A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
ashington on Thursday, March 19, 1936, at 10:45 a. m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles
Mr. Broderick
Mr. Szymcak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Harrison
Mr. Fleming
Mr. McKinney
Mr. Hamilton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
There was some further discussion of the proposed regulation of
the Federal Open Market Committee with regard to open market operations
of the Federal reserve banks.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, a regulation was approved
and adopted in the following form:
"SECTION 1.
"Pursuant to the authority conferred upon it by section 12A
of the Federal Reserve Act, as amended, the Federal Open Market
Committee prescribes the following regulations relating to the
open-market transactions of the Federal Reserve banks.
"The Federal Open Market Committee expressly reserves the
right to alter, amend, or repeal this regulation in whole or in
part at any time.
"SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS
"(a) Government securities. - The term 'Government securi
ties' shall include bonds, notes, certificates of indebtedness,
Treasury bills, and other obligations of the United States,
including obligations fully guaranteed as to principal and
interest by the United States.

3/19/36
"(b) Obligations - The term 'obligations' shall include
all bankers' acceptances, bills of exchange, cable transfers,
bonds, notes, warrants, debentures, and other obligations, in
cluding Government securities, which Federal Reserve banks are
authorized by law to purchase in the open market.
"(c) System open market account. - The term 'system open
market account' applies to Government securities and other ob
ligations heretofore or hereafter purchased in accordance with
open market policies adopted by the Committee and held for the
account of the Federal Reserve banks.
"(d) Committee - The term 'Committee' shall mean the Fed
eral Open Market Committee.
"(e) Executive committee. - The term 'Executive Committee'
shall mean the executive committee of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
"SECTION 3. GOVERNING PRINCIPLES
"By the terms of section 12A of the Federal Reserve Act,
as amended, the time, character, and volume of all purchases and
sales in the open market by Federal Reserve banks shall be gov
erned with a view to accommodating commerce and business and
with regard to their bearing upon the general credit situation
of the country.
"SECTION 4. FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
"(a) Functions. - The Committee shall consider the needs
of commerce, industry and agriculture, the general credit situa
tion of the country, and other matters having a bearing thereon
and consider, adopt, and transmit to the several Federal Reserve
banks, regulations and directions with respect to the open-market
operations of such banks under section 14 of the Federal Reserve
Act.
"(b) Participation in System Open Market Account. - The Com
mittee from time to time shall determine the principles which
shall govern the allocation among the several Federal Reserve
banks of Government securities and other obligations held in the
System Open Market Account, with a view to meeting the changing
needs of the Federal Reserve banks.
"SECTION 5. EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
"(a) Organization - The Committee, at its first meeting
after March 1 in each calendar year, shall select from its own
members an executive committee consisting of five members.

3/19/36
"(b) Functions. - It shall be the duty of the Executive
Committee:
"1. To direct the execution of transactions in the
open market in accordance with the open-market policies
adopted by the Federal Open Market Committee;
"2. To allocate the Government securities and
other obligations held in the System Open Market Account
among the several Federal Reserve banks in accordance with
the principles determined by the Federal Open Market Com
mittee;
"3. To keep the members of the Federal Open Market
Committee informed of all transactions executed under the
direction of the Federal Open Market Committee and of all
allocations and reallocations of Government securities
and other obligations held in the System Open Market Ac
count; and
"4. To perform such other functions and duties in
connection with open-market operations as may be assigned
to it from time to time by the Federal Open Market Com
mittee.
"SECTION 6. CONDUCT OF OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS
"Each Federal Reserve bank shall engage in open-market op
erations under section 14 of the Federal Reserve Act only in ac
cordance with this regulation and the directions issued by the
Committee from time to time, and no Federal Reserve bank shall
decline to engage in open-market operations as directed by the
Committee.
"Transactions for the System Open Market Account shall be
executed by a Federal Reserve bank selected by the Committee.
Fach Federal Reserve bank shall make available to the Federal
Reserve bank selected by the Committee such funds as may be
necessary to conduct and effectuate such transactions.
"SECTION 7. PURCHASES AND SALES OF GOVERNMENT SECURITIES
"No Federal Reserve bank shall purchase or sell Government
securities except pursuant to authority granted by the Committee
or in accordance with an open market policy adopted by the Com
mittee and in effect at the time.
"The Committee reserves the right, in its discretion, to
require the sale of any Government securities now held or here
after purchased by an individual Federal Reserve bank or to re
quire that such securities be transferred into the System Open
Market Account in accordance with such directions as the Com
mittee may make.

3/19/36
"SECTION 8. OTHER OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS
"Subject to directions of the Committee and the following
conditions, each Federal Reserve bank may engage in open-market
operations other than the purchase or sale of Government securi
ties:
"(1) All such transactions shall be reported daily to
the Secretary of the Committee on the day they take place.
"(2) Only acceptances and bills of exchange which
are of the kinds made eligible for purchase under the pro
visions of Regulation B of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System may be purchased and the rates of
discount shall be established in accordance with the pro
visions of section 14(d) of the Federal Reserve Act: Pro
vided, further, That no obligations payable in foreign
currency shall be purchased except in accordance with
directions of the Committee.
"(3) Only bills, notes, revenue bonds and warrants
of States, counties, districts, political subdivisions or
municipalities which are of the kinds made eligible for
purchase under the provisions of Regulation E of the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System may be purchased.
"(4) No Federal Reserve bank shall engage in the
purchase or sale of cable transfers for its own account
except in accordance with the directions of the Committee;
Provided, That Federal Reserve banks may purchase and sell
cable transfers through the Habana agency in accordance
with the resolutions or regulations of the Board of Govern
ors of the Federal Reserve System governing the operations
of such agency."
President Harrison referred to section 7 of the regulation and
stated that, while he felt that the form in which the section had been
adopted was proper for the purposes of the regulation, he had expected
that the Committee would consider and act upon a proposal that authority
be granted by the Committee under which, in an emergency, any Federal
reserve bank might purchase Government securities when necessary to
afford relief in a situation involving specific banking institutions
in its district, or, after obtaining the consent of the Federal Open

3/19/36
arket Committee, might purchase or sell Government securities for its
o, account, all such purchases and sales to be reported promptly to
the Federal Open Market Committee and its executive committee.
President Harrison moved that the question
of granting such authority be taken up for action
at this meeting. Mr. Harrison's motion was
seconded by Mr. McKee.
After discussion of questions as to the
necessity for taking action at this meeting and
as to when and in what circumstances situations
might arise prior to the next meeting of the
Committee which would necessitate such authority
in the meantime, the motion was put by the Chair
and lost, Messrs. Eccles, Szymczak, Fleming,
McKinney, and Hamilton voting "no" for the reason
that they felt that the matter required further
study and they, therefore, favored deferring ac
tion on the matter until the next meeting of the
Committee. Messrs. McKee and Ransom stated that
their votes were not to be understood as favorable
to the granting of the authority as proposed but
were solely in order that the subject might be
brought up for discussion at this time.
Chairman Eccles referred to the fact that the Federal Open Market
Committee had not selected the members of the executive committee.
Upon motions duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous votes Messrs. Eccles, Szymczak,
Ransom, Harrison and Fleming were selected as
members of the executive committee.
Upon motions duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous votes, the Committee selected Messrs.
Broderick, Morrison, and McKee as alternates to
serve, in the order named, in the absence of Mr.
Eccles, Mr. Szymczak, or Mr. Ransom, and Messrs.
Hamilton and McKinney were selected as alternates
to serve, in the order named, in the absence of
Mr. Harrison or Mr. Fleming.
At this point Mr. E. A. Goldenweiser, Economist for the Committee,

3/19/36 -6
and Mr. W. R. Burgess, Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, joined the meeting.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the open market operations that
had taken place from March 1, 1936, to date were
taken up for consideration.
Thereupon, Mr. Burgess submitted a written report of open market
operations from March 1 to March 16, 1936, inclusive, and called atten
tion to various features of the report and exhibits attached thereto
which he discussed briefly. He called particular attention to the
formula (the ratio of expenses, dividends and charge offs of each bank
to the total for all banks) upon the basis of which holdings of Govern
ment securities had been allocated to the various Federal reserve banks
and to a possible substitute for that formula as set out in the exhibit
"H" attached to the report, pointing out that departures from the exist
ing formula had been necessary as shown by actual holdings of the re
spective Federal reserve banks. During the course of the discussion it
was understood that Mr. Burgess would supplement his written report so
as to bring it down to date.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, the
Committee agreed, by unanimous vote, to con
tinue in effect, pending further consideration
and action by the Committee, the formula adopted
by the Federal Open Market Committee as consti
tuted prior to March 1, 1936, and the practice
followed under its authority, with respect to
allotments to the various Federal reserve banks
of Government securities held in the System open
market account, and to request the executive
committee to consider the matter and submit at

the next meeting of the full Committee a recom
mendation as to whether this formula should be
retained and, if not, what formula should be
adopted.
It was understood that this action included
authority on the part of the executive committee
to continue to make readjustments in the holdings
among the individual Federal reserve banks in accord
ance with the practice which was followed under the
formula and authority of the Federal Open Market
Committee as constituted prior to March 1, 1936.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, it was
unanimously agreed that the Secretary of the Com
mittee should send to each member of the Committee a
copy of the minutes of each meeting of the Committee
and of the executive committee, and also that he
should furnish to members of the official staff of
the full committee and the executive committee copies
of such minutes, with the exception that copies of
minutes of executive sessions of the Committee and
executive committee should be sent only to members
of the Committee.
In this connection, it was understood that the
Secretary should follow the practice which had pre
vailed in connection with the proceedings of the
former Federal Open Market Committee of furnishing
each member of the Committee in attendance upon a
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee or
executive committee with a preliminary draft of the
minutes of such meeting for the purpose of enabling
him to suggest such changes as may be desirable in
the interest of accuracy prior to final approval of
the minutes at the next meeting.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the Committee ratified all trans
actions for the System open market account, and
all open market transactions by individual Federal
reserve banks for their individual accounts, which
had taken place during the period from March 1 to
March 19, 1936, inclusive; the transactions thus
ratified which involve Government securities for the
System open market account being set forth in reports
filed with the Secretary of the Federal Open Market
Committee by Vice President Burgess of the Federal

3/19/36 -8
Reserve Bank of New York and the other transactions
thus ratified being set forth in reports made by the
individual Federal reserve banks to the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
The meeting recessed and reconvened at 2:50 p. m., with the same
attendance as at the morning session, including Messrs. Goldenweiser and
Burgess.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, it was
unanimously agreed to invite Mr. Elliott Thurston,
Special Assistant to the Chairman of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, to attend
this meeting.
In accordance with this action, Mr. Thurston joined the meeting
at this point.
Upon the suggestion of Chairman Eccles, Mr. Goldenweiser made a
brief resume of the general business and credit situation. He stated
that so far as business was concerned there had been a slight recession
from the high point of December. In this connection, he pointed out that
under a change in practice in the automobile industry new models had been
put out earlier than had been customary, with the result that the index
figures indicated a greater recession than was actually true if due
allowance were made for this change. He added that the general tone of
business seemed to be about the same as in December, but that very
recently there had been some improvement. He suggested that building
construction was the most important single item that should be watched
at this time, and that building was recovering, but rather slowly.
He also stated that there had been no growth in commercial loans

3/19/36 -9
of banks and little growth in security loans although there had been an
increase in recent months in the amount of investments by banks, chiefly
in Government securities, and a corresponding growth in deposits. He
stated further that adjusted demand deposits were higher than at any time
in the history of the country but that total bank deposits, including
Government deposits and time and savings deposits, but excluding inter
bank deposits, were still substantially below the peak. In answer to a
question he stated that the deposits of mutual savings banks were not
included in this comparison. He commented that, although deposits were
approaching the peak, industrial activity was still from 20% to 25% be
low the peak, and that excess reserves had decreased to about
$2,400,000,000 as the result of recent Treasury financing operations.
He stated that gold imports had ceased, and that the best information
available indicated that they were not likely to be large within the next
few months so that apparently there would be no material increase in ex
cess reserves from that source. He thought, however, that there would
be a gradual increase in excess reserves, as the Treasury expended its
funds, in the course of the next several weeks, to somewhere around
$3,000,000,000, but probably not above that amount.
During a discussion of the instructions to be given to the
executive committee with regard to the administration of the System open
market account pending another meeting of the full Committee, it was
agreed that the committee should have such authority as may be necessary

3/19/36 -10
in the proper administration of the System account to enable it to re
place maturing securities and to make shifts in maturities to meet
changing market conditions. It was also agreed that the executive
committee should have some limited authority for shifts in the account
from shorter maturities to Government bonds.
Accordingly, upon motion duly made and
seconded the committee, by unanimous vote,
instructed the executive committee to direct
the replacement of maturing securities in the
System account with other Government securities
and to make such shifts between maturities in
the account as may be necessary in the proper
administration of the account, provided that
the amount of securities maturing within two
years be maintained at not less than $1,000,000,000
and that the amount of bonds be not over
$350,000,000. It was understood that the
authority granted to the executive committee
by the above action would continue only until
the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
It was also the consensus of the members present that the execu
tive committee should have authority to buy or sell (which would include
authority to allow maturities to run off) securities for the System open
market account within reasonable limits as to amount, in order that the
Committee might be in a position to act promptly if circumstances not
now foreseen should make such action desirable before a further meeting
of the full Committee..
Accordingly, upon motion duly made and
seconded the executive committee, by unanimous
vote, was authorized, subject to telegraphic or
written approval by a majority of the members of
the Federal Open Market Committee, to direct the

3/19/36 -11
purchase or sale of Government securities for the
System open market account up to an aggregate
amount of $250,000,000.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, authority
was granted, by unanimous vote, to each individual
Federal reserve bank holding Government securities
in its own portfolio to replace maturing securities
in such account, and, with the approval of the
executive committee, to make shifts between maturi
ties in the account, provided that no change in
the total amount of Government securities held by
the Federal reserve bank was effected by such trans
actions.
It was pointed out that the authority granted to the Federal re
serve banks by the action last referred to above corresponded to that
granted to the executive committee in connection with the administration
of the System open market account and was necessary for the same reasons.
President Harrison pointed out that in the past Regulation "M"
covering open market operations by the Federal reserve banks had pro
vided that no obligations payable in foreign currencies shall be purchased
without the consent of the Federal Reserve Board. He said that the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of New York for many years had held for the account of
the Federal reserve banks certain balances, particularly in the Bank of
England, the Bank for International Settlements, and the Bank of France;
and that the balances held with these banks had been invested to some
extent in bills. He pointed out that in these circumstances authority
should be granted by the Committee to enable the Federal reserve banks
to purchase bills which are payable in foreign currencies to replace as
they mature the bills now held by foreign central banks for the account of

3/19/36 -12
the Federal reserve banks so as to maintain the existing portfolio. He
also pointed out that the balances originally held in the Bank of England,
the Bank of France and the Bank for International Settlements had been
greatly reduced and stated that he believed that in the course of time
the amount held in the account with the Bank for International Settlements
could be substantially further reduced.
In accordance with President Harrison's
suggestion, upon motion duly made and seconded,
the Committee, by unanimous vote, authorized
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to direct
the purchase of bills payable in foreign
currencies in such amounts as may be necessary
to replace maturing bills now held for the account
of Federal reserve banks by foreign central banks,
including the Bank for International Settlements,
President Harrison pointed out that the regulation adopted by
the Federal Open Market Committee requires the executive committee to
keep the full Committee informed of all transactions executed under the
direction of the full Committee and stated that it had been the practice
in the past to send to all Federal reserve banks weekly reports of opera
tions in the System open market account.
After a discussion it was agreed as the
sense of the meeting that the existing practice
in this regard should be continued without
change.
It was also agreed as the sense of the
meeting that any member of the Federal Open
Market Committee representing the Federal re
serve banks should have the privilege of re
porting to the boards of directors of the banks
participating in his election that a meeting of
the Committee had been held, that the Committee
had adopted regulations and by-laws, and that

3/19/36 -15-
the Committee had selected the organization which
had been set up. It was agreed that there should
be no report of the discussions or the positions
taken by the individual members of the Committee
in such discussions.
It was also understood that a copy of the
by-laws would be sent by the Secretary to the
president of each Federal reserve bank with
the advice that the by-laws might be read at the
next meeting of the board of directors of the
bank subject to an understanding on the part of
the directors that they should be treated as
confidential.
The Committee noted the receipt of a letter
dated March 12 to the Committee from President
Hamilton of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City in regard to certain purchases of Government
securities from the Federal Land Bank of Omaha
under repurchase agreements and instructed the
Secretary to furnish copies to all members of the
Committee and to place the matter on the program
for consideration at the next meeting.
It was agreed as the sense of the meeting
that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee should be held on April 50, with the
understanding that this would not prevent the
calling of an earlier meeting.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved: