A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Monday, May 25, 1936, at 2:50 p.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Broderiok
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Fleming
Mr. McKinney
Mr. Schaller
Mr. Hamilton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Burgess, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman
The Committee was informed that certificates of the unanimous
election by the directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and
St. Louis of President George J. Schaller as a member of the Federal
Open Market Committee and of President Wm. McC. Martin as alternate
for President Schaller for the period ending February 28, 1957, had
been received by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
The Secretary submitted the minutes of the
meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee on
March 18 and 19, 1936, and, upon motion duly
made and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the
minutes were approved as submitted.
The Secretary also submitted the minutes of
the meeting of the executive committee of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee held on March 19, 1936,
and, upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the actions set forth therein were
approved, ratified and confirmed,

5/25/36 -2
It was then stated that during the interval between the meeting
of the executive committee on March 19, 1956, and the present date the
individual members of the executive committee had approved the follow
ing matters and that at the meeting of the executive committee held
this morning the actions referred to were approved, ratified and con
firmed:
(1) A reduction by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York of
approximately $2,000,000 in the account carried with
the Bank for International Settlements, by the gradual
withdrawal of the proceeds of approximately $1,600,000
of bills held in the account and $400,000 in the sight
deposit with the Bank for International Settlements.
(2) A shift by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas of
$1,205,000 of 3 3/4% 1946-56 bonds held in the bank's
own investment account into a like amount of 2 7/8%
1955-60 Treasury bonds.
(5) An increase of $10,000,000 in the authority granted
to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York by the
executive committee of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee on March 19, 1936, to make shifts of securi
ties in the System account into other securities
having maturities within a range of one year from
those of the securities sold.
(4) Transfers of participations in the System Account, as
follows
$5,000,000 to Dallas from New York.
$5,000,000 to Dallas from Chicago.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the actions of the executive
committee above described were approved, ratified
and confirmed.
President Harrison expressed the view that there were certain
respects in which there was a possible over-lapping of the jurisdiction
of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System which he felt should be studied carefully with a

5/25/36 -3
view to clearing up and removing unnecessary duplication in these matters,
There was a brief discussion as a result of which it was understood that
President Harrison would prepare a review of the matters which he had in
mind and take them up with the Secretary of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Mr. Burgess submitted the report of open market operations pre
pared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as agent for the Federal
Open Market Committee covering the period since March 16, 1936, and up
to and including May 20, 1936. Mr. Burgess discussed the principal
features of the report and called particular attention to the fact
that there had been no change in the total holdings in the system open
market account. He discussed the shifts between maturities and trans
fers of participations in the account and referred briefly to each of
the exhibits attached to the report.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the report as submitted was approved
and the transactions set forth therein were approved,
ratified and confirmed.
Mr. Burgess also submitted for the information of the Committee
memoranda entitled:
"Summary of Methods of Allotment used in Distributing Sys
tem Purchases of Bankers Acceptances and Government Securi
ties."
"Government Security Holdings by Individual Reserve Banks
for their Own Account"
The Committee then took up for consideration the recommendations
which had been agreed upon at the meeting of the executive committee of

5/25/36 -4
the Federal Open Market Committee that morning, which are embodied in the
minutes of that meeting. The first of these recommended that the Federal
Open Market Committee approve and continue in effect the existing formula
for allotment among the Federal reserve banks of their respective partici
pations in the aggregate amount of United States Government securities
held in the System open market account. It was pointed out that this
formula provided for such allotments on the basis oft he ratio of each
bank's expenses, dividends and charge-offs to the total of such expenses,
dividends and charge-offs for the twelve Federal reserve banks. It was
agreed that the formula included the important factors that should be con
sidered and that the current application of its provisions should result
in a reasonable and equitable distribution of the participations in the
account. It was observed that the principal reason that the existing
formula had not worked out in the past as intended had been the fact
that no bank was obliged under the law to accept or retain the particular
amount allotted to it in accordance with the formula and that the actual
participations were determined through informal negotiations on the basis
of the amounts which individual banks desired or were willing to hold
from time to time. This difficulty having been specifically provided
against in the Banking Act of 1935 it was felt that, with the cooperation
of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in requiring and
obtaining periodical reports at reasonably frequent intervals showing
anticipated charge-offs of unusual amounts by reason of possible losses
in addition to the customary information as to current earnings and
expenses, including the usual allowances for depreciation and other items,

5/25/36 -5
together with the development of a uniform policy with respect to unusual
charge-offs, the formula would be practical in its operation.
In connection with the question what treatment should be given
to the profits that might accrue to individual banks from the transfer
to the System account of Government securities held in their individual
portfolios it was agreed that, since they had assumed and carried the
risk of fluctuations in market values and possible losses in the ultimate
disposition of these securities, they were entitled to such profits as
a matter of equity and that, since such profits were of a non-recurring
nature, they should not be taken into account in the future allocation
of the securities held in the System account. The view was expressed by
some of the members that such non-recurring profits might well be added
to the reserves of these banks.
It was pointed out that the proposed provision for readjustments
in the allocations if at any time the reserve ratio of a particular bank
should fall below 50% should afford an ample margin of protection to
such a bank and a reasonable opportunity for considering the possibili
ties of action which would enable the System to meet the situation thus
presented.
After detailed discussion of the various aspects
of the questions involved, upon motion duly made and
seconded and by unanimous vote, the Committee (a) ap
proved and continued in effect the formula adopted by
the Federal Open Market Committee as constituted prior
to March 1, 1936, and the practice followed under its
authority, with respect to allotments to the various
Federal Reserve banks of Government securities held in
the system open market account; (b) authorized and di
rected the executive committee to make such adjustments
as of June 15, 1936, as may be necessary to bring the

5/25/36 -8
allotment to each Federal reserve bank of Govern
ment securities held in the system open market ac
count into conformity with such formula; and (c)
authorized and directed the executive committee to
make thereafter from time to time such readjustments
as may be necessary to maintain the distribution of
Government securities among the Federal reserve banks
in accordance with such formula: provided, however,
that if at any time the reserve ratio of any Federal
reserve bank should fall below 50% or would be reduced
below 50% by reason of the operation of such formula
the executive committee shall make such readjustments
in the allotments as shall be necessary to raise the
reserve ratio of such bank to 50% by allocating the
necessary amount of securities to the other Federal
reserve banks in accordance with the formula. In this
connection it was agreed that any profit received by
any individual Federal reserve bank as a result of the
transfer as of June 15, 1936, to the system open mar
ket account of United States Government securities held
in the individual investment account of such Federal re
serve bank should be treated as a non-recurrent item
which should not be taken into account in the applica
tion of such formula. It was also agreed that there
should be obtained from each Federal reserve bank at
quarterly intervals reports showing the nature and
amount of any unusual charge-offs which such bank anti
cipates will be made during or at the end of each cal
endar year and that the Board of Governors of the Fed
eral Reserve System should be requested to endeavor to
bring about the observance of a uniform policy among
the Federal reserve banks with reference to such
charge-offs.
In connection with the recommendation of the executive committee
that the Federal reserve banks be directed to transfer on June 15, 1936,
to the System open market account all of the United States Government
securities held in the individual investment accounts of such banks, a
question was raised as to the application of this requirement to Govern
ment securities in which the self-insurance funds of certain Federal re
serve banks had been invested. It was stated that, while the executive

5/25/56 -7
committee had not discussed the effect of the recommendation upon such
investments, such recommendation was broad enough in its terms to re
quire such investments to be transferred to the System open market
account. After some discussion it was the consensus that such invest
ments were in reality a matter of individual bank bookkeeping and that
there was no sufficient reason why such securities should not be included
in those required to be transferred to the System open market account,
In view of the fact that the Banking Act of 1955 transferred to
and lodged in the Federal Open Market Committee the final authority over
as well as the responsibility for the determination of policy with re
spect to the conduct of open market operations, and provided that no
Federal reserve bank should engage or decline to engage in such opera
tions except in accordance with the direction or regulations of the
Committee, it was the opinion of the Committee that the separate invest
ments in Government securities now held by individual Federal reserve
banks should be transferred to the System account.
Accordingly, upon motion duly made and
seconded and by unanimous vote, the Committee
directed that the Federal reserve banks trans
fer on June 15, 1936, to the System open market
account, at the market prices prevailing on
that date, all the United States Government
securities held in the individual investment
accounts of such Federal reserve banks, in
cluding Government securities held as invest
ments of self-insurance funds.
In connection with the foregoing action there was a discussion
of the disposition that should be made of the earnings accruing from the

5/25/36 -8
investments of self-insurance funds in Government securities and the
view was expressed by certain members of the Committee that, as a mat
ter of accounting, the earnings from such securities should be treated
as a part of the current earnings of each Federal reserve bank and that
any additions to the self-insurance fund should be made from current
earnings as in the case of any other special reserve. Other members of
the Committee expressed the view that earnings from investments of self
insurance funds might well be permitted to accumulate in such funds,
especially if all reserve banks should invest their self-insurance funds.
It was agreed unanimously that it would be desirable to have a
uniform policy in the twelve Federal reserve banks in regard to the
establishment and maintenance of self-insurance funds and the allocation
of investments thereto, and it was suggested that the matter be given
consideration by the Presidents' Conference which will convene tomorrow.
The Committee then took up for consideration the practice which
it was reported is now followed by only one Federal reserve bank of
holding temporarily in a special investment account Government securities
which it purchases and sells at the request of individual member and
non-member banks. It was agreed that, since the principle had been
adopted that the Government securities held by the Federal reserve banks
in their own portfolios should be transferred to and held in the System
account and since it did not appear that it was necessary for the Fed
eral reserve banks to handle as an investment the securities thus pur
chased and sold, the practice should be discontinued but that a reason
able time should be alloed in which to enable the bank to effect the

5/25/36 -9
necessary adjustments.
Upon motion duly made and seconded and
by unanimous vote, the Committee directed
that any Federal reserve bank which purchases
and holds for its own investment account Gov
ernment securities pending their sale for the
account of member or nonmember banks shall not
later than June 15, 1936, discontinue such pur
chases and sell all Government securities so
held,
Attention was then directed to the letter from President Hamilton,
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, in regard to temporary pur
chases of Government securities under resale agreements, which was sub
mitted at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 19
and to the fact that the consideration of this letter had been deferred
until this meeting. It was pointed out that such purchases had been
made from time to time in the past with the approval of the Federal Re
serve Board and that permission to continue the practice would enable
the Federal Reserve Bank to render a service. It was agreed that, if
confined to short periods which would be adequate for the accommodations
desired, there was no objection to the practice.
Upon motion duly made and seconded and
by unanimous vote, the Committee granted
authority to each Federal reserve bank to
make temporary purchases of Government securi
ties under resale agreements for periods not
exceeding fifteen days.
Mr. Goldenweiser as the Committee's economist submitted a memo
randum dated May 22, 1936, containing his report on business and credit
conditions.
Reference was made to the proposal submitted by President
Harrison at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on March

5/25/36 -10
19, 1936, that authority be granted by the Committee under which, in an
emergency, any Federal reserve bank might purchase Government securities
when necessary to afford relief in a situation involving specific bank
ing situations in its district, or, after obtaining the consent of the
Federal Open Market Committee, might purchase or sell Government securi
ties for its own account, all such purchases and sales to be reported
promptly to the Federal Open Market Committee and its executive
committee. Attention was directed to the fact that two members of the
Board of Governors were absent and that Mr. Ransom had expressed a
desire to be present and participate in the discussion when this matter
was taken up for consideration.
In view of the fact that Mr. Ransom's
illness prevented his attendance at this
meeting, Mr. Harrison moved that consideration
of this matter be deferred until the next meet
ing of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Carried unanimously.
The Chairman called attention to the resolutions which were
adopted by the Committee at its last meeting covering open market opera
tions. He read the resolution instructing the executive committee to
direct the replacement of maturing securities and to make such shifts
of securities in the System account as may be necessary in the proper
administration of the account, and recommended that the Committee renew
the authority granted in that resolution with an amendment to permit an
increase in the maximum amount of bonds in the System account from
$350,000,000 to $500,000,000.

5/25/36 -11
The Chairman stated that the suggestion had been made that it
would be desirable to make some shifts in maturities from short-term
to long-term obligations with a view to improving the earning position
of the Federal reserve banks, and, in this connection, it was pointed
out that in March the amount of bonds in the System portfolio had been
increased by $50,000,000. Reference was also made to the probability
that Treasury financing in June and September would provide for conver
sions of maturing securities into bonds and that it might be desirable
to take advantage of these opportunities to make further shifts into
bonds. President Harrison expressed the view that the time to exercise
such authority would be when it would serve not only the purpose of
increasing earnings but when such purchases would be more appropriate
from the point of view of market conditions and the interests of the
reserve banks. It was agreed that an important aspect of the question
was one of timing of the purchases of bonds.
Mr. Williams suggested that in view of the fact that the desir
ability of increasing the System's bond holdings might depend on whether
or not it was likely that these bonds would have to be sold before matur
ity the question what course should be followed in this matter might de
pend upon the policy of the Board of Governors with reference to changes
in reserve requirements.
A general agreement was indicated that the executive committee
should have such authority as may be necessary in the proper administra
tion of the System account to enable it to replace maturing securities
and to make shifts in maturities to meet changing market conditions, that

5/25/36 -l2
in that connection it would be desirable to increase the authority of
the committee to make shifts from short to long term securities, and
that the question of the timing of such shifts should be left to the
judgment of the executive committee. Messrs. McKee and Hamilton
indicated that they would favor increasing the bond portfolio to the
extent of $50,000,000 or $75,000,000 in connection with the next
Treasury financing.
At the conclusion of the discussion, upon
motion duly made and seconded and by unanimous
vote, the Committee instructed the executive
committee to direct the replacement of maturing
securities in the System open market account with
other Government securities and to make such
shifts between maturities in the account as may
be necessary in the proper administration of the
account, provided that the amount of securities
maturing within two years be maintained at not
less than $1,000,000,000 and that the amount of
bonds be not over $500,000,000.
It was also agreed that the executive committee should have
authority to buy or sell (which would include authority to allow matur
ities to run off) securities for the System open market account within
reasonable limits in order that the committee might be in a position to
act promptly if circumstances not now foreseen should make such action
desirable before another meeting of the full committee.
Accordingly, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the Committee
authorized the executive committee, subject to
telegraphic or written approval by a majority of
the members of the Federal Open Market Committee,
to direct the purchase or sale of Government
securities for the System open arket account up
to an aggregate amount of $250,000,000

5/25/36 -13-
It was pointed out that as a matter of practical operation until
June 15, 1936, when the Government securities held in the individual in
vestment accounts of Federal reserve banks are transferred to the System
open market account, it would be necessary for the banks to replace
maturing securities in such accounts and to make such shifts of securi
ties held as may be desirable in the proper administration of the
accounts.
Accordingly, upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, authority was granted, until
June 15, 1936, to each Federal reserve bank holding
Government securities in its individual investment
account to replace maturing securities in such account
and, with the approval of the executive committee, to
make shifts between the maturities in such account,
provided that no change in the total amount of Govern
ment securities held by such Federal reserve bank
shall be effected by such transactions.
Reference was made to the action taken at the last meeting cov
ering the replacement of bills payable in foreign currencies and it was
agreed that the authority granted the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
should be continued in order properly to maintain the investments of
balances held with foreign central banks, including the Bank for Inter
national Settlements.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by unani
mous vote, the Committee authorized the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York to direct the purchase of bills payable
in foreign currencies in such amount as may be necessary
to replace maturing bills now held for the account of
Federal reserve banks by foreign central banks, includ
ing the Bank for International Settlements. It was
agreed, however, that the Bank might permit the payment
of such maturing bills without replacement thereof to
such extent as it might find advisable in the interest
of the Federal reserve banks.
President Harrison raised a question as to the extent to which
the Presidents of the Federal reserve banks who are members of the Federal

5/25/36 -14-
Open Market Committee might report to the directors of their respective
banks, and to the other Presidents, actions taken by the Federal Open
Market Committee.
After discussion, it was agreed that the Secretary
of the Federal Open Market Committee should prepare ten
tative drafts of excerpts of the minutes of this meeting
setting forth the actions taken by the Committee relating
to the formula for the allotment of securities in the Sys
tem portfolio to the individual Federal reserve banks, the
transfer of individual holdings of Federal reserve banks
to the System account, the authority of individual Federal
reserve banks to replace maturing securities and make shifts
in securities in individual investment accounts until June
15, 1936, the authority granted to each Federal reserve
bank to make temporary purchases of Government securities
under resale agreements for periods not exceeding fifteen
days, and the discontinuance by Federal reserve banks of
purchases for their own investment accounts of Government
securities pending their sale for the account of member or
nonmember banks, so that such excerpts might be made
available to the Presidents of the Federal reserve banks
during their conference tomorrow, with the understanding
that each President would be authorized to report such
actions in confidence to the board of directors of his bank.
Mr. Broderick suggested that the Secretary of the Federal Open
Market Committee be permitted to bring into future meetings of the Com
mittee Mr. S. R, Carpenter, Assistant Secretary of the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, for the purpose of assisting the Secre
tary in making the record of the proceedings of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded and by unani
mous vote, Mr. Broderick's suggestion was approved.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.