A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Thursday, November 19, 1936, at 4:45 p.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Broderick
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Fleming
Mr. McKinney
Mr. Schaller
Mr. Hamilton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Burgess, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary of the
Board of Governors
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
Reference was made to the fact that earlier in the day there had
been a meeting of members of the Board of Governors and Presidents of
Federal Reserve Banks, including all the members of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee, during which Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams had dis
cussed various phases of the present recovery movement as well as credit
and monetary conditions and the problems presented in the field of credit
control by the inflow of foreign funds which resulted in the importation
of gold. Mr. Goldenweiser had referred to the excess reserves of member
banks and stated that the question was presented whether the time had
come when the Board of Governors should reverse its easy money policy or,

11/19/36 -2
if not, whether it should take further action to reduce the excess re
serves which had accumulated since August 15, 1936, when increased reserve
requirements went into effect. In connection with the latter question he
had suggested that, if and when action became necessary, it would be more
desirable to increase reserve requirements than to reduce the System
portfolio.
Following Mr. Goldenweiser's statement Mr. Williams referred to
the steps which had been taken to stimulate recovery and expressed the
opinion that further stimulation would be unnecessary; that while the
time had not come to reverse the easy money policy, care should be
taken to prevent any maladjustment of the economic structure from pos
sible over-stimulation; and that any action taken by the System should
be in the form of a further increase in reserve requirements to offset
gold imports, reserving open market operations for internal control of
credit when the necessity for such control arises.
In response to an inquiry by the Chairman, Messrs. Goldenweiser
and Williams said that there were no additional comments that they de
sired to offer at this time.
A draft of the minutes of the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee held on May 25, 1936, was considered and reviewed.
After discussion, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the minutes
were approved.
The attention of the Committee was directed to the informal
actions taken by the members of the Federal Open Market Committee in June
1936 with reference to the postponements to June 25 and June 30 of the

11/19/36 ,
effective date for transfers to the System Open Market Account of Govern
ment securities held in the individual accounts of the Federal reserve
banks, and the reallocation of securities held in such account, and with
reference to the adoption of "Plan No. 2" for such transfers and re
allocations, which were made effective June 30, 1936.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, these actions were approved, rati
fied and confirmed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the quarterly readjustment of the
participations of the Federal reserve banks in the
System Open Market Account as of October 1, 1936,
in accordance with the plan followed as of June 30,
1936, was approved, ratified and confirmed.
In connection with the foregoing action it was stated that the
executive committee at its meeting this morning had voted to recommend
to the Federal Open Market Committee that the executive committee be au
thorized to follow, as of January 1, 1937, the same plan as that followed
on October 1, 1936, in making readjustments of the participations of the
Federal reserve banks in the System Open Market Account; it being under
stood that before it is actually made the proposed readjustment of par
ticipations as of January 1, 1937, will be submitted to the Federal re
serve banks for any comments that they may desire to make.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the foregoing recommendation of
the executive committee was approved.
Mr. Burgess stated that before this meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee he had sent to the members of the Committee and its
Secretary a summary report of the open market operations since the last
meeting of the Committee on May 25, 1936, which had been reported in

11/19/36 -4
detail in the usual weekly reports, including the transactions covered
by the report submitted to the executive committee on September 2, 1936.
Various features of the report were reviewed briefly by Mr. Burgess.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the transactions set forth in
the report as submitted by Mr. Burgess were
approved, ratified and confirmed.
Reference was made to the fact that the resignation of Mr. Morrison
as a member of the Board had resulted in a vacancy in the position held
by him as an alternate member of the executive committee of the Federal
Open Market Committee, and that this vacancy had not been filled.
Upon motion by Mr. McKee which was duly
seconded, and by unanimous vote, Mr. Davis was
appointed to succeed Mr. Morrison as an alter
nate member of the executive committee of the
Federal Open Market Committee.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned with the understanding that the
Committee would meet again at 9:30 a.m. on Friday, November 20, 1936.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.