A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Wednesday, June 9, 1937, at 10:45 a, m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Broderick
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Sinclair
Mr. McKinney
Mr. Martin
Mr. Day
Messrs. Schaller and Peyton, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and
Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Burgess, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System
Mr. Ransom stated that the committee which was appointed at the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on May 4, 1937, to consider
the form of the minutes of the meetings of the Committee and its execu
tive committee had reviewed the minutes of that meeting as well as min
utes of the subsequent meetings of the executive committee and was of
the opinion that these minutes were in satisfactory form and that if the

6/9/37 -2
same form is followed in the preparation of minutes of future meetings
the special committee would have no suggestions to offer.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the minutes of the meetings of
the Federal Open Market Committee on April 3-4,
and May 4-5, 1937, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the actions of the executive com
mittee as set forth in the minutes of the meetings
of the executive committee on April 4-6, 19-20, 26,
May 3-5, and June 2, 1937, were approved, ratified
and confirmed.
Mr. Burgess submitted and reviewed briefly a report prepared
by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York covering transactions in the
System open market account since the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee on May 4, 1937. He also reported the transactions which had
been effected, up to and including June 8, 1937, since the written re
port had been prepared.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the transactions referred to in
the reports were approved, ratified and confirmed.
It was agreed that there should be incorporated in the minutes
of this meeting reports made by Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams at
the meeting of the members of the Board of Governors with Presidents
of Federal reserve banks on June 8, 1937. At that meeting Mr.
Goldenweiser distributed copies of a memorandum prepared by the Divi
sion of Research and Statistics of the Board of Governors under date
of June 4, 1937, on the subject of business and credit conditions and
commented briefly on the important points covered by the memorandum,

6/9/37 -3
a copy of which has been placed in the files of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee. Summaries of the comments of Messrs. Goldenweiser and
Williams are set forth below.
With reference to the distribution of maturities of the securi
ties in the System open market account Mr. Goldenweiser suggested that,
with approximately $700,000,000 of long-term bonds, $1,100,000,000 of
maturities within two years, and the balance of the maturities between
two and five years, the portfolio was in a fairly satisfactory condition.
He felt that, in view of prospective developments in the reserve posi
tion of member banks during the remainder of the year, the short-term
securities now in the account would be adequate to make effective a
policy of reducing reserves by allowing maturities to run off if such
a policy should become desirable. On the subject of the continued in
flow of gold into the United States, he expressed the opinion that,
because of the large volume of gold imports, the Treasury would even
tually abandon its present policy of sterilizing such imports and the
Federal Reserve System would be under the necessity of taking action
to counteract their effects upon the money market. He said that for
that reason it was important that the Federal Reserve System be in a
position to absorb gold imports in some manner and assist in discourag
ing further additions to the gold supply and that additional powers
were necessary for that purpose. He suggested that study should be
given to a plan for putting an upper limit on the amount of reserve
balances that could be counted as reserves. He added that it was be
coming more and more apparent that unless the banking system in the

6/9/37 -4
United States is unified and the Federal Reserve System is granted
additional authority it will not be able to discharge properly the re
sponsibilities now resting upon it.
Following Mr. Goldenweiser's statement, Mr. Williams stated
that he was impressed by the rapidity with which things had changed.
Two or three months ago, he said, the System was disturbed by the speed
with which the recovery movement was progressing and prices were ad
vancing, whereas the indications of undue expansion, including the ac
cumulation of inventories in anticipation of higher prices, had now
largely disappeared. He felt that the large increase in the price of
building materials which had taken place might have an adverse effect
upon the volume of construction, and that the continuation of serious
labor troubles would undoubtedly have a similar effect upon the progress
of business recovery. He expressed the opinion that the much talked
of recession in business had not materialized to any substantial ex
tent and that, while some economists had concluded that there would be
a recession of business in the third quarter of the year, there was
little evidence at the present time of such a recession, and that it
was the general expectation that in any event recovery would be resumed
by fall. He added that the slowing down of the rate of business activi
ty was salutary in effect and had decreased substantially the possibil
ity of any major disorders in the progress of business recovery, and
that, in his opinion the continued inflow of gold and the possible ef
fects of that movement upon credit conditions constituted the most im
portant problem before the Federal Reserve System at the present time.

6/9/37 -5.
It was the unanimous agreement of the members present that the
reasons for the authority granted to the executive committee by the
full Committee at its meeting on May 5, 1937, to replace maturing se
curities and to make shifts between maturities of securities in the Sys
tem open market account still applied and that such authority should be
renewed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the Committee instructed the ex
ecutive committee to direct the replacement of
maturing securities in the System open market ac
count with other Government securities and to make
such shifts between maturities in the account as
may be necessary in the proper administration of
the account, provided that the amount of securities
maturing within two years be maintained at not less
than $1,000,000,00 and that the amount of bonds
having maturities in excess of five years be not
over $850,000,000 nor less than $500,000,000.
Reference was made to questions which had been raised with re
spect to the forms of resolutions adopted by the Committee and it was
suggested that a special committee be appointed to consider the forms of
resolutions and submit a recommendation at the next meeting.
Mr. Harrison moved that the Chairman appoint
a committee of three for the purpose stated.
This motion, having been duly seconded, was
put by the chair and carried unanimously.
Thereupon it was agreed that authority to the executive commit
tee to increase or decrease the total amount of securities in the System
account should be renewed for the same reasons as had prompted similar
action at the meeting of the full Committee on May 5, 1937.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the Committee directed the executive

6/9/37 -6
committee to make purchases and sales (including
authority to allow maturities to run off without
replacement) of United States Government securities
for the System open market account, to such extent
as may be necessary before the adjournment of the
next meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee,
for the purpose of preventing disorderly market con
ditions, provided tnat the aggregate amount of se
curities held in the account shall not be increased
or decreased from the amount now held in the account
by more than $250,000,000; the kinds and maturities
of the securities acquired or sold to be determined
in the light of current market developments.
Mr. Harrison stated that at the meeting of the Presidents'Con
ference on June 7, 1937, following consideration of the report submit
ted by Messrs. Smead and Burgess with respect to the formula used for
the quarterly readjustment of the participations of the Federal reserve
banks in the Government securities held in the System open market ac
count, the Conference had recommended that, provided there is no substan
tial amount of depreciation in the account as of July 1, 1937, the par
ticipations of the Federal reserve banks in the account be readjusted
as of that date on the same basis as that used in the readjustment on
April 1, 1937. The Conference also recommended, Mr. Harrison stated,
that Messrs. Smead and Burgess continue their studies to determine wheth
er a more satisfactory formula for such adjustments could be devised.
Mr. Burgess stated that at the present time there is a small amount of
appreciation in the account.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the executive committee was au
thorized to make a quarterly readjustment of the
participations of the Federal reserve banks in the
System account, as of July 1, 1937, in accordance
with the same plan and procedure as that followed

6/9/37 -7
in connection with the adjustment made as of April
1, 1937, which contemplates that before it is ac
tually made the proposed readjustment will be sub
mitted to the Federal reserve banks for any comments
that they may desire to make.
The meeting recessed at 1:05 p.m. and reconvened at 2:45 p.m.
with the same attendance as at the morning session except that Messrs.
Schaller and Peyton were not present.
Chairman Eccles suggested that consideration be given at this
meeting to the proposal that the Federal Open Market Committee adopt a
plan for purchases by Federal reserve banks of Treasury bills offered
to them by member banks. The proposal had been discussed informally
by the members of the Board of Governors and had been considered by
the Presidents'Conference and the Board at a meeting yesterday. Chair
man Eccles outlined the reasons why in his opinion it would be desir
able to adopt such a plan and during a discussion of these reasons
various members of the Committee raised questions which had occurred
to them with respect to the objective, effects, and operation of the
plan.
Mr. Harrison suggested that it would be desirable if the pro
posal could be studied by the members from the standpoint of its effect
upon the entire credit situation and credit policy as well as upon the
bill market and that for that purpose a memorandum outlining the details
of the plan be prepared for the consideration of the Committee. He also
inquired whether the matter had been discussed with the Treasury Depart
ment and Chairman Eccles stated that it had not been except that he had

6/9/37 -8-
mentioned it briefly to Mr. Wayne C. Taylor, Assistant Secretary of
the Treasury, whom he had told that he (Chairman Eccles) proposed to
submit it to the Federal Open Market Committee for consideration.
Mr. Ransom suggested that the executive committee be requested
to study the entire matter and submit a report thereon for the con
sideration of the full Committee. There followed a brief discussion
of a question raised by Mr. McKee whether the executive committee
should not confine its activities to the performance of administrative
functions only and not be expected to consider questions of policy,
Mr. Ransom moved that it be the sense of the
Federal Open Market Committee that the executive
committee should consider matters of policy from
time to time, whenever it is requested or desires
to do so, and submit recommendations to the full
Committee with respect thereto.
This motion having been duly seconded was put
by the chair and carried unanimously.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the executive committee was requested
to study the proposal presented by Chairman Eccles
and to prepare and send to the members of the full
Committee, prior to a meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee to be held on August 5, 1937, a
memorandum outlining the plan in detail, including
its objectives, mechanics and possible effects,
together with any views or suggestions that the ex
ecutive committee might desire to present for the
consideration of the full Committee.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Approved: