A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Saturday, September 11, 1937, at 10:20 a. m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Broderick
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Sinclair
Mr. McKinney
Mr. Martin
Mr. Day
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Burgess, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
June 9, 1937, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the executive
committee as set forth in the minutes of the
meetings of the executive committee on June 9,
June 15, July 6, August 18 and September 4,
1937, were approved, ratified and confirmed.
Mr. Burgess submitted a report prepared by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York of open market operations conducted by the New York

9/11/37 -2
bank for the System open market account since the meeting of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee on June 9 and up to and including September
10, 1937.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the transactions covered by the
report were approved, ratified and confirmed.
Chairman Eccles then called on Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams
for a review of business and credit conditions.
Mr. Goldenweiser stated that, while the impetus of recovery had
slackened temporarily, there was as yet no evidence of a general decline
or recession. In the capital market, Mr. Goldenweiser said, there had
been a very definite slackening of activity with less refunding than last
year and a scarcity cf new issues, and the stock market had gone through
a pretty severe reaction recently. In the banking situation, the aggre
gate amount of investments had gone down and the volume of deposits had
decreased but not substantially. He was of the opinion that the situa
tion was one where, in terms of short-term developments, there was no
danger of the speculative excesses or inflationary developments that were
somewhat in evidence six months ago, but, where on the contrary there was
a possibility that the uncertain situation, partly as an immediate result
of the hesitation in the capital market, might lead to a decline in busi
ness and to a recession of indeterminable magnitude. He said that the
situation was different in different industries, the textile industry
showing a definite slowing down, while the automobile and the steel
industries were continuing at a high rate, the latter largely on orders

9/11/37 -3.
received previously rather than on current orders, which had fallen off.
The past year, he said, had been disappointing in the construction field
which had not yet recovered to anything like the extent hoped for or to
the extent necessary to provide a volume of activity which would result
in little unemployment and a more lasting basis of prosperity. He stated
further that prices have had a mixed movement but that the situation in
this respect was not unusual at this time of the year. In general, he
felt that the industrial production index was not likely to go much be
low the 115 that had been anticipated but that it might fall below that
figure for a month or two. He interpreted the industrial outlook over a
somewhat longer period as being very good because of the present larger
annual income than has been the case for several years and the existence
of substantial shortages in many important industries such as construc
tion, railroads, and public utilities, the expenditures of which when
made will place a large amount of buying power in the hands of those who
work for these concerns.
There was no reason, he said, for modifying the policy of
monetary ease that was adopted by the System in 1932 and continu
ously maintained since that time. He believed there was less reason
to deviate from that general policy now than there was last autumn or
winter when prices were going up very rapidly and there was evidence of
speculative developments in the securities market and in some lines of
business. It appeared to him, therefore, that the System should contem
plate at this time a policy of counteracting such seasonal tightening

9/11/37 -4
influences as are likely to develop between now and the end of the year
as a result of a prospective increase in the demand for currency of ap
proximately $400,000,000 and possibly some increase in reserve require
ments owing to the growth of deposits in connection with autumn trade,
which would reduce excess reserves of member banks at the peak of the
currency demand to between $300,000,000 and $400,000,000, while in the
New York market excess reserves might be wiped out completely.
He felt that, if it were still the System's policy to maintain
a condition of monetary ease for the furtherance and completion of re
covery, the System should be prepared to take action to make that policy
effective, and if that point were made clear it would be easier to con
sider the possible courses of action that might be pursued in carrying
out that policy. These alternatives in his opinion were
(1) A reduction in reserve requirements,
(2) Action by the System in the open market,
(3) Action by the Treasury to desterilize gold or to modify
its policy of gold sterilization, or
(4) A combination of action by the System and the Treasury.
He was strongly of the opinion that a reduction in reserve
requirements had all of the vices and none of the virtues of any other
policy that could be adopted, that it would be a reversal of the posi
tion that changes in reserve requirements should not be utilized except
infrequently, and that it would involve the use of an inflexible in
strument instead of a flexible one, to meet a seasonal situation.

He also said that action by the Treasury to desterilize a
stated amount of gold would be better than the discontinuance of further
sterilization, for the reason that in the event the latter course were
pursued the extent of the action could not be determined, whereas the
desterilization of a given amount of gold would increase reserves of
member banks by a definite amount. The objections to desterilization, he
said, were that the increase in reserves could not be counteracted except
by sales out of the System portfolio, and that action by the Treasury
at this time also might be interpreted as violating the principle that
the Federal Reserve System has primary responsibility for credit condi
tions and has adequate instruments for handling it. He then expressed
the opinion that the most satisfactory action would be for the System
to take such independent action through the medium of open market
operations as, in its judgment, was necessary to meet the situation.
He pointed out that for four or five years there had been such
a large volume of excess reserves that there was a tendency now to
regard fluctuations in reserves as being of more importance than is
justified, and that the System regards action to ease a situation more
seriously than used to be the case. He suggested that the System might
take counsel on the advisability of the adoption of a rule of thumb as to
the volume of reserves that would be likely to produce desirable conditions
in the market at different stages of business activity, and that, if such
an amount could be determined upon, the System would increase its port
folio when reserves fell below that amount and let securities run off
when reserves exceeded it, without feeling that it was undertaking an

9/11/37 -6
operation involving a matter of major policy. He called attention to the
view that at one time prevailed that the New York banks should be in debt
by approximately $50,000,000, that when they were in debt more than that
a condition of tightness developed and that when they were in debt less
than that credit conditions were considered to be unduly easy. He felt
that a much more liberal rule would have to be adopted today in furtherance
of the existing easy money policy, which would contemplate not only that
the banks would be out of debt but also would have a volume of reserves
sufficient to make them willing to undertake legitimate financing without
disposing of other earning assets, and that the System could adopt a policy
of maintaining approximately $250,000,000 of excess reserves for central
reserve city banks and $700,000,000 or $800,000,000 for the country as a
whole. He concluded by expressing the opinion that if the System would
adopt such a policy it would be in a position to meet the seasonal
problem without difficulty and that he would recommend that the policy
be made effective.
Mr. Williams stated that the question, which was a difficult
one, was whether the country was confronted at the present time with a
short-term seasonal variation or whether it was something more serious
than that; that he had felt that there probably would be a side-wise
movement for a while during this period which would be disappointing to
some and would cause some hesitancy; and that, while, on the whole,
he was still inclined to that view, he was growing less confident about
it and that there might be some recession.

9/11/37 -7
It appeared to him that there were two influences on the situation,
one of minor significance and one of greater significance. Inventories
were built up last winter and early spring because of fear of rising
prices, labor troubles, etc., and since that time production has been
in larger volume than new orders. It had been thought, he said, that
the present would be about the time when there would be some indication
of when the period of hesitancy would end but that such indications were
not yet in evidence. That, he added, was the kind of situation in which
people become nervous and it might be that the present reaction in the
stock market was a reflection of that situation. He felt that the break
in the market, coming at this time, was apt to have a rather significant
effect on business and might cause business men to delay activity longer
than they otherwise would, resulting in a negative movement lasting
longer than ordinarily would be the case.
The other question, he said, had to do with the more fundamental
fact that recovery could not go forward without assistance from the heavy
industries such as building, public utilities, and railroad equipment,
and that although high agricultural and industrial income might result
in a side-wise movement rather than a decline, there was a possibility
that business would recede before going forward.
He was of the opinion that among the factors bearing on the
matter were the following: It seemed clear that if the Administration
went forward on the present basis there would be a reduction in this
fiscal year in the income-creating expenditures of the Government of

9/11/37 -8
$2,500,000,000 to $3,000,000,000, which is a substantial proportion of
the national income, and which it had been expected would be replaced
by private spending. While he had felt last spring that the time for
such replacement had come, there was now a question in his mind whether
that situation would materialize fully. The building situation, he
said, was disappointing in that it now appeared that it not only had
not gone forward during the recent period, but it seemed probable that
it would recede owing chiefly to advances in construction costs. Not
withstanding the fact that there was evidence of rising rents and a
reduction in the number of vacancies, there was a considerable statis
tical record behind the view that a sharp advance in construction costs
was followed by a recession in building or a cessation of building ex
pansion for a considerable period. In view of this there was a major
question in his mind whether the country could count on a recovery of
building to take the place of a decrease of Government income-creating
expenditures.
Another question, he said, was whether an increase in public
utility expenditures could be relied on, and that although there was an
increase in power consumption and some evidence of pressure on facilities,
it might develop that, because of all the uncertainties of the public
utility situation, new expansion in that field would be slow in making
its appearance. The railroad equipment industry, he felt, was made
uncertain by the labor outlook for the next few months.
Mr. Williams then stated that he did not know what conclusions

9/11/37 -9
to draw from all of these circumstances but that they indicated a
distinct possibility of a recession before further recovery. He was
firmly of the opinion that sooner or later recovery would be resumed but
he felt unable to say whether a recession would first occur as a means
of correcting some of the existing obstacles to further recovery. The
major question, he said, was whether private investment in the heavy
industries during this fiscal year would take the place of a substantial
contraction of public spending.
The Committee entered into a discussion of the business and
credit situation as outlined by Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams.
Mr. Harrison suggested that the problem before the Federal Open
Market Committee at this time was quite different from that under con
sideration at the April and May meetings of the Committee and was related
to the question whether the leveling off of the volume of business
activity was the result of monetary or nonmonetary causes, whether the
System appropriately could take any action which would tend to check a
recession and to facilitate the continuation of recovery, and, if so,
what form it should take. He was of the opinion that the causes of the
present situation were not in the monetary field and that there had been
no evidence thus far that the increases in reserve requirements of member
banks had resulted in any actual restriction of credit.
During a discussion of the possible causes of the present trend
Mr. Goldenweiser expressed the opinion that, while the existing situation
was not due to monetary causes, it was desirable that action be taken
to maintain a monetary climate favorable to economic recovery.

9/11/37 -10
In this connection consideration was given to forecasts of prob
able demands for credit and currency between now and the end of the year
which it was anticipated would result in substantial reductions in excess
reserves of member banks and the possible elimination of excess reserves
in the New York market with resulting increases in short-term money
rates. Mr. Ransom said that action in the open market to counteract
such a stiffening of rates would be consistent with the policy announced
by the Federal Open Market Committee in the statement released to the
press on April 5, 1937.
There was also a discussion of the relation of the current de
cline in security prices to the problem under consideration, and the
probable effects of a continuation of that movement on the general busi
ness situation.
Mr. Ransom expressed the opinion that the anticipated year-end
reduction in excess reserves was a money market problem and one in con
nection with which responsibility rested on the Federal Reserve System
and particularly the Federal Open Market Committee to initiate whatever
action was necessary to meet the situation and to continue in effect the
System policy of easy money conditions. He also felt that, for this
purpose, the Committee should regard the powers existing in the Federal
Reserve System and the Treasury to influence credit conditions as though
they resided in one place and were available for use in determining the
action that should be taken. He stated that, while there was no apparent
restriction of credit at the present time, the expectation by banks that
less easy money conditions would exist over the year-end might result in
more restrictive credit policies on the part of the banks at a time when the

9/11/37 -11
recovery movement had practically halted and there was some evidence that
there might be a recession in business activity, and that the question
before the Committee was whether action should be taken to assure the
banks that there would be no shortage of reserves over the period of crop
movements and increased currency requirements.
Mr. Ransom then presented, as a basis for discussion, a draft of
a resolution which would instruct the executive committee of the Federal
Open Market Committee to direct the purchase in the open market from time
to time of sufficient amounts of Treasury bills to offset the seasonal
withdrawals of currency and other seasonal influences between now and the
end of the year so that the aggregate volume of excess reserves of member
banks would be continuously adequate to maintain the System's policy of
furthering economic recovery through monetary ease.
At 1:00 p.m. the meeting recessed for luncheon and reconvened
at 2:30 p.m. with the same attendance as at the morning session.
There was a further discussion of the possible reserve position
of member banks between now and the end of the year and of the prospective
demands for credit in connection with the movement of crops and for
currency during the holiday season. Information presented indicated that
excess reserves of all member banks would probably be reduced to below
$400,000,000 before Christmas, and that by the end of November excess re
serves would probably have disappeared in New York and some member banks
in that market might be forced to borrow or to liquidate earning assets.
Consideration was given to the question whether, in view of the
present uncertain business picture and the necessity for further progress

9/11/37 -12
in the recovery movement, the System should take any action to create
additional excess reserves in conformity with its policy of maintaining
easy money conditions, and whether it should make any public statement
at this time. The discussion disclosed the view on the part of a majority
of the members of the Committee that the situation called for affirmative
action by the Federal Open Market Committee at the present time and that
some public announcement of the action taken should be made.
There ensued a discussion of the extent to which, and the form
in which, action should be taken. The four alternatives presented by Mr.
Goldenweiser during the morning session were analyzed, and suggestions
were made that the System request the Treasury to desterilize a given
amount of gold, which it was stated would have the effect of increasing
member bank reserves relatively promptly and largely in the money centers
where additional reserves would probably be needed, and that the executive
committee be authorized to direct the purchase of a sufficient amount of
short-term Government securities to provide such additional funds as might
be needed to meet the expected reduction of reserves between now and the
end of the year. It was the consensus of the members of the Committee
that, while the System could act alone through the open market, the most
desirable action would be the suggested joint action by the System and
the Treasury.
At the conclusion of the discussion it was agreed that the Chair
man should ascertain from the Secretary of the Treasury whether he would
be willing to desterilize $200,000,000 or $300,000,000 of inactive gold
as a part of a program which might be adopted along the lines of the
above suggestions.

9/11/37 -13
Thereupon the meeting recessed with the understanding that it
would reconvene again on September 12, 1937, at 11:00 a. m.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.

The meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was reconvened
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on September 12, 1937, at 11:00 a. m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Broderick
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Sinclair
Mr. McKinney
Mr. Martin
Mr. Day
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Burgess, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary of
the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System
Chairman Eccles stated that he had talked over the telephone
with Mr. Wayne Taylor, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, and Secretary
Morgenthau with respect to the program of action suggested at the meet
ing of the Federal Open Market Committee yesterday afternoon and had
stated that the Committee and the Board of Governors were of the opinion
that, while the System could meet the situation by acting alone through
the open market, it was also felt that the most desirable action would
be the proposed joint action by the System and the Treasury. Chairman

9/12/37
Eccles said that Secretary Morgenthau stated that the Treasury would be
glad to cooperate in a program along the lines suggested and that he would
take the necessary steps to release gold from the inactive account to the
extent of $300,000,000 upon being advised of the adoption of the proposed
program.
During the discussion of the proposed program there were presented
the following resolutions:
RESOLVED, That, until the adjournment of the
next meeting of the Committee, the executive com
mittee is authorized to direct the purchase in
the open market from time to time of sufficient
amounts of Treasury bills or other short-term
Treasury obligations to provide funds to meet
seasonal withdrawals of currency from the banks
and other seasonal requirements, for the purpose
of maintaining at member banks an aggregate
volume of excess reserves adequate for the con
tinuation of the System's policy of furthering
economic recovery through monetary ease; and
the executive committee is authorized from time
to time to direct a reduction of the holdings
of such obligations when the seasonal influences
are reversed or if other influences make their
retention unnecessary for the purposes of this
resolution. It is understood that the executive
committee, in the exercise of this authority, will
not increase or decrease by more than $300,000,000
the amount of securities now in the System open
market account without another meeting of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee.
RESOLVED, That, with a view to cooperation
in effectuating the policy declared in the above
resolution the Committee recommend to the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System that
it request the Secretary of the Treasury favor
ably to consider the desterilization of approxi
mately $300,000,000 of gold out of the Treasury

9/12/37
inactive account, the time and method of such
desterilization to be determined by the Secretary
of the Treasury in consultation and cooperation
with the executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
the foregoing resolutions were adopted by
unanimous vote.
The meeting then recessed with the understanding that the
Board of Governors would convene to consider the request of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee that the Board request the Treasury to de
sterilize $300,000,000 of gold.
Following this recess the Committee reconvened with the same
attendance as at the earlier session and the Chairman stated that the
Board of Governors had voted unanimously to act in accordance with the
request of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Thereupon consideration was given to the
form of statement to be issued to the press
regarding the action taken by the System, and
the following statement was approved unani
mously for release in the morning papers of
September 13, 1937, with the understanding
that before such release the Chairman would
ascertain that the Secretary of the Treasury
approved the portion of the statement regard
ing the agreement on his part to release gold
from the inactive account:
"The Federal Open Market Committee met in Washington
on September 11 and 12 and reviewed the business and credit
situation. In view of the expected seasonal demands on the
banks for currency and credit during the coming weeks
the Committee authorized its Executive Committee to pur
chase in the open market from time to time sufficient amounts

9/12/37
"of short term U. S. Government obligations to provide
funds to meet seasonal withdrawals of currency from the
banks and other seasonal requirements. Reduction of the
additional holdings in the open market portfolio is con
templated when the seasonal influences are reversed or
other circumstances make their retention unnecessary.
"The purpose of this action is to maintain at member
banks an aggregate volume of excess reserves adequate for
the continuation of the System's policy of monetary ease
for the furtherance of economic recovery.
"As a further means of making this policy effective,
the Open Market Committee recommended that the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System request the Secre
tary of the Treasury to release approximately $300,000,000
of gold from the Treasury's inactive account. The Board
of Governors acted upon this recommendation and the Secre
tary of the Treasury agreed to release at once the desired
amount of gold. This will place an equivalent amount of
funds at the disposal of the banks and correspondingly in
crease their available reserves.
"This action is in conformity with the usual policy
of the System to facilitate the financing of orderly mar
keting of crops and of autumn trade. Together with the
recent reductions of discount rates at the several Federal
Reserve banks, it will enable the banks to meet readily
any increased seasonal demands for credit and currency and
contribute to the continuation of easy credit conditions."
The members of the Committee concurred in the opinion that the
reasons for the authority previously granted to the executive committee
to replace maturing securities and to make shifts of securities in the
System open market account were still present and that the authority
granted at the meeting of the Committee on June 9, 1937, should be re
newed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the Committee instructed the ex
ecutive committee to direct the replacement of
maturing securities in the System open market ac-

9/12/37
count with other Government securities and to make
such shifts between maturities in the account as
may be necessary in the proper administration of
the account, provided that the amount of securities
maturing within two years be maintained at not less
than $1,000,000,000 and that the amount of bonds
having maturities in excess of five years be not
over $850,000,00 nor less than $500,000,000.
Reference was made to the question of quarterly readjust
ments of participations of the Federal reserve banks in the securi
ties held in the System open market account and to the consideration
which had been given to the matter by the executive committee since
the meeting of the full Committee on June 9, 1937.
It was agreed unanimously that further con
sideration of the matter by the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee should be deferred until the next
meeting of the committee.
The Chairman withdrew from the meeting at this point to ad
vise the Secretary of the Treasury of the action taken by the Fed
eral Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors with respect
to the desterilization of gold and by the Committee with respect to
the purchase of Government securities to offset seasonal influences.
Upon his return, the Chairman stated that he had read to the Secre
tary of the Treasury the proposed press statement and that the
Secretary had stated that it was very satisfactory to him and
that he would deposit at once with the Federal reserve banks gold
certificates in the amount of $300,000,000, with the expectation
that the funds would be withdrawn from the Reserve banks in the
course of the next two or three weeks and used to meet Treasury

9/12/37 -6
expenditures. In the circumstances, Chairman Eccles said, the Secretary
suggested that it would not be necessary for the executive committee
to confer with him regarding the matter.
The procedure outlined by the Secre
tary of the Treasury was approved unani
mously.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.