A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, May 4, 1937, at 11:00 a. m.
PRESENT: Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Broderick
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Sinclair
Mr. McKinney
Mr. Martin
Mr. Day
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary of the
Board of Governors
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
The Secretary reported that Mr. Day, who was attending a meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee for the first time, had filed the
required oath of office as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee
and that it was the opinion of the Committee's counsel that Mr. Day had
duly qualified to participate in the meeting.
Consideration was given to suggestions which had been made with
respect to the form of the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
and particularly to the suggestions that the Committee agree that the
minutes be prepared in less detail, that whenever an agreement is reached
or a position taken by the Committee the agreement or action be expressed
as a formal motion or resolution and voted upon, so that it may be so
recorded in the minutes, and that individual statements of opinion or

5/4/37 -2
position be omitted from the record, unless the person making the state
ments requests that it be incorporated in the minutes in which case
the authorship should be shown. During the discussion the Committee
considered the questions (1) whether the present form of minutes should
be continued, (2) whether the changes referred to above should be made
in the present form, (3) whether the minutes should be prepared in a
brief form which would state only the actions taken with the votes
thereon followed by the reasons and any explanatory discussion that
might be necessary, and (4) whether a full stenographic report should
be made of the Committee's proceedings.
At the conclusion of the discussion Mr. McKee
moved that the vice chairman appoint a committee
to consider the entire matter and submit a recom
mendation to the Federal Open Market Committee.
This motion having been duly seconded was put
by the chair and carried by unanimous vote.
In accordance with this action Mr. Harrison
appointed Messrs. Ransom, Davis and Sinclair as
members of the committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded and by
unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee held on March 15,
1937, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded and by
unanimous vote the actions of the executive com
mittee of the Federal Open Market Committee as
set forth in the minutes of the meetings of the
executive committee on March 13, 15, and 22-23,
1937, were approved, ratified and confirmed.
Mr. Harrison submitted a report prepared by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York of operations in the System open market account since
the meeting of the Committee on April 3-4, 1937, which operations had
been reported in detail in the weekly reports made by the bank.

5/4/37
Upon motion duly made and seconded and by
unanimous vote the transactions referred to in
the report were approved, ratified and confirmed.
The question was raised whether the Committee should take any
action at this time with respect to directing a quarterly readjustment,
as of July 1, 1937, of the participations of the Federal reserve banks
in the System open market account and in that connection reference was
made to the report of Mr. Burgess, Manager of the System Open Market
Account, at the last meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, that,
in the event of further depreciation in the System account, some of the
Federal reserve banks might desire that the entire matter of adjust
ment of participations in the account be reconsidered before the next
quarterly readjustment date.
Upon motion duly made and seconded and by
unanimous vote, action on the matter was deferred
with the understanding that Mr. Smead, Chief of
the Division of Bank Operations of the Board of
Governors, and Mr. Burgess or Mr. Sproul, of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, would be re
quested to study the questions which might arise
in connection with the next quarterly readjustment
and to submit a report which would be sent by the
Secretary to the Presidents' Conference for con
sideration and a recommendation as to the action
to be taken.
At 12:10 p. m. the meeting recessed and reconvened at 2:35 p.m.
with the same attendance as at the morning session and, in addition,
Chairman Eccles and Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist for the Federal Open
Market Committee.
In response to a request for a statement as to present business
and credit conditions Mr. Williams said that conditions had undergone
a change since the meeting of the Committee in March at which tie he

5/4/37 -4
was fearful that the recovery movement was proceeding too rapidly and
that it might turn into a disorderly upward movement which might
result in price spirals and dislocations which would be distinctly
harmful. He stated that, during the interim since the last meeting
of the Committee, the movement had leveled out with some reduction in
prices both at home and abroad and a more orderly condition had
appeared, so that there seemed to be much less likelihood of a runaway
movement than was the case a month or two ago.
He referred to statements made by some economists that the
present uninterrupted recovery movement was the longest on record and
that, therefore, a recession could be expected, and stated that while
the records of past recoveries and reactions might indicate that a
decline in business activity could be expected he did not feel that
such a conclusion should be drawn from the present situation. He
stated that because of the many uncertain factors in the situation it
was difficult, if not impossible, to forecast what the future would
bring, but that he felt, because of what appeared to be a strong under
lying demand for goods, particularly durable goods, that the continuation
of recovery might reasonably be expected.
The general conclusion that he would draw from this situation,
Mr. Williams said, was that there was no need at the present time for
a change in the present easy money policy by the adoption by the Fed
eral Reserve System of any restrictive measures nor for any action
which would result in further stimulation of business activity.
He stated that, notwithstanding the fact that there had been a
long period of sustained business improvement, there had been little

5/4/57 -5
progress made in reducing expenditures and that, if the budget were not
balanced under the existing favorable conditions and a reaction should
set in which would increase the relief burden and reduce revenue, a
serious situation might result, and that therefore he welcomed the
present movement toward reduction in Government expenditures.
He added that, inasmuch as the period of adjustment to the May
1 increase in reserve requirements was past, or nearly so, he did not
see any necessity for continuing purchases of Government securities,
that such action would result in further easing the situation which he
did not feel was justified at this time, and that the question before
the Committee was whether it would take the position that further
stimulation, which might prove to be dangerous to the progress of
orderly recovery, would be justified in order to prevent disorderly
conditions in the Government securities market should such conditions
develop. He felt that the System should follow a middle course which
would result in no restriction to the present movement nor add further
stimulation to it.
Mr. Goldenweiser stated that he was in general agreement with
Mr. Williams' position and expressed the opinion that, as the business
and financial world was much more sensitive and responded more quickly
to changing conditions than had been the case in the past, the
instruments which the System had at hand for credit control were much
more effective in influencing the business and credit situation at the
present time than would have been the case some years ago. As an
illustration of this fact, he referred to a recent rumor concerning
the possibility of a reduction in the price of gold which resulted in

5/4/37 -6
a substantial decline in the prices of commodities traded in on the
international markets and a recession in world business activity. In
these circumstances, he said, he felt more hopeful that the instruments
available to the System would be effective in the field of credit
control and that in view of this situation he felt the System should
not give too much attention to records of past movements but should
analyze existing conditions carefully and reach a decision on that
basis as to what should be done.
In connection with the question of Government expenditures, he
agreed with Mr. Williams that it was desirable to balance the budget,
but he felt that the entire matter of Government expenditures should
be reviewed for the purpose of determining in what fields money should
be spent. He said that the emphasis should be shifted from the total
volume of expenditures, which may have been justified in the period of
"pump-priming", to the nature of expenditures. He thought, on the
other hand, that if it were found that a large volume of funds were
needed to meet the relief problem adequately, this could be accomplished
without inflation if such expenditures were met by increased taxation.
He did not see any great possibility at this time of a new period of
depression setting in with the Government debt at a high level, and he
expressed a further opinion that the budget situation, with the possi
bility of a relatively small deficit for the fiscal year 1938, was a
definite indication that the country was not in any real danger of a
period of general inflation.
He concluded by emphasizing that, inasmuch as it has been
shown that the powers which had been used to exert an influence on

5/4/37 -7
credit conditions had worked more effectively than some had anticipated,
he felt that the responsibility of the System to use its powers wisely
was greatly increased.
After a statement by Mr. Williams with respect to the present
position of gold in the world monetary picture there was a general dis
cussion of the effect of the continued inflow of gold into the United
States on the monetary and credit situation, the reasons for the con
tinued inflow, and steps that might be taken to meet the problem. There
was also a discussion of the questions which would arise if the
Treasury should consider it necessary or desirable to discontinue the
present policy of sterilizing gold.
At the conclusion of the discussion the meeting recessed to
convene again on May 5, 1937.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman,