A meeting of the FeOMdpearerknae tl Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Monday, November 29, 1937, at 2:30 p.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Sinclair
Mr. McKinney
Mr. Martin
Mr. Day
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. burgess, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary of the
Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System
Chairman Eccles suggested that the Committee hear first the re
ports of Messrs. Goldenweiser and illiams on the business and credit
situation.
Mr. Williams reviewed the circumstances which attended the de
velopment of the present business recession and stated that the decline
in business activity, which was expected in the summer following the
abnormal activity in the spring, did not appear until August because of
the fact that production was maintained chiefly on orders for inventory
accumulation and forward buying, which had been relatively larger than

11/29/37 -2
was realized at the time. The delay in the recession, he said, made it
more severe than if it had come somewhat sooner and it was aggravated by
the major decline in security prices which was quite unexpected and
which caused everyone to wonder whether the country was facing another
depression.
He then compared the present basic economic situation with con
ditions existing in 1929 and expressed the opinion that such a compari
son was highly favorable to the present for the following reasons: (1)
The relatively small amount of construction during the last eight years
had resulted in a large accumulated demand for housing; (2) while the
future needs of the utilities were uncertain because of the political
situation, the demand for utility equipment would be larger and perhaps
more pressing than for housing if the uncertainties in the industry
could be removed; (3) much railroad equipment was obsolete and, except
for the unsatisfactory economic position of the industry, there would be
a substantial demand for equipment, in connection with which Mr. Williams
expressed the opinion that, unless there was an increase in traffic or
some specific action was taken to improve the position of the railroads,
which were suffering from rising wages, tax costs, and fixed rates, it
was difficult to see how the industry could make any major contribution
to recovery; (4) there had been a period of approximately eight years
during which, with the possible exception of the last one or two, there
had been installed less than a normal amount of new general plant equip
ment, which, together with the rise of wages which had occurred in recent
years, should create a considerable impetus toward demands for improved

11/29/37 -3
plant equipment when the outlook is clearer than at the present time;
(5) there had been much less speculation during the current period than
in 1929 either in securities or real estate; (6) the position of banking
was better, with much less possibility of hoarding because of deposit
insurance and with many of tne weaker banks out of the picture. In the
light of these conditions, he regarded the conclusion as warranted that
the present trend could not go beyond a minor depression.
He referred, however, to some elements in the present situation
which were different from the conditions existing in 1929 and which ren
dered difficult any forecast at the present time. He stated that there
never had been a period of recovery during which there had existed, as
in the present situation, continued monetary ease throughout the period,
and that, for that reason, a policy of monetary ease could not be counted
on as a major corrective. Another important thing, he said, was the
Governnent fiscal policy, in that this was a year of transition from pub
lic spending to a balanced budget which it was anticipated would effect
a reduction in the national income of from $2,500,000,000 to
$3,000,000,000 and which presented the question whether the transition
from a program of public spending could safely be effected with such
rapidity and whether the transition should not have been begun earlier.
The third question, he said, was the relation between the administration
and the business community arising out of the reform and recovery program
of the former, and he expressed the opinion that it would be possible to
make some adjustments without abandoning the major reform objectives con
templated by the program. He felt that, if something more than a minor

11/29/37 -4
depression should develop, the reasons therefor would lie in the field
of these three questions.
Mr. Williams then stated that the conclusion was quite clear
that those in authority should not sit back and do nothing, that the
program of Government spending should not be revived, but that steps
should be taken to devise a means of encouraging private investment.
He said that it was unwise to do nothing on the supposition that the
situation would work itself out, and that the prudent thing to do would
be to take affirmative action to help the situation along.
In connection with the question of the revival of Government
spending, he expressed the opinion that the limits on the time and mag
nitude of a Government spending program had about been reached and that
it would be better to continue the policy of balancing the budget than
to abandon that policy. Resumption of public spending, he said, would
tend to create an unstable banking and business situation and further
uncertainty. He preferred to see the transition from public spending
to a revival of private investment effected with as little complication
by outside influence as possible, and, therefore, since the primary
causes of the recession were non-monetary, he would put the emphasis
on the program of private investment and first and foremost on a pol
icy of reviving the construction industry where the most obvious gap
existed. In this connection, he felt encouraged by the fact that
since a diagnosis of the existing circumstances indicated that the sit
uation did not need to get out of hand or result in anything more than
a minor depression, there was a favorable atmosphere in which to work

11/29/37 -5
out a program of private investment.
Whether a minor monetary program should be fitted into the
major program, in his opinion, was a secondary question. With refer
ence to the question of taxes in the program, he felt that there should
be a careful exploration of the undistributed profits tax, capital gains
tax, and surtax, to determine whether some adjustment should be made
in these fields.
Mr. Goldenweiser stated that, while no reference could be made
to concrete changes, it was believed that the situation had improved
somewhat over two weeks ago with some improvement in sentiment. He said
that there was no previous record of a simultaneous decline in security
prices and industrial production that had been as sharp and large as
the present one, that this movement was accompanied by a psychological
reaction which was widespread, and that it had resulted in a feeling of
resentment and almost of despair as well as uncertainty as to the pros
pects of recovery. While this feeling was still present, he said,
there had been a sufficient change in the atmosphere so that the situa
tion could be considered a little more clearly at the present time then
was the case a few weeks ago.
He then stated that the rapid rise in business activity in the
spring resulted from everyone wanting to get materials before prices
advanced further and plant capacity was exceeded and that after these
orders had been filled new orders were not adequate and the recession,
which was greater and much sharper than anyone had anticipated, was the
result.

11/29/37 -6
In connection with the System's position in that situation, Mr.
Goldenweiser referred to the policy of monetary ease which had been
followed since the early months of 1932, which had been effectuated
through open market operations, devaluation of gold, large gold imports,
reduction in rates on time deposits, and generally liberal policies,
as well as Government spending. He stated that, when the Board of
Governors in July, 1936, increased reserve requirements of member banks,
the action was taken as a means of preventing future unfavorable devel
opments and not as a reversal of the existing policy. He also said
that it was, however, the first move that was not in the direction of
further ease and was followed in December by sterilization of gold by
the Treasury and in January, effective in March and May, by further in
creases in reserve requirements. He added that, while these actions had
been referred to as causes of the recession, in his opinion, the reces
sion was the result of non-monetary causes which were more fundamental.
He concurred in a position which had been taken by Mr. Williams that it
would have been better if the last increases in reserve requirements
could have been made effective sooner, before long time interest rates
had declined quite so low and before boom psychology had developed.
He then expressed the definite opinion that the action in rais
ing reserve requirements was a correct action although somewhat late and
that, if the policy adopted by the Federal Open Market Committee last
spring of increasing the System portfolio had been put into effect
earlier and more vigorously, regardless of whether it would have re
sulted in any different situation from what exists today, the System

11/29/37 -7
would have been in a stronger position the next time action was taken.
The question before the System, Mr. Goldenweiser said, was
whether it should take any action at this time. He felt it was impor
tant that the System maintain a flexible attitude and be prepared to
avoid the mistake of taking desirable action too late. He was also of
the opinion that the recent purchases of securities by the System were
helpful as indicating a lack of rigidity and that, if, after the Treasury
financing was past, there were the slightest indication that open market
action would be desirable, such action should be taken, not with the
thought that it would cure the situation, but rather with the knowledge
that there was practically no danger in a policy of further ease at the
present time.
He stated that he was of the opinion that the present situation
did not call for desterilization of gold by the Treasury on monetary
grounds as there was an abundance of reserves which was likely to con
tinue, and that if a shortage of reserves should develop it would be
better for the System to act through the open market rather than for the
Treasury to desterilize gold. He felt, however, that if the present
business situation continued and the Treasury believed it was desirable
greatly to increase its expenditures without increasing the public debt,
the System reasonably could not interpose any objection to the desteril
ization of gold.
Mr. Goldenweiser then presented a chart showing the estimated
cash income and expenditures of the Treasury for recent years and pointed
out that, according to budget estimates, Treasury operations for the

11/29/37 -8
fiscal year 1938 on a cash basis would actually take in more money than
would be paid out, whereas during the previous fiscal year approximately
$2,000,000,000 was paid out in excess of the amount taken in. He ex
pressed the opinion that, if actually carried out, this would be an un
precedented drop in Treasury expenditures and possibly more than the
country's economy could sustain. He added that, if the Treasury should
feel it necessary to desterilize gold in order to meet expenditures, the
System later might be faced with a difficult situation for the reason
that if it should be necessary to absorb a substantial amount of excess
reserves through allowing maturities in the System portfolio to run off,
there would result a situation where the System would be left with a
small portfolio of securities with relatively long maturities which would
be inadequate to meet future problems of credit control. In this con
nection, he said, any large addition to required reserves to enable the
System to manage the situation would only accentuate the problem of how
to maintain membership in the System.
He also referred to the fact that the seasonal increase in the
demand for currency and credit this year had been very much less than
usual and had resulted in the banks having larger excess reserves than
there had been any reason to expect. This situation, he felt, was not
entirely due to the smaller demands for currency and credit resulting
from reduced business activity and lower prices but also to the use at
this time to meet seasonal requirements of funds paid out as bonus pay
ments last year. He did not anticipate that the further increase in
currency between now and the end of the year would carry the amount of

11/29/37 -9
currency outstanding to a figure above that at the peak of demand last
year.
He said he saw no occasion for any major monetary action at
this time, but he felt that minor monetary adjustments might be made
in pursuance of a liberal policy in the present situation.
In response to an inquiry with respect to the relation of
prices of farm products and buying power to the recovery movement,
Mr. Goldenweiser said that the farmers' buying power was an important
factor in sustaining economic activity; that the prospects for prices
of farm crops next year were not encouraging; and that, therefore, it
was all the more necessary that something be done to encourage private
financing in industry and to sustain the industrial demand for agri
cultural products as much as possible.
There followed a general discussion of existing conditions,
during which Chairman Eccles suggested that, in order to clarify the
problem before the Committee, a statement be drafted which would re
view the present situation and the steps that might be taken with a
view to counteracting the present downward trend of business activity.
The other members of the Committee concurred in the suggestion and it
was understood that Messrs. Goldenweiser, Williams and Thurston would
prepare a draft of statement along the lines proposed by Chairman
Eccles for consideration at another session of the meeting to be held
on Tuesday.

11/29/37 -10
Thereupon the meeting recessed with the understanding it would
reconvene on Tuesday, November 30, at 10:30 a.m.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.

The meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was recon
vened in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on November 30, 1937, at 10:40 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Sinclair
Mr. McKinney
Mr. Martin
Mr. Day
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Burgess, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Re
serve System
ALSO PRESENT: Mr. Young, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston
Mr. Smead, Chief of the Division of Bank
Operations of the Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System
Reference was made to the request of the Presidents' Confer
ence at its meeting on June 7, 1937, that Messrs. Smead and Burgess
continue their studies to determine whether a more satisfactory
formula for the adjustment of participations of Federal reserve banks
in the System open market account could be devised, and to the under
standing reached at the meeting of the executive committee of the
Federal Open Market Committee on July 6 that President Young of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston would be invited to meet with the

11/30/37 .2
Federal Open Market Committee for the purpose of outlining his views
with respect to the formula used for the reallocation of participa
tions in the System account.
Mr. Burgess read a report which had been prepared by him and
Mr. Smead for consideration by the Committee and which recommended
the continuation of the present formula (based on the principle that
the security holdings should be divided among the Federal reserve
banks in relation to their need for earnings to meet expenses, regular
charge-offs, prior service contributions, and dividends) with one
minor change which would provide that profits and losses on transac
tions in the System account would be allocated among the reserve
banks on the basis of their average holdings in the account since
July 1, 1936, rather than on the basis of average holdings in the
twelve months preceding any transaction. The report stated that con
sideration had been given to a proposal for distributing securities,
after needs for expenses and dividends had been met, in such manner
as to gradually bring about and then maintain a uniform relationship
of surplus and reserves for contingencies to paid-in capital at the
reserve banks; that, since earnings of the Federal reserve banks may
be substantially in excess of expense and dividend requirements, a
distribution of securities in such manner as to bring about substan
tial relative equality among the Federal reserve banks in their
ability to absorb extraordinary losses without impairment of capital
is, of course, desirable; but that such a formula had not yet been
perfected.

11/30/37
The proposed accounting system for handling transactions in
accordance with the suggested formula was as follows:
"1. As securities are purchased or sold the New York bank
will charge or credit the cost of proceeds of all purchases or
sales to accounts carried on its books as follows:
'A' System Open Market Account (par value only)
'B' Premium on Securities
'C' Discount on Securities
'D' Interest Accrued
"2. The (a) par amount, (b) premium, (c) discount, and (d)
interest accrued on all securities purchased or sold will be
prorated by the New York bank to each reserve bank on percent
ages based on the formula given in paragraph 10 below; and set
tlement therefor will be made with each reserve bank through
the inter-district settlement fund.
"3. Each Reserve bank will carry on its books the follow
ing accounts:
'A' Participation in System Open Market Account
(par value only)
'B' Premium on Securities
'C' Discount on Securities
'D' Interest Accrued
and on its balance sheet form 34, the par value of its partic
ipation will be carried under caption 'Participation in System
Open Market Account,' the premium and interest accrued under
caption 'Miscellaneous Assets,' and the discount under caption
'Miscellaneous Liabilities.'
"4. Adjustments in participation will be made at book val
ues, settlement being made with the New York bank through the
inter-district settlement fund in the same manner as for pur
chases and sales.
"5. The New York bank will maintain memorandum bookkeeping
records showing (1) the amount of premium, discount, and inter
est accrued daily on each issue of securities held in the Account,
(2) for the entire account the total amount of premium, discount,
and interest accrued (separately), and each reserve bank's pro
rata share of the total of each of these three items. (Premium
is amortized to earliest callable date and discount to maturity.)
"6. The New York bank will figure the accruals of earnings
each day on the entire amount of holdings in the System Open
Market Account and each reserve bank's pro rata share, and will
advise each bank by telegram the amounts of (1) Premium Amorti
zation, (2) Discount Accrual, (3) Interest Accrued, and (4)
Interest Earned on U. S. Government Direct Obligations, on its

11/30/37
"participation. Each reserve bank will accrue earnings on
its books daily on this basis, (In order to facilitate
handling the System Account, this information will be fur
nished one day late, except on the last day of the month
when two days' earnings will be accrued.) Upon the collec
tion of coupons on interest payment dates, the New York
bank will credit each bank through the inter-district set
tlement fund with its pro rata share of such payments, and
each bank will credit this amount in its Accrued Interest
Account.
"7. Profits or losses on sales of securities will be
distributed among the reserve banks as they occur on the
basis of daily average holdings in the Account since July
1, 1936. (The amount of profit or loss on a sale is de
termined by the difference between the book value and the
sale price at the time of sale.)
"8. When purchases and sales are made in other districts,
cash settlement in full will be made with the New York bank
and the operation will be carried through in the same manner
as though it had been made in New York in the first instance.
"9. Securities purchased for the Account, or vault re
ceipts in case the securities are held by other Federal re
serve banks, will be retained at the New York bank. The
securities will be lodged in a vault compartment apart from
all other securities of the bank, except that on proper au
thority amounts will be held in joint custody of the Federal
Reserve Bank and the Federal Reserve Agent as security for
note issues.
"10. Adjustments in participations of the several Fed
eral Reserve banks in the System Open Market Account will
be made quarterly as of January 1, April 1, July 1, and
October 1 of each year in accordance with the following formula:
A. Expenses
1. Estimated current expenses during year
2. Prior service contribution
3. Total
B. Earnings
1. Current earnings to date of allocation
2. Estimated for remainder of year (exclusive
of earnings on Govts.)
3. Net profit on Govts. sold to date
4. Total
C. Excess of A-3 over B-4
D. Allocation required (on basis of current annual
rate of earnings on Govts.) to furnish earn
ings equal to 'C'

11/30/37
"E. Estimated Dividend requirements (a)
F. Allocation of remainder of System Account in pro
portion to 'E'
G. Total allocation (D + F)
(a) Accrued dividends to date plus 6 percent per annum
on current paid-in capital for remainder of year."
The report suggested that the plan be sent to the Federal reserve
banks for their comments and suggestions and that when these have been re
ceived and met as fully as possible, so that a large majority of the re
serve banks shall have approved the plan, the plan be put into effect by
the Federal Open Market Committee requesting the banks to make the neces
sary adjustments as of January 1, 1938, and quarterly thereafter, subject
to the understanding that each reserve bank would be free at any time to
ask for a reconsideration of the plan.
Chairman Eccles then invited Mr. Young to express his views. Mr.
Young stated that in his opinion Section 12A of the Federal Reserve Act,
as amended by the Banking Act of 1935, provides that authority over open
market operations by the Federal reserve banks rests exclusively with the
Federal Open Market Committee, but that he felt certain that the Committee
would not take any action under that authority that was inequitable or
unreasonable. He said that the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston had ac
cepted the law and the regulations of the Federal Open Market Committee
on that basis and the directors of the bank had been advised that the re
sponsibility for purchases and sales of securities and shifts of securities
in the System account was with the Federal Open Market Committee and that,
therefore, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston need not approve or disapprove
such transactions. He added that he had not declined to participate in any

11/30/37 -6
open market transactions engaged in by the Federal reserve banks but he
had protested against the use of a formula for the allocation of securi
ties which would require his bank to take securities at a higher price
than they could be purchased for in the open market, that originally
he had asked authority from the board of directors of the bank to put
through transactions when directed to do so by the Federal Open Market
Committee, and that when the question arose whether the action of the
Committee with respect to reallocation of securities in the account was
in the nature of a direction or a request to his bank he felt that the
matter should be definitely determined before further reallocations were
effected. He also said that if the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston were
directed to accept a larger participation in the System open market ac
count at appreciably higher prices than the securities could be purchased
for in the open market his bank would probably accept the participation
but only under vigorous protest.
Reference was made during the ensuing discussion to the questions
which had been raised as to the authority of the Federal Open Market
Committee to make allocations and reallocations of securities in the
System open market account and to require the Federal reserve banks to
execute such allocations and reallocations. In this connection there
was presented a memorandum prepared by Mr. Wyatt under date of November
26, 1937, in which it was stated that the Federal Open Market Committee
had the legal power to continue to allocate the System open market ac
count among all Federal reserve banks, to require each Federal reserve

11/30/37 -7
bank to accept its pro rata participation, and from time to time to
reallocate such account and require some Federal reserve banks to re
linquish part of their participations and others to accept increased
participations, all in substantial accordance with the practices which
had been in effect since 1929, whereby such allocations and reallocations
are based on the current needs of each Federal reserve bank for earnings
and whereby transfers of participations are made on the basis of the
book value of the securities in the account instead of the current mar
ket price.
Mr. Harrison suggested that, in the light of Counsel's opinion,
Messrs. Smead and Burgess consider the desirability of amending their
report to provide that, after the comments and suggestions of the Federal
reserve banks had been received, the formula recommended in the report
be put into effect by the Federal Open Market Committee directing, in
stead of requesting, that the Federal reserve banks make the necessary
adjustments as of January 1, 1938, and quarterly thereafter, it being
understood that each Federal reserve bank would be free at any time
to ask for a reconsideration of the present plan or to make suggestions
or criticisms of any later plan which might be proposed. Messrs. Smead
and Burgess stated that they would be willing to amend their report as
suggested.
Thereupon Messrs. Young and Smead withdrew from the meeting.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, it was
voted unanimously that, in view of the opinion

11/30/37 -8
of Counsel referred to above, the report submit
ted by Messrs. Smead and Burgess be adopted and
that the Committee direct that, after the report
and Mr. Wyatt's opinion had been submitted to the
Federal reserve banks and the comments and sugges
tions with respect to the proposed formula had been
received and met as fully as possible, so that a
large majority of the reserve banks shall have ap
proved the plan, the Federal reserve banks, upon
receipt of advice from the Secretary of the Federal
Open Market Committee, make adjustments in their
participations as provided in the formula as of
January 1, 1938, and quarterly thereafter.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee on September 11-12,
1937, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the actions of the executive com
mittee as set forth in the minutes of the meetings
of the executive committee on September 11-12 and
November 9, 1937, were approved, ratified and con
firmed.
Prior to this meeting Mr. Burgess had sent to each member of the
Federal Open Market Committee a report prepared by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York as of November 24, 1937, covering the open market opera
tions conducted by the bank for the System open market account since
the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on September 11-12, 1937.
At this meeting Mr. Burgess reviewed the transactions in the account since
November 24, 1937, up to and including November 29, and stated that the
report prepared by the New York bank should be changed to show that, as
the result of an agreement over the telephone by members of the executive
committee since the meeting of the Committee on November 9, purchases
totaling only $37,825,000 were made under the direction given at that
meeting.

11/30/37 -9
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by unani
mous vote, the transactions in the System open market
account since the previous meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee and up to and including November 29,
1937, were approved, ratified and confirmed.
Reference was made to the fact that the Federal Reserve Banks of
Boston and Richmond were holding in "Miscellaneous Assets Acquired in
Settlement of Claims Account Closed Banks" $6,325 and $52,800, respect
ively, of bonds of the Home Owners Loan Corporation and the Federal Farm
Mortgage Corporation and that it would be necessary for the Committee to
decide as to the action to be taken by it in connection with the reten
tion or disposition of the securities by the banks in question.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by unani
mous vote, it was decided that, in view of the fact
that securities acquired by the Federal reserve banks
in settlement of claims against closed banks will be
in such small amounts as to be unimportant from the
standpoint of credit control, the Committee, until
otherwise directed by it, would interpose no objec
tion to a Federal reserve bank holding any such se
curities acquired by the bank, or to the sale of
such securities wnenever such sale is deemed to be
advisable by the holding bank. The Secretary was
requested to advise the banks accordingly.
Mr. Ransom recommended that, in view of the changed situation
since the appointment of the special committee (Messrs. Ransom, Davis
and Sinclair) for the purpose of considering the forms of resolutions
adopted by the Federal Open Market Committee, the special committee be
discharged until such time as the Federal Open Market Committee might
wish to take the matter up again.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, Mr.
Ransom's recommendation was approved by unani
mous vote.

11/30/37 -10
Reference was made to discussions at previous meetings of the
question as to the desirability of granting authority to the members
of the Committee to disclose to alternate members of the Committee and
to other Presidents and to directors of their own Federal reserve banks
information with respect to the actions taken by the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee. Attention was also called to the suggestion made to Mr.
Szymczak recently by President Fleming of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland, that the Committee advise the Presidents by telegram of ac
tions taken with respect to which announcements are made to the press.
In this connection the representative members of the Committee expressed
the feeling that it would be distinctly helpful if they could discuss
such matters with their respective alternates and that such a procedure
was desirable particularly in order that each alternate might be familiar
with the problems of the Committee in the event he was called upon to serve
in the absence of a regular member. Mr. Harrison said that he believed
the directors as well as the Presidents of all Federal reserve banks
should be kept advised of the actions of the Committee.
Upon motion by Mr. Harrison which was duly seconded,
it was voted unanimously to request the Chairman to ap
point a special committee to consider and submit a rec
ommendation to the full Committee as to the position to
be taken with respect to the extent, if any, to which
the Presidents and boards of directors of the Federal
reserve banks should be advised of discussions and ac
tions of the Federal Open Market Committee.
In accordance with this action, the Chairman ap
pointed Messrs. Szymczak, McKee and Sinclair as members
of the special committee.

11/30/37 -11
At 1:20 p.m. the meeting recessed and reconvened at 2:45 p.m.
with the same attendance as at the conclusion of the morning session
except that Messrs. Goldenweiser, Williams and Thurston were also in
attendance.
There were submitted copies of a draft of statement which had
been prepared by Messrs. Goldenweiser, Williams and Thurston in accord
ance with the understanding at the meeting of the Committee yesterday
afternoon and the statement was discussed.
At the conclusion of the discussion the meeting recessed with
the understanding that, as the executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee was to meet with the Secretary of the Treasury Wednes
day morning, December 1, 1937, for the purpose of discussing December
15 Treasury financing, the Federal Open Market Committee would reconvene
at 2:30 p.m. Wednesday afternoon.
Secretary
Approved:
Chairman.

The meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was recon
vened in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on December 1, 1937, at 2:30 p.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Sinclair
Mr. McKinney
Mr. Martin
Mr. Day
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Burgess, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Re
serve System
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System
There was presented for consideration by the full Committee
the recommendation of the executive committee of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee that, in view of the fact that circumstances had changed
very considerably since the meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee on June 9, 1937, when the executive committee was requested to
study the proposed plan for purchases of Treasury bills by Federal re
serve banks, the entire matter be laid on the table.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the recommendation of the
executive committee was approved.

12/1/37 -2
At this point Mr. Piser, Senior Economist in the Division of
Research and Statistics of the Board of Governors of the Federal Re
serve System, entered the room.
In view of the discussions which had taken place during the
meeting the Committee agreed unanimously upon the following statement
for the minutes:
The Committee gave full consideration to general business and
credit developments which had taken place since its last meeting in
September, 1937, and to the reviews of the economic situation pre
sented by Dr. Williams and Dr. Goldenweiser. The Committee also dis
cussed the effects of the various actions taken under authority of the
Committee and by the Board of Governors during this period.
It was the general opinion in the Committee that the existing
volume of excess reserves and of supplies of private capital is abun
dant at this time at low rates for continuance of easy credit condi
tions and for meeting all credit requirements of commerce, business and
agriculture.
In the light of existing business and credit conditions, the
Committee felt that effective action to meet and overcome the present
business recession should be taken outside the field of the System's
various monetary powers and that the System could best contribute to
the furtherance of economic recovery by being prepared to meet promptly
any developments in the credit situation which might require a further
exercise of its authority.
In order to place the System in position to meet such develop
ments in business and credit conditions as might require further

open-market operations in accordance with the System's policy during
the period before another meeting of the full Committee, it was de
cided to continue the authority of the executive committee to engage
in open-market operations.
Accordingly, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following resolution was adopted
by unanimous vote:
RESOLVED, That, until the adjournment of the
next meeting of the Committee, the executive com
mittee is authorized to direct the purchase in the
open market from time to time of sufficient amounts
of Treasury bills or other short-term Treasury ob
ligations to provide funds to meet seasonal with
drawals of currency from the banks and other re
quirements of commerce, business and agriculture by
keepinp at member banks an aggregate volume of ex
cess reserves adequate for the continuation of the
System's policy of maintaining credit conditions
conducive to economic recovery; and the executive
committee is authorized from time to time to direct
a reduction of the holdings of such obligations to
the extent that their retention is found to be un
necessary for the purposes of this resolution. It
is understood that the executive committee, in the
exercise of this authority, shall not increase or
decrease by more than $300,000,000 the amount of
securities now in the System open market account.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, it was
agreed unanimously that a meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee should be held in Washington
on January 10-11, 1938.
The members of the Committee agreed that the authority granted
to the executive committee at the last meeting of the full Committee
to replace maturing securities and to make shifts in the System open
market account should be continued for the same reasons as prompted
the existing authority.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the Committee instructed the ex
ecutive committee to direct the replacement of

12/1/37 -4-
maturing securities in the System open market ac
count with other Government securities and to make
such shifts between maturities in the account as
may be necessary in the proper administration of
the account, provided that the amount of securi
ties maturing within two years be maintained at
not less than $1,000,000,000 and that the amount
of bonds having maturities in excess of five years
be not over $850,000,000 nor less than $500,000,000.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved: