A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Thursday, April 21, 1938, at 10:25 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Sinclair
Mr. Newton
Mr. Schaller
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Burgess, Manager, System Open Market
Account
For the purpose of the Committee's records, Chairman Eccles re
ferred to the recent developments in connection with the Government's
program for the encouragement of business recovery, including the Presi
dent's message of April 14 to the Congress of the United States, the
President's radio address which was broadcast from the White House on
the evening of April 14, the action of the Board of Governors on April
15 in reducing reserve requirements on all classes of deposits for all
member banks effective at the opening of business on April 16 and the
announcement thereof, released to the press for morning newspapers of
April 16, which referred to this action as a part of the Government's
program for the encouragement of business recovery, and to the announce
ment made by the Treasury Department on April 18 for release in the

4/21/38 -2
morning papers of April 19, that the inactive gold account had been dis
continued. In the President's message to the Congress on April 14 the
following statement was made:
"The Administration proposes immediately to make addi
tional bank resources available for the credit needs of the
country. This can be done without legislation. It will be
done through the desterilization of approximately one billion
four hundred million dollars of Treasury gold, accompanied by
action on the part of the Federal Reserve Board to reduce re
serve requirements by about three-quarters of a billion dol
lars. The Federal Reserve Board informs me that they are
willing to do so. These measures will make more abundant
the supply of funds for commerce, industry and agriculture.
By themselves, however, monetary measures are insufficient
to start us on a sustained upward movement."
The Chairman stated that he had discussed with the Secretary of
the Treasury this morning the considerations involved in such decision
as the Treasury might make with respect to the utilization of the gold
released from the inactive gold account; that he had an appointment to
discuss the matter further with the Secretary of the Treasury at 12:30
today; and that the Secretary of the Treasury had in view a press con
ference at 5:00 o'clock at which he expected to make a statement as to
what the program of the Treasury would be with respect to replacing or
paying off maturing Treasury bills.
The Chairman then stated that he felt that the question of the
policy to be pursued hereafter by the Federal Open Market Committee
in the light of the changed situation had become one of very great im
portance; that the greatly increased volume of excess reserves had an

4/21/38 -3
important bearing upon the market for Government securities, and that
in spite of the fact that there had been sold from the system account
with a view to preventing a disorderly market more than $100,000,000
of bonds with corresponding purchases of bills and notes, the market
had advanced very rapidly during the past few days and the short-term
market particularly had gone up until the yield was negligible on notes
and some bills were selling on a no-yield basis. He referred to the
fact that the Treasury had announced the complete desterilization of
gold in an amount aggregating approximately $1,392,000,000, together
with the discontinuance of further sterilization, and that the result
ing Treasury deposits had increased the Treasury balances at the Federal
reserve banks and depository banks to approximately $2,300,000,000.
He observed that the desterilization action had not yet created excess
reserves and would not do so until the Treasury began making disburse
ments from its balances with the Federal reserve banks; that there were
falling due each week $100,000,000 of Treasury bills until June 22,
after which there would be $150,000,000 falling due each week until
July 20 and that, in addition, there would be $250,000,000 of tax bills
falling due in the middle of June and $620,000,000 of notes maturing
on the 15th of June.
He stated that it was understood that the Treasury proposed
to retire $50,000,000 of the maturing bills each week until further
notice as well as the $250,000,000 of tax bills maturing in the middle

4/21/38 -4
of June. The result of this, he said, would be to increase excess re
serves of member banks until the middle of June at the rate of $50,000,000
a week faster than would result from current net expenditures of the
Treasury. He summed up the situation by saying that it appeared that
with the retirement in June of the tax bills, about $600,000,000 would
be added to excess reserves, sooner than would be the case if the Trea
sury were to wait until net expenditures produced that result, and that
approximately $1,000,000,000 of the total of $1,400,000,000 of desteril
ized gold would be in excess reserves of member banks by the middle of
June. He added that there very likely would also be additions to excess
reserves by reason of further gold imports.
He pointed out that the proposed weekly retirement of bills
would reduce the amount of such paper available in the market and at
the same time increase the ability and desire of banks to make addi
tional investments, with the result that, in the absence of opportuni
ties to invest funds elsewhere, the banks would bid up the prices of the
Government securities remaining on the market. He added that the Re
serve system would have $39,500,000 of bills falling due on April 27;
$36,500,000 on May 4; $54,500,000 on May 11, $59,000,000 on May 18,
$55,500,000 on May 25, $48,500,000 on June 1, $34,500,000 on June 8,
$19,000,000 on June 15, $31,000,000 on June 16, and $45,000,000 on
June 17, and that the difficulty in replacing these bills would not be
nearly as great if the Treasury were to refund in the market the full

4/21/38 -5-
amount of its outstanding maturities as would be the case under the
contemplated plan of retiring $50,000,000 each week.
On the other hand, the Chairman stated, if the system were to
allow the bills in its portfolio to run off without replacement, the
effect on excess reserves would be practically to offset the reduction
in reserve requirements which had been made by the Board of Governors,
and he felt that such action would be regarded as in effect nullifying
the action of the Board in reducing reserve requirements or as nullify
ing to an equivalent extent the action of the Treasury in paying off
maturing bills as a means of giving effect to the gold desterilization
policy, with its consequent increase in the lending power of banks.
The Chairman recognized the fact that the replacement by the system
open market account of the maturing bills held by it would have a
tendency to upset the market further but expressed the opinion that
the Reserve system should not be held at fault for such a consequence;
that the Treasury should be fully advised that the system could not
accept responsibility for the condition in the Government bond market
created by the Treasury's determination to pay off maturing bills; and
that the system could accept responsibility for market conditions only
if it had the full cooperation of the Treasury. He pointed out that
while the proposed action of the Treasury involved a temporary reduc
tion in the outstanding public debt, the Treasury would be under the
necessity later on of increasing the debt at a much greater rate by

4/21/38 -6
reason of increased expenditures than would be the case if it replaced
the maturing bills currently; that no one could foresee what the con
dition of the market would be when new borrowing became necessary; and
that, in these circumstances, he saw no reason why the committee should
assume responsibility for attempting to prevent the anticipated dis
orderly condition in the Government security market due to rapidly
rising prices. He expressed the further view that, if banks continue
to buy bonds in these circumstances, the system should not be held re
sponsible for not interfering in the market; that the trend in the
market was in the direction of much lower yields for Goverment bonds;
and that, even if the system were to sell its entire portfolio of
Government bonds, such action might not be sufficient to control the
expected rise, and therefore might strip the system of practically all
its earning assets without achieving the desired result.
There ensued a discussion of the policy to be adopted by the
Committee to meet the situation. The opinion was expressed and con
curred in by some of the members of the Committee that the system
could not be expected to maintain its existing portfolio beyond the
extent that replacement securities could be purchased on a no-yield
basis or better. There was also consideration of the question whether
the System would be justified in replacing maturing securities if such
action would reduce bills as well as notes with maturities up to two
years or more to a no-yield basis, and particularly since such replace
ments would tend to distort the relationship between short- and long-term

4/21/38 -7
rates, which relationship is as important an element in an orderly mar
ket as the general level of rates. It was pointed out that notes were
being quoted at the present time on a no-yield or minus-yield basis
for maturities up to a year and a half and that it was extremely dif
ficult to get sufficient blocks of notes for replacement purchases.
With respect to the Board's action in increasing reserve re
quirements, the statement was made that while, following that action,
there remained a large volume of excess reserves accompanied by ex
tremely low rates of interest and an abundance of available funds, many
people were under the impression that the Board's action was unduly
deflationary, that therefore the System was in a position, in the
opinion of a portion of the public at least, of resisting the recovery
program, that for that reason the Board of Governors could not be
motivated exclusively by the economic factors in the situation and
disregard the psychological factors, and that the subsequent reduction
of reserve requirements was believed to be in the best interests of the
Federal Reserve System. Some of the members of the Committee referred
to the fact that the Board of Governors and the Committee were dif
ferently constituted bodies, with separate statutory responsibilities,
and stated that they felt that, therefore, the Committee was under
the necessity of determining what course it should follow regardless
of how the situation with which it was confronted was created.
Some of the members of the Committee stated that, while it
apparently was the desire of the Administration to have the entire

4/21/38 -8
addition to excess reserves resulting from the termination of the in
active gold account made effective as promptly as possible, they felt
that the Treasury should operate on a week-to-week basis and determine,
in the light of developments, whether the policy of retiring bills should
be continued.
There was also discussion of the questions whether, if no ac
tion be taken by the system to influence the market during the period
of an advance, such action should be taken during a period of market
decline, and whether, in view of the fact that up to the present time
the policy of the system had been to endeavor to maintain orderly con
ditions in the Government securities markets, a reduction of from
$200,000,000 to $400,000,000 in the System portfolio for the purpose
of effectively continuing that policy could reasonably be interpreted
as an effort to nullify the reduction in reserve requirements. In
this connection, some of the members of the Committee took the posi
tion that the Committee should not abdicate its responsibility for
maintaining orderly conditions in the Government securities market and
that they did not believe that the Treasury or the Administration would
wish the Committee to do so if they were fully informed as to the
nature of the problem; that therefore the Secretary of the Treasury
should be put on notice of the difficulties from the Committee's
standpoint of the position with which it was confronted; and that the
Treasury should be requested to modify its program with respect to

4/21/38 -9
maturing bills, thereby giving the Committee an opportunity to meet
its responsibility not only because of the effect of the program upon
the condition of the Government bond market in the first instance but
also its ultimate effect upon member banks.
The meeting recessed for lunch, and reconvened at 3:00 p.m.
with the same attendance as at the morning session except that Chair
man Eccles and Mr. McKee were not in attendance.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on February 28 and March 1,
1938, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the
minutes of the meeting of the executive
committee on February 28 and March 1,
1938, were approved, ratified and con
firmed.
Mr. Burgess reviewed the operations which had taken place in
the system open market account since the last meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee, including the sales of bonds and replacements
by bills and notes during the recent period, which had resulted in a
reduction of the bond holdings in the account with maturities in ex
cess of five years to approximately $600,000,000.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the system open market account since
February 28, 1938, up to the close of the
market today, were approved, ratified and
confirmed.

4/21/38 -10
At the request of the Committee for his views regarding the
situation discussed by the Committee, Mr. Goldenweiser stated that ap
proximately $4,000,000,000 in excess reserves might be expected before
the end of the year, that this amount is larger than in 1936 when the
Board increased reserve requirements, but that the situation had changed
materially from the boom conditions that existed at that time to a con
dition of depression the end of which was not yet in sight. He ex
pressed the opinion that the large amount of excess reserves would have
the effect of reducing going rates on Government securities possibly to
a no-yield basis on bills, to 1/4% to 1/2% on notes, and to 2% on bonds,
and that, in these circumstances, the reduction of the system portfolio
in an attempt to maintain rates would be a futile gesture which might
deprive the system of its earning assets without accomplishing any
useful purpose. Under these circumstances, and in the light of the
determination of the Treasury to retire maturing bills, he felt that
the system portfolio should be retained without making shifts to in
fluence the market until such time as the securities purchased to replace
maturing securities reach a no-yield basis. He thought it was clear
that the system could not be expected to purchase replacement securi
ties at a premium. He added that in his opinion the course to be
followed was essentially one of inaction, that everything that could
be done in the monetary field had been done, and that the system should
stand by and determine on the basis of future developments what further
action might be required.

4/21/38 -11
Following Mr. Goldenweiser's statement there was a further
discussion of the question whether, if the system takes no action to
influence market conditions during the period of advancing prices, it
should take such action during a period of market decline and it was
stated by some of the members of the Committee that, regardless of the
desire of the system to influence the market in the present situation
and regardless of the policy followed in a period of market decline,
the system was without the necessary power to prevent a decline in
security yields at the present time and that, therefore, no purpose
would be served in reducing the system portfolio even though it might
be felt that under ordinary conditions the system had some responsi
bility to act.
At this point Chairman Eccles returned to the meeting.
He stated that he had just returned from a very thorough dis
cussion of the entire problem with the Secretary of the Treasury and
that, after reviewing the whole subject, pointing out the problem before
the Federal Open Market Committee, recognizing the Treasury situation
and recognizing that both the Treasury and the Board were in a very
difficult position, there was not the slightest disagreement as to
the essential facts of the situation. Chairman Eccles said that he
had advised the Secretary that the Federal Open Market Committee had
not decided on the course that it should take because it did not know
exactly what program would be followed by the Treasury. He also said

4/21/38 -12.
be had reviewed, for the information of the Secretary, the discussions
which the Committee had had and that the Secretary understood the posi
tion in which the Committee was placed.
Chairman Eccles then stated that the Secretary had outlined
quite fully the Administration conferences that had taken place at which
it had been recognized that if the Treasury retired maturing bills it
would create a difficult problem for the Federal Reserve System for the
reason that there would be fewer bills in the market which could be
used for replacement purposes, that the retirement of bills at the
present time in addition to the effort of the Federal Reserve System
to replace maturing securities would very likely put the Government
securities market up when it was felt that it was already high enough,
if not too high, and that this might have an adverse effect at a sub
sequent time. Notwithstanding these considerations, Chairman Eccles
said, it was decided during the conferences referred to that the pro
ceeds of the desterilized gold should be put into the banking situation,
that this could be done more rapidly by paying off $50,000,000 of bills
a week between now and June, and that, therefore, an announcement should
be made that until further notice the Treasury would sell $50,000,000
of bills weekly. The Secretary stated, Mr. Eccles said, that it was
too late to do anything to change that position this week, because tele
graphic advices had already been sent to the Federal reserve banks that
only $50,000,000 of bills would be offered next week. Mr. Eccles added

4/21/38 -13
that the Secretary felt that the press announcement would leave the
Treasury free to change its policy during the succeeding week if it
desired to do so. Chairman Eccles stated further that the Secretary
had given assurance that, if the System desired, the entire matter
would be considered again next week in the light of intervening devel
opments.
Chairman Eccles' statement was followed by a consideration of
the availability of bankers acceptances and other eligible securities
in addition to Government obligations for purchase for the system ac
count. There was also a discussion of the extent of the authority which
should be given to the executive committee to effect transactions in the
system account pending another meeting of the Committee.
At 5:05 p.m. Mr. Williams, who had not attended the meeting be
cause of illness, entered the room.
There was a discussion of the question how far the Committee
should permit the amount of bonds held in the System account to be
reduced. Some members expressed the view that it should not go below
$500,000,000 in present circumstances; that it might very well be main
tained at the present level; but that the executive committee should
have some authority to let bills run off without replacement. Follow
ing this discussion the Chairman stated that he would like to have
the record show that the Committee had adopted a policy of not letting
the portfolio run off unless a condition developed which would make it

4/21/38 -14
unreasonable to expect the system to replace its maturing bills; that
the situation might change considerably during the next two or three
weeks; and therefore that it would be advisable to review the matter
with the Secretary of the Treasury again next week.
At 5:30 p.m. the meeting recessed with the understanding that
it would reconvene on Friday, April 22, at 10:30 a.m.
Secretary.

The meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was reconvened
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Friday, April 22, 1938, at 10:35 a.m.
PRESENT; Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Sinclair
Mr. Newton
Mr. Schaller
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
Mr. Ransom referred to the fact that since action was taken by
the Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting on March 1 in appoint
ing Messrs. McKee and Ransom as alternates for Messrs. Eccles, Szymczak
and Davis as members of the executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee Mr. Draper had been appointed a member of the Board.
Thereupon Mr. Ransom moved that Mr. Draper
be selected as the first alternate for members
of the Board on the executive committee so that
the alternates for such members of the executive
committee would serve in the following orders
Mr. Draper
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Having been duly seconded, Mr. Ransom's
motion was put by the chair and carried unani
mously.
Mr. Harrison stated that, in view of the discussions at the
meeting yesterday, he had instructed Mr. Burgess, Manager of the System

4/22/38
open market account who had returned to New York following the meeting
yesterday, to effect no transactions in the system open market account
today until further instructions were received from the Committee,
that the market at the present time was from 4/32's to 5/32's higher
than yesterday's closing prices, and that if, in these circumstances,
the Committee felt that Mr. Burgess should be given different instruc
tions it was suggested that the Committee determine the instructions
that should be issued.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the instructions given by
Mr. Harrison to Mr. Burgess were approved,
ratified and confirmed.
Mr. Harrison then presented the follow
ing resolution and moved that it be adopted.
Mr. Harrison's motion was duly seconded:
In view of the fact that the present and prospective
amounts of excess reserves of member banks are tending to
make it more difficult for the System, by means of shifts
in the maturities in the open market account, to exercise
its influence towards orderliness in the Government securi
ties market
VOTED that, until otherwise authorized or
directed by the Committee, and in addition to the
authority to make shifts in the maturities in the
system open market account, the executive committee
be authorized to permit fluctuations in the total
amount of the account in order more effectively,
with the means available and in the light of
current conditions, to exert its influence towards
orderly conditions in the Government bond market,
provided, however, that the account shall not be
increased or decreased by more than $200,000,000
from the present level of the account.
At Mr. Ransom's request, the following draft of resolution was
read:

4/22/38
In view of the fact that actions of the Treasury and
the Board of Governors in pursuance of the program recently
adopted by the Government for the encouragement of business
recovery have resulted in the creation of a large volume of
actual and prospective excess reserves; and of the further
fact that these actions have entirely changed the situation
in the money market, it is the judgment of the Federal Open
Market Committee that interest rates and bond yields should
be permitted to adjust to the new conditions. Consequently,
it is
VOTED that the executive committee is directed
to maintain the system's open market account at its
present level until the next meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee, except that, in case it be
comes impossible to replace maturities in the account
with other securities having a maturity not exceeding
two years without paying a premium above a no-yield
basis, the executive committee is authorized to per
mit the account to fall below its present level by
an amount not exceeding $ .
After some consideration of the differences between the two
resolutions further discussion thereof was deferred until Chairman
Eccles, who was necessarily absent at the beginning of this session,
could join the meeting.
Reference was made to the action of the Committee on March 1
in appointing a committee (Messrs. Davis, Ransom and Sinclair) to con
sider section 6 of Article I of the by-laws of the Federal Open Market
Committee and to submit a report and recommendation, and it was stated
that the committee was not prepared to submit a report at this time.
It was voted unanimously to request the
committee to continue its study of the matter.
Reference was also made to the understanding at the last meeting
of the Committee that Mr. Williams, Associate Economist, would submit
a second memorandum which would be in the nature of a supplement to the

4/22/38 -4
memorandum submitted by him relating to the question whether the raising
of reserve requirements caused the depression. It was stated that Mr.
Williams was absent from this meeting because of illness and that the
memorandum was not available at this time.
Mr. Harrison reviewed, for the information of Mr. McKee, who
was not present at the afternoon session yesterday, the substance of
Chairman Eccles' report of his discussion during the afternoon with
the Secretary of the Treasury.
Chairman Eccles joined the meeting at this point and Mr.
Harrison advised him of the instructions which he had given to Mr.
Burgess and which had been approved by the other members of the Com
mittee. Chairman Eccles stated that he concurred in the action of the
Committee.
Mr. Harrison advised the Committee from time to time of the
reports which he was receiving from the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York regarding developments in the Government securities market.
The discussion of the problem before the Committee proceeded
along the lines of analysis of the existing situation and of points
brought out in the consideration of the problem during the preceding
session.
Mr. Harrison said that he would like to have a vote upon his
resolution, believing that it would be inadvisable for the Committee
to decide at this time that it had no responsibility with respect to
the money market or that it would witness a continued and rapid rise in
the Government bond market without any action on its part in the

4/22/38 -5
direction of maintaining an orderly market, since government bond prices
were almost at record heights with many issues selling on a no-yield
basis, and present and prospective amounts of excess reserves were
tending to force the market still higher, thus making it more vulnerable
for attack in the future. In the event of a reaction later, he said,
the Committee, no doubt, would decide to intervene not only because it
had been its policy to exert its influence toward maintaining an
orderly market on the decline, but also because it might feel some
measure of responsibility for the condition of its member banks. He
added that he felt that, in all the circumstances, the executive com
mittee should at least have authority to permit some flexibility in the
account if that should seem desirable as a factor in restraining a dis
orderly rise in the market. In his opinion, some reasonable reduction
in the account at such a time could not properly be interpreted as a
reversal of the policy of the Government with respect to excess re
serves and probably would serve to make the market less vulnerable in
the future.
Mr. Davis said that he would be opposed to any statement by way
of preamble or otherwise that would indicate that the Committee under
present conditions had any responsibility for the movement of the bond
market or that would imply a criticism of actions which had been taken.
Chairman Eccles said that he could not vote for any resolution
that implied a responsibility for maintaining an orderly market, which
he felt could not be met under the conditions with which the Committee
was confronted but that he would like to see the executive committee

4/22/58
instructed to replace the maturing bills in the portfolio with bills
to the extent that they could be purchased without paying a premium
over a no-yield basis, letting that resolution stand from week to week
pending another meeting of the full Committee to consider a change of
policy.
During the course of the discussion Mr.
McKee moved as a substitute for Mr. Harrison's
motion that the executive committee be in
structed to direct the replacement of the next
maturing Treasury bills in the system open mar
ket account with Treasury bills or notes having
maturities not to exceed two years provided that
such securities could be purchased without pay
ing a premium above a no-yield basis.
Mr. McKee's motion was duly seconded.
Mr. McKee stated that his motion was made with the idea that
another meeting of the Committee should be held next week in order that
the situation might be reviewed again.
At the conclusion of the discussion Mr.
McKee's motion was put by the chair and carried
unanimously.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, it was
voted unanimously that another meeting of the
Committee should be called to convene in
Washington on Friday, April 29, 1938, at 10:30
a.m.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the Committee instructed the
executive committee, until otherwise instructed
by the Committee and subject to the limitations
contained in the motion previously adopted on
this date with respect to the next maturing Treas
ury bills in the account, to direct the replace
ment of maturing securities in the system open
market account with other Government securities
and to make such shifts between maturities in
the account as may be necessary in the proper

4/22/38
administration of the account, provided, that
the amount of securities maturing within two
years be maintained at not less than
$1,000,000,000 and that the amount of bonds
having maturities in excess of five years be
not over $850,000,000 nor less than $500,000,000.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the Committee authorized the
executive committee to permit such fluctuations
within reasonable limits in the amount of hold
ings of Government securities in the system open
market account between weekly statement dates
as may be desirable for the practical adminis
tration of the account in making shifts between
and replacements of securities pursuant to the
general authority granted by the Federal Open
Market Committee.
In taking these actions it was understood that the resolution
adopted at the last meeting relating to an increase or decrease in
the system account would be treated as being no longer in effect.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned,
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.