A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Friday, April 29, 1938, at 10:40 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Sinclair
Mr. Newton
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Martin (alternate for Mr. Schaller)
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Burgess, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System
Mr. Thomas, Assistant Director of the
Division of Research and Statistics
of the Board of Governors
Mr. Piser, Senior Economist in the Divi
sion of Research and Statistics of the
Board of Governors
Mr. Burgess submitted copies of a report prepared by the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of New York for this meeting, covering operations
in the system open market account for the period from April 17 to 27,
1938, inclusive, and reviewed briefly the transactions covered by the
report. In connection with the report there was a discussion of the
relatively large volume of bills held in the account which mature during
the next two months and of the possible future trend of yields on Gov
ernment securities.

4/29/38 -2.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
system open market account for the period
from April 22, to April 28, 1938, inclusive,
were approved, ratified and confirmed.
Chairman Eccles stated that, in accordance with the understand
ing at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on April 21
and 22, he and Mr. Davis had a further discussion with the Secretary
of the Treasury on Tuesday, April 26, of the problems which were before
the Federal Open Market Committee as a result of the action of the
Treasury in discontinuing the inactive gold account and of the Board
of Governors in reducing reserve requirements and particularly the
problem created by the proposed retirement by the Treasury of a por
tion of the maturing Treasury bills. Chairman Eccles said that the
Secretary had a very clear understanding of the difficulties faced by
the Committee and had stated that he desired to cooperate with the Com
mittee in every way as he realized that its problem was very closely
related to his own. Chairman Eccles said that the Secretary had in
dicated that he was in agreement with the position that the system
open market account should not be reduced as long as it is possible
to purchase replacement securities without paying a premium over a
no-yield basis, particularly since any reduction in the account might
be regarded as a reversal of policy.
Chairman Eccles stated further that it was clear that, while
the Administration understood fully the difficulties created by the re
tirement of maturing bills, it felt that it was essential that such

4/29/38 -3
action be taken as a means of completing its announced program and
getting into the banks promptly as excess reserves the proceeds of
the desterilized gold. The Secretary stated during the conference,
Chairman Eccles said, that the Reconstruction Finance Corporation would
very likely require additional funds in the near future with which to
make loans under the authority recently granted to it and that, if it
appeared desirable to do so, the Reconstruction Finance Corporation
might offer within the next two weeks $500,000,000 of Reconstruction
Finance Corporation debentures with possibly a five-year maturity, on
a book credit basis, which would tend to reduce the demand for the
shorter term Government securities.
There was further discussion of the question whether, in view
of the intention of the Treasury to retire maturing bills, the Federal
Reserve System had any responsibility with respect to the maintenance
of orderly conditions in the Government securities market.
Chairman Eccles stated that, following the conference with
the Secretary of the Treasury and in preparing for this meeting, he
had had drafted two resolutions which he desired to submit for consid
eration by the Committee in connection with its discussion of the au
thority to be granted to the executive committee to effect transactions
in the system open market account.
The first draft of resolution read as follows:
"That the executive committee be directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange

4/29/38
"for the replacement of maturing securities in the system
open market account with other Government securities and
for such shifts in maturities as may be necessary in the
proper administration of the account, provided (1) that
maturing Treasury bills shall be replaced only with Trea
sury bills or notes maturing within two years to the ex
tent that they can be purchased without paying a premium
over a no-yield basis; (2) that, subject to the foregoing
limitation, the amount of securities in the account matur
ing within two years be maintained at not less than
$1,000,000,000; and (3) that the amount of bonds in the
account having maturities in excess of five years be main
tained at not less than $500,000,000 nor more than
$850,000,000."
The second resolution (with changes made during the discussion)
read as follows:
"That, in addition to such authority as may be con
tained in other resolutions of the Federal Open Market
Committee and until otherwise directed by the Committee,
the executive committee be authorized, upon written,
telephonic or telegraphic approval of a majority of the
members of the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for the purchase or sale (which would include authority
to allow maturities to run off without replacement) of
Government securities in the open market from time to time
for the system open market account to such extent as the
executive committee shall find to be necessary for the
purpose of exercising an influence toward maintaining
orderly market conditions, provided (1) that the total
amount of securities in the account be not increased or
decreased by more than $125,000,000, and (2) that the
amount of bonds in the account having maturities over five
years be maintained at not less than $500,000,000 nor more
than $850,000,000."
In connection with the first resolution it was stated that the
replacement of maturing bills with bills and notes maturing within two
years to the extent that they could be purchased without paying a premium
over a no-yield basis would not only tend to increase the price of all

4/29/38 -5
such securities up to two years to a no-yield basis, but would very
likely result in higher prices for notes of all maturities.
Mr. Harrison said that he felt that the executive committee
should be given authority to reduce the account within certain limita
tions, as suggested in the resolution offered by him at the last meet
ing of the Federal Open Market Committee. He pointed out that, follow
ing the recent decrease in reserve requirements of member banks, coupled
with the desterilization of approximately $1,400,000,000 of gold, ex
cess reserves of member banks already had been largely increased and
would likely reach $3,800,000,000 before the end of the year, and that
this increase had already resulted in a rapid and substantial rise in
Government security prices. Looking ahead, he said, it might become
increasingly difficult for the System, by means of shifts in maturities
in its account, to exercise an influence toward orderly conditions in
the market; many of the shorter maturities were selling on a no-yield
basis; and further shifts into such maturities or forced replacement
of maturing securities with short maturities would accentuate the pres
ent abnormalities of both short and long term rates.
He also stated that, in his opinion, the Committee should con
tinue to recognize its responsibility, when possible, to exercise its
influence toward maintaining orderly conditions in the market, not only
on the down-side but on the up-side as well; that the latter was im
portant at this time if we were to avoid a too rapid or extensive rise

4/29/38 -6
in bond prices which might make the market more vulnerable to later
reactions; and that, to meet this responsibility most effectively
under conditions such as exist now, the Committee should have authority
to reduce the account, either by sales of securities or by allowing
maturities to run off without replacement. He added that a reduction
in the account at this time, especially if it resulted merely from a
failure to replace maturities, would probably run little of the risk
previously feared that a decrease in the account might precipitate
disorderly liquidation by banks, and that a reduction now, effected
for the purpose of exercising the System's influence toward the main
tenance of orderly market conditions, could not fairly be interpreted
as in conflict with or as counteracting the Government's recent program
to increase excess reserves, as the amounts involved would be rela
tively too small as compared with the total amount of excess reserves
now outstanding to warrant such an interpretation.
Chairman Eccles expressed the opinion that any action to re
duce the account so long as replacements could be purchased without
paying a premium over a no-yield basis would be interpreted as in
consistent with the Government's program. He stated that, as a member
of the executive committee, he would not want the executive committee
to take the responsibility of reducing the account, and that, while
he would be willing to vote for the second resolution, he felt that
if conditions arose which called for a reduction in the account another

4/29/38 -7
meeting of the full Committee should be called.
There was a discussion of what action the executive committee
would be expected to take under clause (1) of the first resolution
and Chairman Eccles stated that it was intended to instruct the execu
tive committee to replace maturing bills so long as such replacements
could be made by the purchase of bills or notes, with maturities not to
exceed two years without paying a premium over a no-yield basis and
that, to the extent that such replacements could not be made, maturi
ties would be allowed to run off without replacement. The discussion
also made clear that the authority proposed in the second resolution,
if given, would be construed to be independent of any authority or
action under the first resolution.
Further consideration was given to the possibility of acquir
ing for the system account securities, other than direct obligations
of the Government, that are eligible for purchase by the Federal re
serve banks, and it was stated that, since these securities were
available only from time to time in small blocks, substantial pur
chases thereof would be difficult to make and might substantially
increase prices, and that, therefore, such purchases would not be de
sirable from a market standpoint. It was also stated that, in view
of the large volume of maturities in the system account during the
next two months, it was quite possible that unless replacements were
made with notes running as high as five years it might be necessary

4/29/38
to allow a substantial amount of securities in the account to mature
without replacement.
At the conclusion of the discussion
Mr. Newton moved that the two resolutions
set forth above be adopted. Mr. Newton's
motion was duly seconded.
Mr. Harrison moved as a substitute for
Mr. Newton's motion that the following res
olution be adopted for the reasons which he
had outlined earlier in this meeting:
"That until otherwise authorized or directed by the
Federal Open Market Committee the executive committee be
authorized (a) to make such shifts in maturities in the
system open market account as may be necessary in the
proper administration of the account and (b) to permit
fluctuations in the total amount of the account in order
more effectively with the means available and in the light
of current conditions to exert its influence toward main
taining orderly conditions in the market, provided
(1) that the amount of securities in the account matur
ing within two years be maintained at not less than
$1,000,000,000, (2) that the amount of bonds in the account
having maturities in excess of five years be maintained at
not less than $500,000,000 nor more than $850,000,000, and
(3) that the total amount of the account be not increased
or decreased by more than $200,000,000 from the present
level of the account."
Mr. Harrison's motion, having been
duly seconded, was put by the chair and
lost, the members voting as follows:
Mr. Harrison Mr. Ecles
Mr. McKee Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Sinclair Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Newton
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Martin

4/29/38
Mr. Newton's original motion was put
by the chair and carried unanimously.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.