A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Friday, December 30, 1938, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Sinclair
Mr. Schaller
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Leach (alternate for Mr. Newton)
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Sproul, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
September 21, 1938, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the execu
tive committee of the Federal Open Market
Committee as set forth in the minutes of the
meetings of the executive committee on Sep
tember 15 and 21 and December 7, 1938, were
approved, ratified and confirmed.
With the consent of the members of the Committee, Mr. Piser,
Senior Economist in the Division of Research and Statistics of the
Board of Governors, was requested to attend this meeting.
Mr. Sproul distributed among the members of the Committee

12/30/38 -2
copies of a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
of open market operations conducted by the bank since the meeting of
the Committee on September 21, 1938. He referred briefly to the prin
cipal transactions in the account during the period covered by the
report and stated that the bank had experienced considerable diffi
culty during the last three weeks in carrying out the instructions
of the executive committee to replace maturing bills by purchases of
like amounts of Treasury bills or Treasury notes without paying a
premium above a no-yield basis. In this connection, he said that,
due to a special and insistent demand for Treasury bills in recent
weeks, the discount on outstanding Treasury bills had been eliminated
completely and bills were being traded in at prices at or above par,
the most recent issue of bills having been sold at par or above.
He added that a somewhat similar situation existed in the
Treasury note market, all issues of notes maturing within two years
being currently traded in as "rights" on a negative yield basis with
the return on longer maturities declining. This condition, he said,
had been aggravated by the inability of the reserve bank to obtain
sufficient amounts of bills to replace maturities and the resulting
necessity of going into the market and making replacements with notes.
He said that there had not been a sufficient supply of notes freely
available in the market to make these replacements and the bank had
been forced to solicit banks and others directly and through dealers
to sell notes at advanced prices or from their investment accounts.

12/30/38 -3
This, he stated, had established a presumption in the market that the
Federal Open Market Committee would maintain the existing portfolio
at all cost, which, so long as the present situation in the bill mar
ket continued, would result in cumulative pressure on the market for
notes and in a tendency toward forced lengthening of the maturity of
holdings in the system account.
He stated further that, as outlined in the report referred
to above, it was necessary on December 14 to purchase $3,000,000 of
notes to complete replacement of maturing Treasury bills, that on
December 21, $12,904,000 of notes were acquired, and that on Decem
ber 28 a total of $30,044,000 of notes were added to the portfolio,
the notes purchased amounting to more than 62% of the replacement
purchases as of that date. He anticipated that, because of the ex
pected heavy demand for bills for tax purposes in the early weeks of
the new year and the increase in excess reserves which will occur after
the first of the new year, the situation described above would con
tinue, at least to some extent, during the immediate future.
At the conclusion of Mr. Sproul's re
port, upon motion duly made and seconded and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
system account for the period from September
20 to December 29, 1938, inclusive, were ap
proved, ratified and confirmed.
Mr. Harrison then called upon Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams
for statements with respect to the present business and credit situa
tion.

12/30/38 -4
Mr. Goldenweiser stated that the present recovery movement,
which had carried the index of industrial production up from 75 to
about 103, was quite general, taking in all the major industrial
groups; that the rate of recovery was almost unequalled except for
a short period in the early part of 1933; and that the conclusion
which he felt could be drawn from the movement was that the decline
in business last year and the early part of 1938 was more radical
than underlying economic conditions appeared to justify and was
principally an adjustment of an inventory situation. He said that
the severe downturn did not spread to the whole economic system,
as the decline in consumption, indicated by department store sales,
was not nearly as sharp as the decline in production, and that the
decline in income was considerably less. He pointed out that
throughout the year the rate of consumption was greater than that
of production and that, therefore, inventories were being cut down,
and he said that at the present time the best estimate was that
production and consumption were at about the same level, that if
this condition continued the upward movement might continue for some
time, and that it was the hope that production would continue to in
crease gradually and that consumption would increase at a comparable
rate.
The crucial point in the situation, Mr. Goldenweiser said,
was whether there would be a continued upturn in the durable goods

12/30/38 -5
industries that supply the greater portion of employment, and, if
steel, automobiles, and building continued to advance, the coming
year would be a good one, reaching a higher level of production for
the year as a whole than the present level. The weak point at pres
ent, he added, was the low level of agricultural prices which was
not likely to rise in the next year although there might be some im
provement. He concluded with an expression of his opinion that, aside
from agricultural prices, the fact that prices had been fairly steady
during recent months was an element of strength instead of weakness
in the situation.
At this point Chairman Eccles joined the meeting.
Mr. Williams expressed general agreement with the statement
made by Mr. Goldenweiser. He felt that recent stability of prices
was a point of strength as contrasted with the condition existing
during the latter part of 1936 when prices advanced very rapidly, re
sulting in accumulation of inventories and forward buying and creating
a situation which lent itself to downward adjustment.
He said he had been interested in the rather general expec
tation that there would be a decline in activity during the first
quarter of 1939, that such declines had occurred in other recent years,
but that he felt too much importance should not be attached to such a
movement. The strongest single indication, he said, that a downturn
might occur was that the rate of recovery has been so rapid that it
would not be surprising if it should decline somewhat and if such

12/30/38 -6.
was the result it would mean that the economy was merely marking time
and that activity might be considerably higher by the end of next
year than it was at this time. His own opinion was that 1939 might
turn out to be a considerably better year than the estimates which,
he felt, contained an element of pessimism, that since the late re
cession was fundamentally an adjustment of inventories it could be
expected to be of short duration, and that, inasmuch as building and
the durable goods industries were better than they had been, the first
quarter of the new year should be a satisfactory one.
While we now have the elements of a genuine recovery, he said,
he could not venture a guess as to how long it would last. The out
look in the durable goods industries for the next few years appeared
good so far as the demand for such goods was concerned. He referred
to the facts that there were no unhealthy speculative elements of any
importance in the situation and that the banking situation was better
than it had been at times in the past as being among the reasons for
expecting a recovery of the economy under its own power. He felt
that what was needed more than anything else at the moment was a
demonstration that the economy was capable of staging a recovery,
and that, while he did not feel that the Government should stop its
efforts to maintain consuming power, he did feel that, to the extent
that evidences of recovery appear, the primary policy should be one
of tapering off Federal deficits and giving a demonstration that the
economy is able to bring about a recovery on its own power.

12/30/38 -7-
During the discussion which followed of the problems to be
considered by the Committee in determining its future open market
policy, Mr. Williams made the further statement that he recognized
that the country was faced with several important specific problems
which presented substantial difficulties such as the railroad situa
tion, social security and public utilities, but that he felt that
there was a real possibility that a solution of these problems was
not going to be found as long as the temporary expedient of deficit
spending was used rather than to work out a sound economic solution
of the difficulties.
Chairman Eccles stated that Mr. Sproul had reported to him
currently the difficulty that was being experienced by the New York
bank in acquiring Treasury bills and notes to replace maturing bills,
but that he had been unable to discuss the matter with the Secretary
of the Treasury until this morning when he (Chairman Eccles) had
gone to the Treasury and reviewed the problem with the Secretary and
Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Taylor. He said he had explained
that the situation had been brought about by the substantial reduc
tion in the amount of bills in the market following the reduction
in the inactive gold account in April, that the total amount of bills
now outstanding was about half of what it was formerly, that the
system account held approximately half of the bills maturing currently,
and that the situation was being aggravated at the present time by

12/30/38 -8
the heavy demand for bills for tax purposes and by the pressure for
investment of idle deposit balances in bills to enable banks to reduce
the expense of assessments of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
He advised the Secretary, he said, that this condition placed the Fed
eral Open Market Committee in a situation where it must choose between
the alternative of allowing some of the bills held in the system account
to run off without replacement to the extent that replacements cannot be
made in bills or short term notes without paying a premium above a no
yield basis and the alternative of buying longer term Goverment securi
ties. He stated that he had pointed out the difficulty that would fol
low from replacing maturing bills with bonds, as the bond market was
strong and additional purchases would drive it higher with possible ad
verse reactions later on when the system account might be in a less
effective position to lend support to the market. On the other hand,
if bills were allowed to run off, Chairman Eccles said, because of the
system's inability to replace, the account would show a reduction from
week to week which might be difficult to explain in the light of other
monetary actions taken by the Treasury and the System and might be con
strued by the public as a reversal of policy. Chairman Eccles added
that he suggested to the Secretary that the Treasury Department could
avoid the entire situation by issuing additional amounts of bills, that
the reduction in the amount of outstanding bills did not appear to be
necessary, and that if the weekly bill offering were increased from

12/30/38 -9
$100,000,000 to $150,000,000 for ten weeks the Treasury would thereby
obtain the additional funds needed between now and the first of June,
probably without cost to the Treasury.
The reply of the Secretary in which Mr. Taylor concurred,
Chairman Eccles said, was that he did not think it would be desirable
to issue more bills at this time as to do so would increase Treasury
balances beyond their already high level, which would create what
would amount to a ridiculous situation, that he was beginning to favor
the suggestion that a further increase in the Federal debt be avoided
in the near future by having the Reconstruction Finance Corporation
borrow in the market to the extent of $500,000,000 and use the pro
ceeds to pay its indebtedness to the Treasury, that if that were
done he believed it might be well to have it done before the March
refunding of June notes, possibly in February, and that the Treasury
might retire an additional $500,000,000 of bills with the funds re
ceived from the Reconstruction Finance Corporation. The Secretary
did not seem to see any objection, Chairman Eccles stated, to re
ducing the total amount of outstanding bills, as it was thought the
Treasury would then be in a position where it would be assured of a
continued favorable bill market.
Chairman Eccles added that the Secretary had stated that the
decision whether the Federal Open Market Committee should allow ma
turities to run off or should replace current maturities with bonds

12/30/38 -10
to the extent necessary, with a resultant increase in bond prices,
was a responsibility of the Committee and that he would have no com
ment or criticism to offer at this time or later regarding the deci
sion reached by the Committee in that connection. However, Mr. Taylor
felt, Chairman Eccles said, that it would be a mistake for the account
to acquire bonds, that the account should be allowed to run off to
the extent that it was not possible to acquire bills or notes without
paying a premium above a no-yield basis, and that a reduction in the
account for this reason could be explained easily.
There followed a considerable discussion of the policy to
be adopted by the Committee in the light of the information before
the Committee during which Mr. Harrison suggested the adoption of a
resolution to instruct the executive committee to replace maturing
bills in the account with other bills or with Treasury notes, or to
allow such bills to run off without replacement or pending such re
placement, (a) when market conditions are such as to make it impos
sible to procure bills or notes without paying a premium above a
no-yield basis or (b) when such other bills or notes are not obtain
able without undue disturbance to the market. In making this sug
gestion Mr. Harrison said that he felt it was important that the New
York bank should not be placed again in the position in which it found
itself during the last three weeks of having to solicit banks and
dealers for bills or notes with which to make replacements, a proce
dure which disturbs the whole government security market and, if long

12/30/38 -11.
continued, runs the risk of driving up the price of even the longer
term notes to a no-yield basis.
During the discussion there were distributed to the members
copies of a draft of a statement which had been prepared by Messrs.
Goldenweiser and Thurston at the suggestion of the Chairman as a basis
for consideration of a decision not to replace all bills maturing In
the system account.
At 1:15 p.m. the meeting recessed with the understanding that
it would reconvene in the afternoon and that during the interim Messrs.
Eccles and Harrison would prepare drafts of a resolution and press
statement for consideration at the afternoon session.
The meeting reconvened at 2:30 p.m. with the same attendance
as at the close of the morning session.
Consideration was given to a draft of press statement offered
by Messrs. Eccles and Harrison which had been prepared on the theory
that there might be a reduction in the system account because of in
ability to replace maturing bills.
At Mr. Ransom's suggestion Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams
were requested to comment on the action contemplated by the draft
of statement.
Mr. Goldenweiser stated that he was not in favor of reducing
the amount of securities held in the system account at the present
time; that he did not favor the policy which had been advocated of

12/30/38 -12
having a fluctuating portfolio; that he did not think that the reasons
given in the proposed press statement would be widely accepted; and
that the action might be regarded as contemplating a reduction in the
portfolio as a matter of policy. He saw no reason why the Federal
Open Market Committee should limit itself to the replacement of matur
ing bills with other bills or with Treasury notes; and he felt that,
while the decision would be a fairly close one, the Committee would
be less likely to regret an action requiring the maintenance of the
present portfolio than it would action contemplating a reduction. He
added that if it were decided to allow bills to run off without re
placement a full statement should be made for the reason that there
has been no reduction in the portfolio for approximately six years
and such action would require something more than a brief explana
tion.
Mr. Williams said that he favored action allowing maturing
bills to run off without replacement to the extent they could not be
replaced with bills or notes without paying a premium above a no-yield
basis; that he felt it would not be regarded as an important action;
and that he would favor a brief statement to the press to the effect
that the action was taken because of the inability to obtain bills
and notes for replacement purposes without paying a premium or with
out undue disturbance to the market for such securities. He expressed
the opinion that in view of the present high prices of Government

12/30/38 -13
securities it would not be difficult to explain the Committee's ac
tion, and that there was not much danger of its being regarded by
anyone as a change of policy, but that if full replacements were con
tinued and the prices of Government securities were driven higher the
system would be in danger of criticism for having carried its policy
beyond reasonable limits, which might result in discrediting the sys
tem's open market policy altogether.
During a further discussion Mr. McKee suggested that consid
eration be given to the question whether it would be desirable to
continue during the next week or two the efforts to make full re
placement of maturing bills, by purchasing not only bills and notes
but also bonds to the extent that bills and notes were not available
in the market, for the purpose of seeing what the effect of that pro
cedure would be.
Chairman Eccles referred to the fact that the President's
budget message to Congress would be delivered next week and that if
the system account were reduced and there were any unfavorable re
action in the Government securities market resulting from the budget
message, the result might be attributed to the action of the Federal
Open Market Committee in reducing the account.
After a further discussion, Mr. Harrison read a revised draft
of statement for the press, which was considered by the Committee. He
also presented a draft of resolution directing the executive committee

12/30/38 -14-
to effect transactions in the System account which he suggested for
the consideration of the Federal Open Market Committee.
During the discussion of Mr. Harrison's draft, consideration
was also given to the desirability of (1) continuing the existing
directions to the executive committee to make complete replacements
of maturing bills during the coming week or two and of recessing
this meeting with the understanding that it would reconvene before
January 11, 1939 (on which date there would be a maturity of bills
held in the account) for reconsideration of the entire matter in the
light of the situation then existing, and (2) directing the executive
committee to replace maturing bills with bonds to the extent that
bills and notes were not available in the market without paying a
premium.
At the conclusion of the discussion Mr.
Sinclair moved that the resolution offered
by Mr. Harrison be adopted as follows:
That the executive committee be directed until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, (1)
to arrange for the replacement of maturing Treasury bills
in the system open market account with other Treasury
bills or Treasury notes, or, from time to time, to allow
such bills to mature without replacement or pending sub
sequent replacement (a) when market conditions are such
as to make it impossible to procure other bills or notes
without paying a premium over a no-yield basis, or (b)
when such notes are not obtainable without undue disturb
ance to the market; (2) to arrange for the replacement of
maturing Treasury notes and bonds in the system open market
account with other Government securities; and (3) to ar
range for such shifts in maturities in the system open
market account as may be necessary in the proper adminis
tration of the account; provided, (a) that the amount of

12/30/38 -15-
securities in the account maturing within two years be
maintained at not less than $1,000,000,000; (b) that the
amount of bonds in the account having maturities in excess
of five years be maintained at not less than $500,000,000
nor more than $900,000,000; and (c) that, if Treasury
bills in the account are allowed to mature without re
placement, the total amount of securities in the account
be not decreased by more than $200,000,000.
That, in addition to such authority as may be con
tained in other resolutions of the Federal Open Market
Committee and until otherwise directed by the Committee,
the executive committee be authorized, upon written, tele
phonic or telegraphic approval of a majority of the mem
bers of the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for
the purchase or sale (which would include authority to
allow maturities to run off without replacement) of Gov
ernment securities in the open market from time to time
for system open market account to such extent as the
executive committee shall find to be necessary for the
purpose of exercising an influence toward maintaining
orderly market conditions, provided (1) that the total
amount of securities in the account be not increased by
more than $200,000,000 nor decreased by more than
$200,000,000 including such decreases as may result from
allowing Treasury bills in the account to mature without
replacement, and (2) that the amount of bonds in the ac
count having maturities over five years be maintained
at not less than $500,000,000 nor more than $900,000,000.
Mr. Sinclair's motion having been duly
seconded, was put by the chair and carried,
Messrs. Harrison, Szymczak, McKee, Davis,
Sinclair, Schaller, Peyton and Leach voting
"Aye", and Messrs. Eccles, Ransom and Draper
voting "No".
Chairman Eccles voted "No" for the fol
lowing reasons:
Last spring, as a part of the Government's program
for the encouragement of business recovery, the Board of
Governors reduced reserve requirements for member banks
by $750,000,000. The Chairman voted for this action for
the purpose of cooperating with the Government in its
recovery program of last spring. The Chairman's view

12/30/38 -16-
was that this addition to excess reserves at a time when
deflation and credit contraction were in progress could
not have an adverse effect and might possibly have a de
sirable psychological effect. The Government's recovery
program is now being carried out and the business situa
tion and prospects are not such as to require a change
in policy. Since a failure to replace maturing bills in
the System's portfolio would reduce reserves, it might
be interpreted as a reversal of policy, which would not
be justified under present business conditions, and would
be inconsistent with the action taken last spring to in
crease reserves. The Chairman thought it particularly
inadvisable at this time to fail to replace maturing bills
for technical operating reasons, unless an effort had
first been made to replace them with bonds or long term
notes to the extent that it proved impossible to do so
with bills or short-dated notes except by paying a pre
mium above a no-yield basis. He also thought that if
the effort were made to replace with longer term notes
or bonds, it would tend to ease the demand for bills and
short-dated notes and thus tend to make them more readily
available without paying a premium above a no-yield
basis.
In voting against the adoption of the resolutions
Mr. Ransom stated that, without reviewing all of the
considerations that influenced his vote, he felt that
it was preferable under existing circumstances to make
no reduction in the portfolio. A reduction should be
reserved to be used at such time as a reversal of pol
icy is intended, or at such other time as conditions
or reasons other than those now before the Committee
would, in his opinion, require a reduction in the port
folio. If the portfolio were now reduced without in
tending a change of policy, an explanatory statement
would be necessary. If later a change of policy were
intended in connection with a reduction in the portfolio,
it would then appear necessary to issue a further ex
planatory statement. It seemed to him that the Commit
tee should rely more upon its actions to speak for
themselves and less upon the use of statements to give
effect to or limit the effect of the actions themselves,
and that statements should support and explain rather
than controvert action.
Mr. Harrison stated that Mr. Matteson, Assistant Vice President

12/30/38 -17-
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, had just advised Mr. Sproul
over the telephone that because of the reduced demand for bills for
year-end statement purposes it appeared that it might be possible to
replace next week's maturities of bills with other bills that would be
available in the market,
Mr. McKee moved that the proposed state
ment for the press be approved subject to such
changes of form as might be thought necessary
by Messrs. Sproul and Thurston.
Mr. McKee's motion, having been duly
seconded, was put by the chair and carried,
Messrs. Eccles, Harrison, Szymczak, McKee,
Davis, Sinclair, Schaller, Peyton and Leach
voting "Aye", and Mr. Ransom not voting.
(Secretary's note. It had been necessary
for Mr. Draper to leave the meeting before the
foregoing vote was taken and he advised the
the Secretary subsequently that, in view of
the earlier action of the Committee, he wished
to be recorded as approving the statement.)
The statement as released to the press
was as follows:
"The Federal Open Market Committee announced, following
a meeting today, that weekly statements of the total hold
ings in the Federal Reserve System's Open Market Account
may at times show some fluctuation depending upon condi
tions in the market affecting the committee's ability to
replace maturing Treasury bills held in its portfolio. The
volume of Treasury bills available on the market has de
clined materially during the year and, owing to the large
and increasing demand, such bills are already selling
either on a no yield basis or at a premium above a no
yield basis. It has, therefore, become difficult and in
some weeks impossible for the System to find sufficient
bills on the market to replace those that mature. Short
term notes are also selling on a no yield basis and longer
term notes have at times been difficult to obtain. In
these circumstances, it may be necessary from time to time

12/30/38 -18-
"to permit bills held in the portfolio to mature without
replacement, not because of any change in Federal Reserve
policy but solely because of the technical situation in
the market. Because no change in Federal Reserve policy is
contemplated at this time, maturing bills will be replaced
to the extent that market conditions warrant."
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.