A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Monday, February 28, 1938, at 3:45 p.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Sinclair
Mr. McKinney
Mr. Martin
Mr. Day
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Burgess, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Re-.
serve System
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on November 29, November 30,
and December 1, 1937, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the
minutes of the meetings of the executive
committee on November 30-December 1, and
December 13, 1937, were approved, rati
fied and confirmed.
Mr. Burgess referred to the report submitted by the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York under date of February 24, 1938, of transactions
effected in the System open market account since the last meeting Of
the Federal Open Market Committee, and outlined briefly the transactions

2/28/38 -2
which had taken place since February 24 and up to the close of business
February 28, 1938. The transactions and the resulting changes in the
maturities of securities held in the System account were discussed, in
cluding particularly the reduction which had taken place in the System's
holdings of longer term bonds.
During the discussion, Mr. Young, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston, joined the meeting as an alternate for Mr.
Harrison who was unable to attend the meeting because of illness.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System open market account since
November 29, 1937, and up to the close of
business February 28, 1938, were approved,
ratified and confirmed.
Attention was directed to the memorandum which had been pre
pared by Mr. Williams in response to an informal request of the members
of the Federal Open Market Committee on the subject "Did the Raising
of Reserve Requirements Cause the Depression?" Copies of a draft of
the memorandum had been sent to the members of the Committee by Mr.
Williams under date of February 11, 1938, at which time he stated that
he was giving consideration to adding another section to the memorandum
and that the memorandum was only in draft form. At this meeting he
stated that, after considering the matter further, he had decided not
to make any further addition to the memorandum, as the subject matter
of the contemplated additional section could be treated more appro
priately in an entirely separate memorandum, and that, therefore, he

2/28/38
wished to submit the memorandum in the form in which it was sent to
the members of the Committee on February 11.
After a discussion of various sec
tions of the memorandum, upon motion duly
made and seconded, it was voted unanimously
(1) to accept and file the report, with
the understanding that the conclusions set
forth therein did not necessarily repre
sent the views of the members of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee, and (2) to
request Mr. Williams to prepare, for
submission to the members of the Committee
before the next meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee, the second memo
randum covering the material which he had
contemplated putting in a fourth section
of the report.
In taking this action it was agreed
that the Secretary should send under con
fidential cover to the Presidents who are
not members of the Federal Open Market
Committee copies of the memorandum sub
mitted by Mr. Williams at this meeting,
and, when completed, copies of the second
memorandum to be prepared by him.
Reference was then made to the action taken at the meeting of
the Federal Open Market Committee on November 30, 1937, when Chairman
Eccles was requested to appoint a special committee to consider and
submit a recommendation to the full Committee as to the position to be
taken with respect to the extent, if any, to which the Presidents and
boards of directors of the Federal reserve banks should be advised of
discussions and actions of the Federal Open Market Committee. On be
half of the committee (Messrs.Szymczak, McKee and Sinclair) Mr. Szymczak

2/28/38 -4-
stated that the committee had met on various occasions and decided to
submit to the Federal Open Market Committee the following recommenda
tions:
1. That the Presidents of the Federal reserve banks who
are not members of the Federal Open Market Committee
be invited to the preliminary discussions at the
time of the regular meetings of the Federal Open
Market Committee for advice and information. Thus
the Presidents' Conference would precede or follow
the regular meetings of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee.
2. That the Federal Open Market Committee consider the
adoption of a method by which members of the Federal
Open Market Committee may freely discuss matters con
sidered and actions taken at meetings of the Committee
with the Presidents of the Federal reserve banks who
are not members of the Committee. The method to be
adopted should be consistent with the provisions of
the rules and regulations of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
In explanation of the second recommendation, Mr. Szymczak stated
that the committee had not reached a unanimous decision on a recom
mendation as to the method by which the Presidents might be advised of
discussions and actions of the Federal Open Market Committee, but were
unanimously of the opinion that the question of giving such informa
tion to the directors of the Federal reserve banks should not be raised
at this time.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
the first recommendation was approved
unanimously.
In connection with the discussion of the second recommendation,

2/28/38 -5.
reference was made to section 6 of Article I of the by-laws of the
Federal Open Market Committee which provides that proceedings, deliber
ations, discussions and actions of the Committee, except as required
by law and except as authorized by the Committee, shall be strictly
confidential, and Mr. Young stated that he felt that the section was
unduly restrictive, that he was not willing to be placed in the posi
tion of being unable to discuss with his directors matters relating to
the Federal Open Market Committee and its deliberations and actions,
and that the section should be amended.
There followed a general discussion
of the question raised by Mr. Young, at
the conclusion of which, upon motion
duly made and seconded, the following
resolution was adopted by unanimous vote:
RESOLVED, That the members of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee be authorized to discuss in confidence
with the President of any Federal reserve bank the mat
ters considered and actions taken at meetings of the
Committee and its executive committee.
Mr. Young stated that, while he had voted for the resolution,
he wished again to make it clear that he did not approve the section
of the by-laws of the Federal Open Market Committee referred to above.
Mr. Sinclair moved that the Com
mittee during its session tomorrow
consider the appointment of a special
committee to study section 6 of Article
I of the by-laws of the Federal Open
Market Committee and to submit a report
and recommendation as to changes in
the section at the next meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee.

2/28/38
Mr. Sinclair's motion, having been duly
seconded, was put by the chair and carried
unanimously.
Thereupon the meeting recessed,
with the understanding that the next
session would be held on March 1 at
11 a.m.
Approved:
Chairman.

The meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was recon
vened in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, March 1, 1938, at 11:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Sinclair
Mr. Newton
Mr. Schaller
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Burgess, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary of
the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System
The Secretary reported that records of the elections for the
period of one year commencing March 1, 1938, of members and alter
nates representing the Federal reserve banks, or certified copies
thereof, had been received by the Secretary of the Committee; that
each newly elected member and alternate had filed the required oath
of office; and that it was the opinion of the Committee's counsel on
the basis of these documents that the newly elected members and alter
nates present were legally qualified to participate in the meeting,
as follows:

3/1/38 -2-
George L. Harrison, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, with Roy A. Young, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, as alternate member;
John S. Sinclair, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia, with M. J. Fleming, President
of the Federal Reserve bank of Cleveland, as alternate
member;
Oscar Newton, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta, with Hugh Leach, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond, as alternate member;
George J. Schaller, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago, with Wm. McC.Martin, President of
the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, as alternate
member; and
John N. Peyton, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis, with George H. Hamilton, Presi
dent of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, as
alternate member.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, the
following officers of the Committee were re
elected by unanimous votes to serve until the
election of their successors at the first meet
ing after March 1, 1939:
Marriner S. Eccles, Chairman
George L. Harrison, Vice Chairman
E. A. Goldenweiser, Economist
John H. Williams, Associate Economist
Walter Wyatt, General Counsel
J. P. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the Committee selected the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of New York to execute trans
actions for the System open market account until
the adjournment of the first meeting of the Com
mittee after March 1, 1939.
Mr. Harrison stated that it was his intention to recommend
to the board of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York the
selection of Mr. Burgess as Manager of the System Open Market Account.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the Committee approved the selec
tion of Mr. Burgess as Manager of the System

-3-
account in the event of his reappointment by
the board of directors of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York to act in that capacity.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the following were selected to
serve with the Chairman of the Federal Open Market
Committee, who under the provisions of the by-laws
is also chairman of the executive committee, as
members and alternate members of the executive
committee until the first meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee after March 1, 1939:
Members Alternate Members
M. S. Szymczak John K. McKee
Chester C. Davis Ronald Ransom
George L. Harrison (to serve in the order
John S. Sinclair named as alternates for
Messrs. Eccles, Szymczak
and Davis)
George J. Schaller
John N. Peyton
(to serve in the order
named as alternates for
Messrs. Harrison and
Sinclair)
There were then presented by Mr. Ransom certain suggested amend
ments to the by-laws of the Federal Open Market Committee and the regu
lation adopted by it with respect to open market operations of Federal
reserve banks.
After discussion of the proposed changes,
upon motion duly made and seconded, the follow
ing amendments were approved unanimously:
Section 1 of Article I of the by-laws of the Committee
was amended to read as follows:
"Prior to the first meeting of the Committee fol
lowing March 1 each year, each member of the Com
mittee representing the Federal reserve banks

"shall cause a record of his election and of the
election of the alternate to serve in his absence
to be forwarded to the Secretary of the Committee
If any question be raised as to the election or
eligibility of such member or alternate, the Com
mittee shall determine such question before per
mitting such member or alternate to participate
in the meetings."
The clause "and upon receipt of such notice the alter
nate shall advise the Secretary whether he will attend such
meeting", was added to the last sentence of Section 5 of
Article I of the by-laws so that the sentence would read
as follows:
"Whenever any member of the Committee represent
ing Federal Reserve banks shall find that he
will be unable to attend a meeting of the Com
mittee, he shall promptly notify his alternate
and the Secretary of the Committee in writing
or by telegram, and upon receipt of such notice
the alternate shall advise the Secretary whether
he will attend such meeting."
Section 2 of Article II of the by-laws was amended by
substituting for the last sentence the following two sen
tences:
"At its first meeting after March 1 of each year
the Committee shall elect an Assistant Secretary,
to serve until the first meeting after March 1 of
the next year. In the absence of the Secretary
of the Committee, the Assistant Secretary shall
act as Secretary pro tem."
The first paragraph of Section 7 of the regulation of
the Federal Open Market Committee relating to open market
operations of Federal reserve banks was amended to read as
follows:
"No Federal Reserve bank shall purchase or
sell Government securities, for its own account
or for the account of any other Federal Reserve
bank, except pursuant to authority granted by
the Committee or in accordance with an open
market policy adopted by the Committee and in
effect at the time."

Paragraphs (1) and (2) of Section 8 of the regulation
of the Federal Open Market Committee relating to open market
operations of Federal Reserve banks were amended to read as
follows:
"(1) Each Federal Reserve Bank, as may be
required from time to time by the Committee,
shall report all such transactions to the Secre
tary of the Committee.
"(2) Only acceptances and bills of exchange
which are of the kinds made eligible for purchase
under the provisions of Regulation B of the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System may be
purchased and the rates of discount shall be es
tablished in accordance with the provisions of
section 14(d) of the Federal Reserve Act: Pro
vided, further, That no obligations payable in
foreign currency shall be purchased or sold for
the account of the Federal Reserve bank except
in accordance with directions of the Committee."
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, S. R. Carpenter was
elected Assistant Secretary of the Commit
tee to serve until the election of his suc
cessor at the first meeting after March 1,
1939.
It was stated that at the meeting of the Board of Governors
with the Presidents of Federal reserve banks yesterday, at which all
of the members of the Federal Open Market Committee with the exception
of Mr. Harrison were in attendance, Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams,
as economists for the Committee, reviewed the present business and
credit situation. Copies of the memorandum prepared by Mr. Golden
weiser under date of February 26, 1938, on the subject of recent
business and credit developments, which formed the basis of his state
ment, and a summary of Mr. Williams' statement which reviewed the

3/1/38 -6
possible trends of business activity in the near future, have been
placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
There ensued a general discussion of open market policy and
of the resolutions to be adopted by the Committee authorizing the ex
ecutive committee to direct open market operations pending another
meeting of the full Committee. Chairman Eccles stated that he felt
the present policy should be continued for the reason that the excess
reserves held by member banks are not excessive under existing circum
stances; that, in view of the low volume of business activity, declining
prices, and business uncertainty, no useful purpose would be achieved
by reducing the total amount of securities held in the System open
market account; and that such action might be misinterpreted and thereby
result in a further unfavorable element in the business situation. He
also expressed the opinion that the present policy of reducing the amount
of holdings of long-term bonds in the System account should be continued
in order to exercise some restraint upon increases in prices of Govern
ment bonds and to place the System in a better position to make purchases
later if they should be necessary to maintain an orderly market. Others
expressed agreement with this statement of principles.
Mr. Harrison stated that, while he did not wish at this time
to vote for a reduction in the total amount of securities held in the
System account, he felt that careful consideration should be given from
time to time to the reasons that might be advanced for such action in

3/1/38 -7
order that the Committee might be ready to take that action whenever
conditions might make it possible without undue risk. During the en
suing discussion of the circumstances under which the Committee might
be justified in reducing the amount of securities held in the System
open market account there was general concurrence in the opinion that
such action should not be taken at this time.
There was also a discussion of ways in which a policy of re
ducing the System open market account might be made effective, such as
through the sale of securities in the market thereby reducing excess
reserves, or sales simultaneous with purchases by the Treasury to be
paid for from the inactive gold account, which would not affect the
excess reserve position of member banks. Reference was made to sugges
tions that had been made from time to time in the past that small fluc
tuations in the total amount of securities held in the account be per
mitted in order to prevent the appearance of inflexibility in the ac
count and to prevent undue importance being attached in the market to
the Committee's action when a decision is made to reduce the amount
held in the account. Some of the members stated that they felt, however,
that no change should be made in the portfolio until there is a change
of policy as to the amount to be held, in order that the action of the
Committee at that time might have as great a psychological effect as
possible.

3/1/38 -8
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the Committee instructed the ex
ecutive committee, until otherwise instructed
by the Committee, to direct the replacement of
maturing securities in the System open market
account with other Government securities and to
make such shifts between maturities in the ac
count as may be necessary in the proper adminis
tration of the account, provided that the amount
of securities maturing within two years be main
tained at not less than $1,000,000,000 and that
the amount of bonds having maturities in excess
of five years be not over 850,000,000 nor less
than $500,000,000.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, the
Committee voted unanimously to authorize the
executive committee, upon written, telephonic,
or telegraphic approval of a majority of the
members of the Committee, and until otherwise
directed by the Committee, to direct the pur
chase in the open market from time to time of
sufficient amounts of Government securities to
meet the requirements of commerce, business, and
agriculture by keeping at member banks an aggregate
volume of excess reserves adequate for the con
tinuance of the System's policy of maintaining
credit conditions conducive to economic recovery;
and to authorize the executive committee, upon
written, telephonic, or telegraphic approval of
a majority of the members of the Committee, and
until otherwise directed by the Committee, to
direct a reduction of the holdings of such se
curities, to the extent that their retention
is found to be unnecessary for the purposes of
this resolution. It was understood, however,
that the executive committee, under this reso
lution, was not authorized to increase or de
crease by more than $300,000,000 the amount of
securities now held in the System open market
account.
Reference was made to the action taken at the session of the
Federal Open Market Committee yesterday in voting to recomend that

3/1/38 -9
the Committee, at its meeting today, take action to appoint a special
committee to consider Section 6 of Article I of the by-laws of the
Committee in the light of the discussion at the meeting yesterday and
to submit a report and recommendation at the next meeting of the Com
mittee as to changes in the section.
Mr. Harrison moved that the Chairman be
requested to appoint a special committee in
accordance with the recommendation made at
the meeting yesterday.
Having been duly seconded, Mr. Harrison's
motion was put by the chair and carried by
unanimous vote.
In accordance with the Committee's action, Chairman Eccles
appointed Mr. Davis as chairman, and Messrs. Ransom and Sinclair as
the other two members, of the special committee.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.