A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Monday, March 20, 1939, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Fleming
Mr. Leach
Mr. Martin
Mr. Hamilton
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Sproul, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
Mr. Davis stated that the special committee (Mr. Davis,
Chairman, and Messrs. Ransom and Harrison) appointed by the Chairman
in accordance with the suggestion made at the meeting of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee on March 6, 1939, had considered the
question of the distribution to be made of the minutes of the meet
ings of the Federal Open Market Committee and the executive committee
thereof and recommended that the Secretary of the Federal Open Market
Committee be directed to send to the President of each Federal Re
serve bank copies of the minutes of all meetings of the Federal Open
Market Committee and its executive committee under the same conditions
as to the confidential nature of the minutes as apply to copies sent

3/20/39 -2
to the regular members of the Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the recommendation of the
special committee was approved with the under
standing that the minutes would first be sent
to the regular members of the Federal Open
Market Committee for review before being sent
to the other Presidents.
Mr. Sproul distributed among the members of the Federal Open
Market Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York of operations in the System open market account since the
last meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 6, 1939.
He then discussed the report briefly and stated that as prices in
the Government securities market had eased somewhat it appeared that
it would be possible to replace the $72,710,000 of bills maturing
this week without undue disturbance to the market.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
account for the period from March 5 to March
19, 1939, inclusive, were approved, ratified
and confirmed.
During the discussion of Mr. Sproul's report Mr. Piser,
Senior Economist in the Board's Division of Research and Statistics,
joined the meeting.
Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams were asked to comment upon
the existing business and credit situation and Mr. Goldenweiser
stated that they had nothing to add to the statements which were
made by them at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on
March 6, 1939. Upon inquiry Mr. Goldenweiser said that he did not

3/20/39 -3
anticipate any substantial decline in the index of business activity
because of unsettled conditions abroad but rather that the situation,
resulting in greater demands for munitions and war supplies, would
tend to greater business activity in this country. He added that he
did not feel that the European situation would have an immediately
bad effect on business conditions in the United States even though
war were actually declared.
Chairman Eccles then reviewed briefly the circumstances sur
rounding the calling of the meeting of the executive committee on
March 13, 1939, the discussions with the Secretary of the Treasury
on that date, and the reasons for calling this meeting of the full
Committee to determine, among other things, the answer to be made to
the question asked by the Secretary of the Treasury whether the Sys
tem would be willing to participate with the Treasury in the sale of
bonds for the purpose of checking a too rapid rise in the Government
security market. Mr. Sproul stated in this connection that because
of the subsequent easing of Government security prices the Treasury
had cancelled a second order placed with the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York for the sale of $10,000,000 of Government bonds for the ac
count of trust funds administered by the Treasury.
During a discussion of the question presented by the Secre
tary of the Treasury, Chairman Eccles stated that he had had prepared
a draft of statement which might be made to the Secretary in response
to his suggestion as well as in response to his statement that any

3/20/39 -4-
action with respect to the problem of excess reserves of member banks
should be initiated by the Federal Reserve System. The draft of state
ment was read and a copy has been placed in the files of the Federal
Open Market Committee.
At the conclusion of the discussion, Mr.
Harrison moved that the Chairman, either by
telephone or personally, advise the Secretary
of the Treasury in reply to his question that
(1) the Federal Open Market Committee does not
regard the present as a proper time for a re
duction in the System open market account by
the sale of bonds and that, in view of the
change in circumstances that has occurred
since his question was presented, the Commit
tee assumes that the Secretary is of the
same opinion as indicated by the cancelation
of an outstanding order by the Treasury to
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to sell
$10,000,000 of bonds for the account of trusts
administered by the Treasury and (2) that
the Committee still feels that the continuing
and fundamental problem involved is one of
excess reserves and that inasmuch as the
Secretary of the Treasury expressed the
opinion that the primary responsibility
for initiating action with respect to ex
cess reserves rests upon the Federal Re
serve System, the Federal Open Market Com
mittee would suggest that representatives
of the System consult with the Treasury
with a view to determining if a long range
attack can be made on the problem.
Mr. Harrison's motion, after being duly
seconded, was put by the chair and carried
unanimously.
Chairman Eccles inquired what the answer of the Committee
would be if the Secretary asked whether the Committee would be willing
to cooperate in the sale of bonds in the event of a further sharp rise
in Government security prices. It was the consensus of the members

3/20/39
that the Committee could not commit itself in advance on this point
but would be glad to consider the matter in the light of all of the
surrounding circumstances when the problem was again presented.
Mr. Goldenweiser raised the question whether the Board de
sired to renew the suggestion to the Secretary that he meet Treasury
expenditures by drawing on balances with depositary banks rather than
on the balances held at the Federal Reserve banks. It was felt that
this question was a part of the general problem of excess reserves
of member banks and that it should be considered in that connection
and not as a separate question.
Mr. Harrison then moved that the Commit
tee adopt the following resolutions:
That the executive committee be directed until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, (1) to
arrange for the replacement of maturing Treasury bills in
the System open market account with other Treasury bills
or Treasury notes, or, from time to time, to allow such
bills to mature without replacement or pending subsequent
replacement (a) when market conditions are such as to make
it impossible to procure other bills or notes without pay
ing a premium over a no-yield basis, or (b) when such
notes are not obtainable without undue disturbance to the
market; (2) to arrange for the replacement of maturing
Treasury notes and bonds in the System open market account
with other Government securities; and (3) to arrange for
such shifts in maturities in the System open market ac
count as may be necessary in the proper administration of
the account; provided, (a) that the amount of securities
in the account maturing within two years be maintained at
not less than $1,000,000,000; (b) that the amount of bonds
in the account having maturities in excess of five years
be maintained at not less than $500,000,000 nor more than
$900,000,000; and (c) that, if Treasury bills in the ac
count are allowed to mature without replacement, the total
amount of securities in the account be not decreased by
more than $200,000,000.

3/20/39
That, in addition to such authority as may be con
tained in other resolutions of the Federal Open Market
Committee and until otherwise directed by the Committee,
the executive committee be authorized, upon written,
telephonic or telegraphic approval of a majority of the
members of the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for the purchase or sale (which would include authority
to allow maturities to run off without replacement) of
Government securities in the open market from time to
time for System open market account to such extent as
the executive committee shall find to be necessary for
the purpose of exercising an influence toward maintaining
orderly market conditions, provided (1) that the total
amount of securities in the account be not increased by
more than $200,000,000 nor decreased by more than
$200,000,000 including such decreases as may result from
allowing Treasury bills in the account to mature without
replacement, and (2) that the amount of bonds in the ac
count having maturities over five years be maintained at
not less than $500,000,000 nor more than $900,000,000.
During the ensuing discussion consideration was given par
ticularly to the question whether the System open market account
should be allowed to run off to the extent that it was not possible
to obtain replacement bills or notes on a better than no-yield basis.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
Mr. Harrison's motion, having been duly
seconded, was put by the chair and carried,
Messrs. Harrison, Szymczak, McKee, Davis,
Fleming, Leach, Martin and Hamilton voting
"aye", and Messrs. Eccles, Ransom and
Draper voting "no".
Mr. Draper stated that the special committee appointed at
the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 6, 1939, to
examine the question whether there is any responsibility on the part
of the Committee to audit, or otherwise to verify transactions in,
the System open market account, had requested an opinion of the Com
mittee's counsel with respect to the question, that the opinion had

3/20/39 -7
been prepared, and that the matter would be considered by the commit
tee with the view to making a report at the next meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Approved:
Chairman.