A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys
tem in Washington on Wednesday, December 13, 1939, at 10:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Fleming
Mr. Leach
Mr. Martin
Mr. Hamilton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Sproul, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Young, Sinclair, Parker, Schaller,
Peyton, Gilbert and Day, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston,
Philadelphia, Atlanta, Chicago,
Minneapolis, Dallas and San Francisco,
respectively
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on September 18, 1939, were ap
proved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the min
utes of the meetings of the executive
committee on September 18-19 and November
6, 1939, were approved, ratified and con
firmed.

12/13/39 -2
Reference was made to the action of the board of directors
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York on November 9, 1939, in ap
pointing Robert G. Rouse, a Vice President of the bank, to succeed
Mr. Sproul as Manager of the System Open Market Account subject to
his appointment being satisfactory to the Federal Open Market Com
mittee.
Mr. Harrison moved that the Commit
tee approve the selection of Mr. Rouse
as Manager of the System account.
Mr. Harrison's motion, having been
duly seconded, was put by the chair and
carried unanimously.
The report of open market operations since the last meeting
of the Committee, which had been prepared at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, was reviewed by Mr. Sproul at the meeting of the
executive committee, at which all members of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee were present, just before this meeting, and for that
reason was not discussed at this time.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
for the System open market account during
the period since that covered by similar
action at the meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee on September 18, 1939,
to and including December 12, 1939, were
approved, ratified and confirmed.
Under date of November 29, 1939, there was sent to each mem
ber of the Federal Open Market Committee a copy of a resolution adopted
by the Federal Advisory Council at its meeting on November 20, 1939,

12/13/39 -3
recommending that the volume of sales from the System open market
account be promptly expanded in an orderly manner.
The recommendation was discussed
and Mr. Harrison moved that it be re
ceived and placed on file and that the
Secretary address a letter to the Secre
tary of the Federal Advisory Council
stating that the resolution had been
presented at a meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee and would be given
consideration in the determination of
the policy to be followed in connection
with transactions in the System open
market account.
Mr. Harrison's motion, having been
duly seconded, was put by the chair and
carried unanimously.
Mr. Goldenweiser discussed the present business situation
and reviewed some of the problems with respect to System open mar
ket policy which were created by the large gold imports during re
cent years. A copy of Mr. Goldenweiser's statement has been placed
in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
After a discussion of some of the points covered in Mr.
Goldenweiser's statement and their relation to the open market pol
icy of the System, Mr. Harrison stated that there appeared to be no
reason for a change in the existing authority of the executive com
mittee to effect transactions in the System open market account and
that it would be his recommendation that the resolution adopted at
the last meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee be renewed.
Chairman Eccles said that, while he was in agreement with
the suggestion that the existing authority of the executive committee

12/13/39 -4
be renewed, he desired to make a statement with respect to his con
ception of the present open market policy so that if there were any
questions as to the action to be taken under the resolution granting
authority to the executive committee they could be discussed at this
time. Chairman Eccles then made a statement substantially as follows:
Open market operations during recent months were not directed
toward changing or influencing money rates. The large volume of ex
cess reserves has removed the System so far from contact with the
money market that the System's purchases and sales of securities
have had little effect on the market and practically no effect on
the aggregate volume of available funds. In these circumstances,
transactions for the System open market account should continue to
be in the direction of maintaining stability in the Government se
curities market, which in turn reflects itself in the entire capital
market.
This does not mean that we should sell for the purpose of
preventing interest rates from going down nor does it mean that we
should purchase securities in order to hold interest rates at any
particular level. It does mean, however, that if there were sub
stantial fluctuations which were the result of a small amount of
buying at a time when there was no selling in the market or vice versa
or which were the result of other conditions which did not reflect
fundamental market trends the System might go into the market and
attempt to exercise an influence toward stability of the market by

12/13/39 -5
counteracting such conditions. The System would buy or sell on a slid
ing scale rather than at a fixed price so that the market would not rise
too rapidly when there were few or no selling orders in the market and
would not fall too rapidly when there was little or no buying interest
present.
It is essential that the System use the open market portfolio
in such manner as to make it as effective as possible and at the same
time give consideration to the income requirements of the System. It
should be recognized also that the System cannot and should not attempt
to peg the market on either the up or down side, and that under present
conditions, with excess reserves more than twice as large as the entire
System portfolio, our responsibility is one of attempting to maintain
orderly market conditions rather than of attempting to influence market
rat es.
Mr. Harrison said that, in his opinion, the Chairman's com
ments were an accurate statement of the present policy of the Federal
Open Market Committee.
Thereupon Mr. Harrison moved that the
following resolution be adopted:
"That the executive committee be directed until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee to ar
range for such transactions for the System open market
account (including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement
of maturing securities, and letting maturities run off
without replacement) as in its judgment from time to time
may be necessary for the purpose of exercising an influence
toward maintaining orderly market conditions; provided
that the aggregate amount of securities held in the ac
count at the close of this date shall not be increased
nor decreased by more than $500,000,000."

12/13/39
Mr. Harrison's motion was put by the
chair and carried unanimously.
Mr. McKee referred to the fact that the System open market
account contained $161,705,000 of March 15, 1940 Treasury notes, for
which issue the Treasury is now offering to exchange 2-1/4% 12-14
year bonds and 1% 4-3/4 year notes. Mr. McKee suggested that the Com
mittee consider the question of the amounts of the new securities that
should be taken in exchange for the System's holdings of the old notes.
The matter was considered in the light of desirable maturity distribu
tions in the System open market account and it was the unanimous opinion
that the System's holdings of the March 15, 1940, notes should be ex
changed for $100,000,000 of the new bonds and $61,705,000 of the new
notes.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.