A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Wednesday, April 19, 1939, at 10:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Fleming
Mr. Leach
Mr. Martin
Mr. Hamilton
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the actions of the executive
committee of the Federal Open Market Committee
as set forth in the minutes of the meetings of
the executive committee on March 7, 13 and 20,
1939, were approved, ratified and confirmed.
Mr. Harrison distributed copies of a report prepared at the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York of operations in the System open
market account during the period since the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee on March 20, to the close of April 15, 1939,
and discussed the matters covered by the report. He also reviewed
the transactions effected in the account since April 15, 1939.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the transactions in the account
for the period from March 20 to April 18, 1939,
inclusive, were approved, ratified and confirmed.

4/19/39 -2
For the information of the members of the Committee who were
not at the meeting of the executive committee on April 14, 1939,
Chairman Eccles reviewed the meetings held at the Treasury Depart
ment last week for the purpose of considering what action might be
taken by the Government to meet the shock to business and the markets
in this country which might result from the outbreak of a major armed
conflict in Europe. He stated that at the meeting at the Treasury
on April 15 the Secretary of the Treasury inquired what action the
System was prepared to take to maintain orderly market conditions
in the Government securities markets, that it was stated to the
Secretary that the System undoubtedly would be willing to take ao
tion for the purpose of attempting to maintain orderly market condi
tions, and that the matter would be given consideration by the
members of the Federal Open Market Committee who were in Washington.
The Secretary stated, Chairmen Eccles said, that he would like to
have an answer by 4:00 p.m. on that day as he desired to be in a
position to advise the President of the program that had been agreed
upon.
Chairman Eccles stated further that at the meeting of the
executive committee which was held on the afternoon of April 15 it
was agreed unanimously that (1) the executive committee should ask
the Federal Open Market Committee for authority, in the event of
serious disturbance in the Government securities market resulting
from armed conflict abroad, to direct the Federal Reserve banks to

4/19/39 -3
participate with the Treasury in outright purchases of securities,
and in that connection to increase the System portfolio by not to ex
ceed $500,000,000 with the understanding that in making such purchases
it might become necessary to exceed the $900,000,000 limitation on
bonds having maturities over five years contained in the second reso
lution adopted at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on
March 20, 1939, and (2) to advise the Secretary of the Treasury that
the executive committee had agreed to request the full Committee for
this authority it being understood that a meeting of the full Commit
tee would be called for the early part of this week to ratify the
action. Chairman Eccles added that Messrs. Szymczak, Ransom and
Davis, who were present at the meeting of the executive committee,
expressed agreement with the action of the committee and that Mr.
Leach, who was communicated with by telephone on that day, also ex
pressed approval.
Later in the afternoon of April 13, Chairman Eccles said, he
and Mr. Harrison returned to the Treasury for the purpose of partici
pating in a further discussion, when the Secretary was advised of the
action of the executive committee.
Chairman Eccles made the further statement that after the
meeting at the Treasury he reached the conclusion that the System
should participate equally with the Treasury in any purchases of Gov
ernment securities that might be made only until the Treasury had
invested the approximately $100,000,000 which it had available for

4/19/39 -4
investment on account of trust funds administered by the Treasury,
and that thereafter all purchases should be made for the System open
market account. He said that this point was discussed by the execu
tive committee of the Federal Open Market Committee at a meeting on
the morning of April 14, 1939 when he stated, as his reason for his
position, that any purchases by the Treasury after available trust
funds were exhausted would have to be with funds from the stabilization
fund, which would create in the Treasury an open market portfolio of
Government securities in addition to the System's portfolio, and that
this condition would be undesirable for the reason that it would re
sult in lessening the ability of the System to discharge its functions
in the field of credit control. Chairman Eccles pointed out that the
System has adequate authority to purchase large amounts of securities
for the purpose of stabilizing the market and stated that he felt the
System should assume this responsibility.
As a result of this discussion at the meeting of the executive
committee, Chairman Eccles said, it was agreed unanimously that he
should call the absent members of the Federal Open Market Committee
on the telephone and that, in the event they approved the request of
the executive committee for additional authority, the Secretary of
the Treasury should be advised that the executive committee had au
thority to purchase up to $500,000,000 of Government securities, that
the System would be glad to participate with the Treasury in the pur
chase of securities on an equal basis until all of the available trust

4/19/39 -5
funds held by the Treasury were invested, and that thereafter the
System would undertake to make all additional purchases required for
the purpose of exercising a stabilizing influence on the market, with
the understanding that if at any time the System needed the coopera
tion of the Treasury it would be called upon and if the Treasury felt
that the situation was not being handled satisfactorily the Secretary
of the Treasury would communicate with the Chairman.
Chairman Eccles added that in accordance with this decision
of the executive committee he called Messrs. Fleming, Martin and
Hamilton, who were the only members of the full Committee not present
at the meeting of the executive committee on April 14, that they ex
pressed full agreement with the proposed purchase of securities in
the event of an emergency and approved the grant to the executive
committee of the additional authority requested, and that, thereafter,
the Secretary of the Treasury was advised by the Chairman as agreed
upon by the executive comittee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the action of the members
of the Federal Open Market Committee in author
izing the executive committee to increase the
System portfolio by not to exceed $500,000,000
and to exceed the $900,000,000 limitation on
bonds having maturities in excess of five
years was approved, ratified and confirmed.
Mr. Goldenweiser reviewed briefly the present business situa
tion. He stated that the production index for March would be approxi
mately the same as in February since the anticipated rise had not

4/19/39
materialized and it was likely that the level of business activity
in April would be somewhat lower than March because of the strike in
the coal industry. He said there was nothing in the statistics to
indicate any material change in the situation but that there appeared
to be a great deal more hesitancy on the part of business than was
disclosed by available statistics and that there was no way of deter
mining when that situation might reflect itself in reports of business
activity. He added that the rather favorable inventory situation had
not changed and that building activity was continuing at a somewhat
better rate than had been expected.
There was then taken up for consideration
the question of the authority to be granted to
the executive committee to effect transactions
in the System open market account and Mr.
Harrison moved the adoption of the following
resolutions, stating that he did so for sub
stantially the same reasons as prompted the
adoption of similar resolutions at the three
previous meetings of the Committee:
That the executive committee be directed until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee (1) to
arrange for the replacement of maturing Treasury bills in
the System open market account with other Treasury bills
or Treasury notes, or, from time to time, to allow such
bills to mature without replacement or pending subsequent
replacement (a) when market conditions are such as to make
it impossible to procure other bills or notes without paying
a premium over a no-yield basis, or (b) when such notes are
not obtainable without undue disturbance to the market; (2)
to arrange for the replacement of maturing Treasury notes
and bonds in the System open market account with other
Government securities; and (3) to arrange for such shifts
in maturities in the System open market account as may be
necessary in the proper administration of the account; pro
vided (a) that the amount of securities in the account

4/19/39 -7-
maturing within two years be maintained at not less than
$1,000,000,0000; (b) that the amount of bonds in the account
having maturities in excess of five years be maintained at
not less than $500,000,000 nor more than $1,000,000,000; and
(c) that, if Treasury bills in the account are allowed to
mature without replacement, the total amount of securities
in the account be not decreased by more than $200,000,000.
That, in addition to such authority as may be contained
in other resolutions of the Federal Open Market Committee
and until otherwise directed by the Committee, the executive
committee be authorized, upon written, telephonic or tele
graphic approval of a majority of the members of the Federal
Open Market Committee, to arrange for the purchase or sale
(which would include authority to allow maturities to run
off without replacement) of Government securities in the
open market from time to time for System open market account
to such extent as the executive committee shall find to be
necessary for the purpose of exercising an influence toward
maintaining orderly market conditions, provided (1) that the
total amount of securities in the account be not increased
by more than $200,000,000 nor decreased by more than
$200,000,000 including such decreases as may result from
allowing Treasury bills in the account to mature without
replacement, and (2) that the amount of bonds in the account
having maturities over five years be maintained at not less
than $500,000,000 nor more than $1,000,000,000.
Mr. Harrison's motion having been duly
seconded, was put by the chair and carried,
Mr. Draper voting "no".
Mr. Ransom stated that, in view of the
fact that the executive committee had been
given the power in case of market disturbances
caused by an outbreak of hostilities in Europe
to make much larger changes in the System's
portfolio than those authorized by the pres
ent resolutions, and since flexibility of the
portfolio independently of changes in general
credit policy was thereby recognized as a
part of the System's technique in certain
circumstances, his reasons for opposing the
resolutions were no longer applicable to the
existing situation. Consequently he voted
"aye".

4/19/9 -8-
Mr. Draper stated that he voted against
the adoption of the resolutions because he
was opposed to authorizing the executive com
mittee to allow bills to run off without replace
ment but that he otherwise was in favor of the
resolutions.
There was also a discussion of the au
thority to be granted to the executive commit
tee to increase the amount of securities in
the System open market account in the event
of a serious disturbance to the Government
securities markets as a result of armed con
flict or political developments threatening
armed conflict abroad and Mr. Harrison moved
that the following resolution be adopted:
That, in the event that armed conflict or political
developments threatening armed conflict abroad result in
serious disturbance to the Government securities market
in this country, the executive committee be authorized,
in addition to the authority granted by the resolutions
set forth above and notwithstanding any limitations or
restrictions in those resolutions, to increase the se
curities in the account by not to exceed $500,000,000,
and upon written, telephonic, or telegraphic approval of
a majority of the members of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee by not to exceed an additional $500,000,000, if
deemed necessary for the purpose of exercising an influence
toward the maintenance of orderly market conditions, and,
if and when market conditions warrant, to sell securities
in the amount of any securities so purchased. Any pur
chases made under the authority of this resolution shall
not be construed as limiting the powers granted under
resolutions previously adopted at this meeting.
Mr. Harrison's motion having been duly
seconded, was put by the chair and carried
unanimously.
Mr. Draper stated that the special committee appointed at
the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 6, 1939,
to examine the question whether there is any responsibility on the
part of the Committee to audit, or otherwise verify transactions in,

4/19/39 -9
the System open market account had given consideration to the matter
but was not yet ready to submit a report.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Approved:
Chairman.