A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, June 20, 1939, at 3:30 p.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Fleming
Mr. Leach
Mr. Martin
Mr. Hamilton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Sproul, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
Mr. Piser, Senior Economist in the
Division of Research and Statistics
of the Board of Governors
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meetings
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
March 6-7, March 20 and April 19, 1939, were
approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the executive
committee of the Federal Open Market Committee
as set forth in the minutes of the meetings
of the executive committee on April 13-14 and
19, 1939, were approved, ratified and con
firmed.
Mr. Sproul distributed copies of a report prepared by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York of operations in the System open

6/20/39
market account since the last meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee on April 19, 1939, up to and including June 16, 1939, stat
ing that there had been no transactions since the latter date, fol
lowing which there was a brief discussion.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System open market account for the period
since that covered by similar action at the
last meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee on April 19, 1939, to and including
June 19, 1939, were approved, ratified and
confirmed.
Reference was made to the fact that at the meeting of the
Board of Governors with the Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
preceding this meeting, at which all of the members of the Federal
Open Market Committee were present, Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams,
as economists for the Federal Open Market Committee, reviewed busi
ness and credit conditions. Summaries of their statements have been
placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Chairman Eccles then presented for discussion the question
whether any action should be taken at this time by the Committee with
a view to a reduction in the amount of Treasury bills held in the Sys
tem account and, if such action should be taken, whether there should
be issued a public announcement of such action and the reasons there
for. In the course of the Chairman's remarks and the subsequent gen
eral discussion reference was made to the action taken by the Committee
on December 30, 1938, the announcement issued by the Committee in that

6/20/39 -3
connection, the subsequent replacements of Treasury bills in the Sys
tem account, the fact that for some time past Treasury bills had been
purchased for the System account at or near a no-yield basis, the
difficulty at times of replacing maturing bills due to the fact that
the supply of such bills had not always been equal to the market de
mand, the increasing volume of excess reserves, and the substantial
rise which had taken place in prices of Government securities in re
cent months and the consequent decline in yields. Questions were
raised and discussed as to whether it would serve any useful purpose
in relation to open market policy to continue the full replacement
of maturing Treasury bills, whether the present would be a suitable
time to reduce the holdings of Treasury bills, and what might be the
effect of such action upon the general credit situation. References
were also made to a statement which had been submitted to the Board
of Governors by the Federal Advisory Council at its last meeting
with the Board of Governors on June 6, 1939, and, at the suggestion
of Mr. Harrison and the request of the Chairman, the Committee's
Secretary read the statement. A copy of the statement is contained
in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee. The discussion
developed the feeling that it would be desirable to have placed before
the Committee a draft of a tentative statement indicating the reasons
for the reduction if made, which might be considered before determin
ing what action should be taken, and, thereupon, at 6:10 p.m. a re
cess was taken until the morning of June 21, with the understanding

6/20/39 -4
that during the recess such a statement would be drafted by Messrs.
Sproul, Thurston, Goldenweiser, and Williams.
Secretary
Approved:

The meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was recon
vened in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Wednesday, June 21, 1939, at 10:20 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Fleming
Mr. Leach
Mr. Martin
Mr. Hamilton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Sproul, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
Mr. Piser, Senior Economist in the Divi
sion of Research and Statistics of
the Board of Governors
At the request of the Chairman, the Secretary read the draft
of a proposed statement which had been prepared by Messrs. Sproul,
Thurston, Goldenweiser, and Williams pursuant to the understanding
reached before the recess was taken. There followed a general dis
cussion of the contents of the statement and the reasons which various
members of the Committee felt were important in their bearing upon the
advisability of letting Treasury bills held in the System account ma
ture without replacement either in whole or in part and whether there

6/21/39
was necessity for a public statement regarding such action. In this
connection the question whether this was a suitable time to take action
to allow Treasury bills to mature without replacement was particularly
stressed by Mr. Draper. Mr. Ransom also expressed strong doubt as to
the necessity or value of issuing any statement even though the Commit
tee might decide to take the proposed action. In this connection some
of the members of the Committee referred to the statement of December
30, 1938, and raised the question whether it would not be sufficient
to take action without further explanation at this time, relying on
that statement. With respect to this question, other members of the
Committee expressed the opinion that the substantial lapse of time
which had taken place since then without a reduction in the System
portfolio pursuant to that action made it necessary to meet the situa
tion at this time with a new statement.
At this point Mr. Sproul was asked to review the contents of
the weekly reports of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to the
members of the Committee regarding replacements of Treasury bills for
the System account since December and Mr. Sproul referred to the per
tinent item in each week's report. During the course of the discus
sion the further suggestion was made that the Committee might agree
upon the statement but defer its release until there is an actual
reduction in the amount of Treasury bills held, with the understanding
that at that time the executive committee would release the statement.

6/21/39 -3
There was also discussion of a suggestion that before such action is
taken, including the release of the statement, the Chairman should in
form the Secretary of the Treasury so that if there were any reason
that the Treasury might wish to offer for deferring such action the
matter might be reconsidered. During the discussion Mr. Sproul was
asked to advise the Committee on behalf of himself and his associates,
Messrs. Thurston, Goldenweiser, and Williams, who prepared the draft
of statement under consideration, as to the matters which influenced
them in formulating its contents. Mr. Sproul stated that they had
agreed that the proposed action should be related as closely as pos
sible to the situation in the Treasury bill market even though it
might have collateral or secondary effects upon excess reserves and
upon the level of prices in the Government security market; that to
try to relate it to the excess reserve position would clothe the ac
tion with a significance which it did not have; that they would not
want to try to claim for the System the power or the ability to de
cide whether the Government security market was at the right level
or at too high a level; and that in relating the action to the Treas
ury bill market it was desirable to refer back to the statement of
December 30, 1938, because the action taken now, if it did not refer
back to the earlier statement, might be open to misinterpretation in
the market as no such action had been taken during the period of six
months which had elapsed and action now might be deemed to be of a
different character and therefore of greater significance than the

6/21/39 -4
action contemplated then.
Following this statement each member of the Committee stated
his view upon the question of the desirability of taking action at
this time. Mr. Draper said that he was opposed to any action at this
time and Mr. Ransom stated that he would defer his decision until the
statement in its final form was before the Committee for vote. All
of the other members of the Committee indicated that they would favor
action at this time. Thereupon there was a review and discussion of
the contents of the proposed statement. Various suggestions were made
and it was agreed to ask Messrs. Sproul, Thurston, Goldenweiser, and
Williams to prepare a revised draft.
Mr. Harrison made the suggestion, with which there was general
agreement, that if the Committee took action at this meeting it do so
with the understanding that the statement would only be released by
the executive committee when a reduction pursuant to the action of the
Committee actually takes place. Mr. Ransom then raised the question
when the Secretary of the Treasury would be advised and it was agreed
that this should be left to the Chairman to determine. Chairman Eccles
stated that he would take the matter up with the Secretary when there
was a convenient opportunity to discuss it with him, that he would like
to read the press statement to the Secretary as a statement of the ac
tion of the Committee and explain to him, if necessary, exactly what
the resolution of the Committee authorized, that if there were some
question on the part of the Treasury that had not been anticipated by

6/21/39 -5
the Committee he would feel that there should be a reconsideration by
the Committee, and that this was the general procedure which had been
followed in the past. Chairman Eccles added, however, that he would
say nothing to the Secretary of the Treasury until it appeared that
the reduction in the portfolio would actually take place. In this
connection it was understood that the Chairman in discussing the mat
ter with the Secretary of the Treasury would call to his attention
the importance of avoiding any publicity in advance of the release
by the executive committee of the statement when the reduction takes
place.
Thereupon consideration was given to the resolutions adopted
at the last meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and changes
to conform to the proposal to provide for reductions in the amount of
holdings of Treasury bills, through permitting part or all of the
bills maturing from time to time to run off without replacement, were
agreed upon.
Upon motion duly made and seconded
the following resolutions were adopted, the
vote thereon being as follows: "aye"
Messrs. Eccles, Harrison, Szymczak, McKee,
Davis, Fleming, Leach, Martin, and Hamilton:
"no" - Mr. Draper. In accordance with his
statement earlier in this meeting, Mr. Ransom
withheld his vote on the resolutions until
the press statement hereafter referred to
was approved, when he voted "aye" on the
resolutions:
That the executive committee be directed until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee (1) to
arrange for the replacement of maturing Treasury bills in

6/21/39
the System open market account with other Treasury bills
or Treasury notes, or, from time to time, whenever market
conditions warrant, to allow part or all of such bills
to mature without replacement; (2) to arrange for the re
placement of maturing Treasury notes and bonds in the Sys
tem open market account with other Government securities;
and (3) to arrange for such shifts in maturities in the
System open market account as may be necessary in the
practical administration of the account; provided (a)
that the amount of securities in the account maturing
within two years be maintained at not less than $700,000,000;
and (b) that the amount of bonds in the account having
maturities in excess of five years be maintained at not
less than $500,000,000 nor more than $1,000,000,000.
That, in addition to such authority as may be con
tained in other resolutions of the Federal Open Market
Committee and until otherwise directed by the Committee,
the executive committee be authorized, upon written, tele
phonic or telegraphic approval of a majority of the members
of the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for the
purchase or sale (which would include authority to allow
maturities to run off without replacement. of Government
securities in the open market from time to time for Sys
tem open market account to such extent as the executive
committee shall find to be necessary for the purpose of
exercising an influence toward maintaining orderly market
conditions, provided (1) that the total amount of securities
in the account be not increased by more than $200,000,000
nor decreased by more than $200,000,000 excluding such de
creases as may result from allowing Treasury bills in the
account to mature without replacement under the preceding
resolution, and (2) that the amount of bonds in the ac
count having maturities over five years be maintained at
not less than $500,0,000,000 nor more than $1,000,000,000.
That, in the event that armed conflict or political
developments threatening armed conflict abroad result in
serious disturbance to the Government securities market
in this country, the executive committee be authorized,
in addition to the authority granted by the resolutions
set forth above and notwithstanding any limitations or
restrictions in those resolutions, to increase the secu
rities in the account by not to exceed $500,000,000, and
upon written, telephonic, or telegraphic approval of a
majority of the members of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee by not to exceed an additional $ 500,000,000 if

6/21/39
deemed necessary for the purpose of exercising an influ
ence toward the maintenance of orderly market conditions,
and, if and when market conditions warrant, to sell securi
ties in the amount of any securities so purchased. Any
purchases made under the authority of this resolution
shall not be construed as limiting the powers granted
under resolutions previously adopted at this meeting.
The committee composed of Messrs. Sproul, Thurston, Goldenweiser,
and Williams reported and the Secretary read to the members of the Com
mittee the draft of a revised statement which they had prepared. Certain
changes were informally proposed during the discussion that followed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
the Committee authorized the executive com
mittee to release for publication the fol
lowing statement when the first reduction
takes place in the amount of Treasury bills
pursuant to the foregoing resolution of the
Federal Open Market Committee:
As a result of a reduction in holdings of Treasury
bills, this week's statement of condition of Federal Re
serve banks shows a decline of $____ in the System
Open Market Account. This is in accordance with action
taken by the Federal Open Market Committee on June 21,
1939. For some time past, Treasury bills have been pur
chased for the System's account at or near a no-yield
basis and the account at times has had difficulty in re
placing its maturing bills. It was decided that it would
serve no useful purpose to continue full replacement of
maturing bills, the supply of which is not always equal
to the market demand. This action is in response to
technical conditions in the bill market and does not
represent a change in general credit policy.
It was agreed, however, that the
second sentence in the statement should
be omitted if no reduction takes place
next week and the statement is issued at
a later date.
The vote upon the approval of the
foregoing statement was as follows: "aye"
Messrs. Eccles, Harrison, Szymczak, McKee,

6/21/39 -8-
Ransom, Davis, Fleming, Leach, Martin, and
Hamilton; "no" - Mr. Draper.
Attention was directed to the fact that at the last meeting of
the Federal Open Market Committee there had been referred to a special
committee composed of Messrs. Draper, Leach, and Martin the question
of the advisability of causing periodic or other audits to be made of
the System open market account, and there was read by the Secretary to
the Committee the report dated April 19, 1939, of this special commit
tee which contained a recommendation "That a resolution be adopted re
questing the Board of Governors to cause its examining force in the
future to furnish the Secretary of the Open Market Committee a report
of each examination of the System Open Market Account". There followed
a brief discussion of the practice pursued heretofore by the examiners
of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the recommendation of the
special committee was approved.
In this connection it was agreed unani
mously that the Secretary should immediately
advise the Chief of the Division of Examina
tions of the Board of Governors of the action
taken by the Committee with the suggestion
that he communicate at once with the Board's
examiners who it was understood were then at
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Reference was made to the earlier discussion during the meet
ing relating to the advice to be given to the Secretary of the Treasury
with respect to the action of the Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, the
Chairman of the Committee was authorized to

6/21/39
advise the Secretary of the Treasury of the
action which the Committee had taken with re
spect to the proposed reduction in the amount
of Treasury bills held and in that connection
the understanding was stated that the Chairman
in advising the Secretary of the Treasury would
call to his attention the importance of there
being no publicity with respect to either the
action or the proposed statement until the
statement is released by the executive com
mittee.
Mr. Harrison then reported to the Committee that the regu
lar weekly report of open market operations which is prepared at the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York is sent to all members of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee, to its Secretary, Mr. Morrill, to its
Economist, Mr. Goldenweiser, to the Presidents of the Federal Reserve
banks who are not members of the Committee, to the Secretary of the
Treasury and to his Assistant, Mr. Daniel W. Bell, and to Mr. Smead,
Chief of the Division of Bank Operations of the Board of Governors;
and that copies are also furnished to Mr. Rounds, who acts for Mr.
Sproul in his absence in handling operations in the Government se
curity market, and to Mr. Sanford, as Assistant Secretary of the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of New York. Mr. Harrison said also that copies
are being given to Mr. Matteson, Assistant Vice President, under Mr.
Sproul, and should be given to Mr. Matteson's successor when Mr.
Matteson ceases active service with the bank on June 30, 1939.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
the distribution of the weekly report
described by Mr. Harrison was approved
unanimously.

6/21/39 -10
Thereupon the meeting adjourned at 1:05 p.m.
Secretary.