A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Monday, March 6, 1939, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Fleming
Mr. Leach
Mr. Martin
Mr. Hamilton
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Sproul, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
The Assistant Secretary reported that records of the eleo
tions for the period of one year commencing March 1, 1939, of members
and alternate members of the Federal Open Market Committee repre
senting the Federal Reserve banks had been received in the office of
the Secretary of the Committee, that each newly elected member and
alternate had executed the required oath of office, and that it was
the opinion of the Committee's counsel on the basis of these docu
ments that the following members and alternate members were legally
qualified to serve in those capacities:
George L. Harrison, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, with Roy A. Young, President

3/6/39
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, as alternate
member;
M. J. Fleming, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland, with John S. Sinclair, President
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, as alter
nate member;
Hugh Leach, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Richmond, with Oscar Newton, President of the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of Atlanta, as alternate member
(Mr. Newton died on February 13, 1939);
Wm. McC. Martin, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis, with George J. Schaller, President
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate
member;
George H. Hamilton, President of the Federal Re
serve Bank of Kansas City, with William A. Day, Presi
dent of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, as
alternate member
Upon motion duly made and seconded, the
following officers of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee were reelected by unanimous
votes to serve until the election of their
successors at the first meeting of the Com
mittee after March 1, 1940:
Marriner S. Eccles, Chairman
George L. Harrison, Vice Chairman
S. R. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
E. A. Goldenweiser, Economist
John H. Williams, Associate Economist
Walter Wyatt, General Counsel
J. P. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the Committee selected the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to execute
transactions for the System open market account
until the adjournment of the first meeting of
the Committee after March 1, 1940.
Mr. Harrison stated that it was his intention to recommend
to the board of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
the selection of Allan Sproul as Manager of the System Open Market
Account.

3/6/39 -3-
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the Committee approved the
selection of Mr. Sproul as Manager of the Sys
tem Open Market Account in the event of his
reappointment by the board of directors of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to act in
that capacity.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the following were selected
to serve with the Chairman of the Federal Open
Market Committee, who under the provisions of
the by-laws is also chairman of the executive
committee, as members and alternate members of
the executive committee until the first meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee after
March 1, 1940:
Members Alternate Members
John K. McKee Ronald Ransom (to serve as
Ernest G. Draper alternate only in the ab
George L. Harrison sence or disability of
Hugh Leach the Chairman)
M. S. Szymczak
Chester C. Davis
(to serve in the order
named as alternates for
Messrs. McKee and Draper
and also for Chairman
Eccles in the absence of
both the Chairman and
Mr. Ransom)
M. J. Fleming
Wm. McC. Martin
(to serve in the order
named as alternates for
Messrs. Harrison and Leach)
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
December 30, 1938, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the executive

3/6/39 -4
committee of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee as set forth in the minutes of the
meeting of the executive committee on Decem
ber 30, 1938, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Mr. McKee raised the question whether the Federal Open Market
Committee was under a responsibility of any kind with respect to
periodic or other audits of the System open market account.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, Messrs. Draper, Leach and
Martin were appointed a special committee to
examine this question for the purpose of de
termining whether there is any responsibility
on the part of the Committee to audit, or other
wise to verify the transactions in, the System
account, and to submit a report and recommenda
tion as to what action, if any, should be taken
by the Committee.
Mr. Sproul distributed copies of a report prepared at the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York of operations in the System open
market account since the last meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee on December 30, 1938, and commented briefly on the trans
actions covered by the report.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System open market account for the period
from December 30, 1938, to March 4, 1939, in
clusive, were approved, ratified and confirmed.
Mr. McKee presented for discussion the question whether the
Federal Reserve banks should treat profits from sales of securities
held in the System open market account as additions to current earn
ings for the year as is being done at the present time or whether

3/6/39 -5-
they should be used to reduce the book value of the account or to es
tablish reserves for depreciation in the account. Mr. Sproul stated
that that question had been considered on various occasions in the
past and it had been concluded that no substantial difference in the
position of a Federal Reserve bank would result from either procedure.
In this connection it was pointed out that the rate of dividend that
may be paid by the Federal Reserve banks to stockholding member banks
was fixed by law, that the ability of the Federal Reserve banks to
meet a substantial depreciation in the System account would not be
any greater if profits derived from sales of securities in the account
were placed in a special reserve or added to the banks' surplus accounts,
and that the Federal Reserve banks differed from commercial banks in
that the latter were under no legal limitation as to the amount of divi
dends that might be paid and if reserves for depreciation were not es
tablished and profits were added to surplus there would be a greater
temptation on the part of commercial banks to pay larger dividends.
At this point Messrs. Young, Sinclair, Parker, Schaller, Peyton
and Day, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia,
Atlanta, Chicago, Minneapolis and San Francisco; Mr. Giltert, First
Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Mr. Kimball,
Assistant Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and
Mr. Bethea, Assistant Secretary of the Board of Governors of the Fed
eral Reserve System, joined the meeting for the purpose of hearing the

3/6/39 -6
comments of Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams with respect to the cur
rent business and credit situation.
Mr. Goldenweiser stated that he had prepared under date of
March 2, 1939, a memorandum on recent business and credit developments,
copies of which would be distributed. He then commented on the impor
tant points covered by the memorandum following which copies of the
memorandum were handed to those present.
Mr. Williams made a statement in which he commented on various
factors in the existing situation and the prospects for the continua
tion of the current recovery trend. A summary of Mr. Williams' state
ment has been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
These statements were followed by a discussion of questions
which were asked of Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams, particularly
with respect to the relation of prices to business conditions and the
present and future prospects of the construction and housing industry.
The meeting recessed at 1:00 p.m. and reconvened at 2:15 p.m.
with the same attendance as at the opening of the morning session ex
cept that Messrs. Thurston and Dreibelbis were not present.
Mr. Harrison moved that the following
resolutions, which are in the same form as
resolutions adopted at the meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee at its meet
ing on December 30, 1938, be adopted for
substantially the same reasons given at
the time of their adoption in December.
That the executive committee be directed until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, (1) to
arrange for the replacement of maturing Treasury bills in

3/6/39
the System open market account with other Treasury bills
or Treasury notes, or, from time to time, to allow such
bills to mature without replacement or pending subsequent
replacement (a) when market conditions are such as to make
it impossible to procure other bills or notes without pay
ing a premium over a no-yield basis, or (b) when such notes
are not obtainable without undue disturbance to the market;
(2) to arrange for the replacement of maturing Treasury
notes and bonds in the System open market account with
other Government securities; and (3) to arrange for such
shifts in maturities in the System open market account as
may be necessary in the proper administration of the ac
count; provided, (a) that the amount of securities in the
account maturing within two years be maintained at not
less than $1,000,000,000; (b) that the amount of bonds in
the account having maturities in excess of five years be
maintained at not less than $500,000,000 nor more than
900,000,000; and (c) that, if Treasury bills in the ac
count are allowed to mature without replacement, the total
amount of securities in the account be not decreased by
more than $200,000,000.
That, in addition to such authority as may be con
tained in other resolutions of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee and until otherwise directed by the Committee, the
executive committee be authorized, upon written, tele
phonic or telegraphic approval of a majority of the members
of the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for the
purchase or sale (which would include authority to allow
maturities to run off without replacement) of Government
securities in the open market from time to time for System
open market account to such extent as the executive commit
tee shall find to be necessary for the purpose of exercis
ing an influence toward maintaining orderly market condi
tions, provided (1) that the total amount of securities in
the account be not increased by more than $200,000,000 nor
decreased by more than $200,000,000 including such decreases
as may result from allowing Treasury bills in the account
to mature without replacement, and (2) that the amount of
bonds in the account having maturities over five years be
maintained at not less than $500,000,000 nor more than
$900,000,000.
Mr. Harrison's motion was duly seconded.
Reference was made to the circumstances under which action was

3/6/39 -8
taken by the Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting on December
30, 1938, and question was raised whether Messrs. Fleming, Martin and
Hamilton, who had not attended that meeting, had read the minutes of
the meeting. The Assistant Secretary stated that under the procedure
in effect the three members mentioned had not been furnished with
copies of the minutes although a copy had been sent to Mr. Leach who
had attended the meeting as an alternate member. Mr. Fleming stated
he had received the minutes of the meetings of the Committee for the
past year from Mr. Sinclair but had not had an opportunity to read them.
In response to a suggestion by Mr. Davis
it was understood that Chairman Eccles would
appoint a committee of three members of the
Federal Open Market Committee to consider the
question whether copies of the minutes of the
Federal Open Market Committee and its executive
committee should be sent to the alternate mem
bers of the Committee, and to make a recommenda
tion to the Committee with respect thereto and
with regard to the procedure to be followed in
furnishing minutes of the meetings of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee and its executive
committee to new regular members of the Commit
tee elected to take office as of March 1 each
year.
Mr. McKee suggested that for the purpose of acquainting the
new members of the Federal Open Market Committee with the basis for
the action at the meeting on December 30, 1938, the minutes of that
meeting be read.
Mr. Harrison stated that if the members were to have a more
complete background of the circumstances which led up to the action
on December 30 it would be necessary that they read all of the minutes

3/6/39 -9
of the full Committee beginning with the meeting of April 21-22, 1938.
It was agreed that Messrs. Leach, Martin and Hamilton would be furnished
with copies of the minutes referred to by Mr. Harrison, that they and
Mr. Fleming would read the minutes during the evening, and that the Com
mittee would reconvene tomorrow morning for further consideration of the
open market policy to be adopted by the Committee.
Thereupon the meeting recessed with the understanding that it
would reconvene tomorrow, Tuesday, March 7, 1939, at 10:00 a.m.
Assistant Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.

The meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was reconvened
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, March 7, 1939, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Fleming
Mr. Leach
Mr. Martin
Mr. Hamilton
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Sproul, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
At the request of the Committee, Mr. Goldenweiser referred to
various factors that might be taken into consideration in determining
whether a change should be made in the resolutions adopted by the
Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting on December 30, 1938.
He repeated that, in his opinion, the System should follow the policy
of husbanding all of the means of control that it has for the reason
that considerable difficulty might be experienced in the future in ex
ercising an effective influence in the field of credit control. He
said that the psychological effect of a departure from a fixed port
folio was an important one, that he would regret to see that effect
dissipated unless there was a compelling reason for such action, and

3/7/39 -2.
that a decrease in the portfolio should be used as a signal for a def
inite change in System policy. He added that, in his opinion, there
was no evidence of any occasion for reversing the policy of monetary
ease which had been followed by the System and that he felt it would
strengthen the position of the System in the future if the portfolio
was maintained at this time. He made the further observation that with
excess reserves of member banks as large as they are at present there
was little or no economic significance in a reduction of $100,000,000
or $200,000,000 in excess reserves.
Mr. Goldenweiser's statement was followed by a discussion of
the question whether existing circumstances were such as to call for
a change in the resolutions adopted at the December meeting.
During the discussion Mr. McKee raised the question whether
it was the intention of the Committee in December, when authorizing
the executive committee to allow maturities to run off without replace
ment under certain circumstances, that such maturities would be re
placed in the System account as soon as the market conditions justified.
A majority of the members of the Committee agreed that this was the
understanding as indicated both by the resolution itself, which stated
that maturing Treasury bills could be allowed to mature without re
placement or pending subsequent replacement, and by the last paragraph
of the statement released to the press at that time to the effect that
because no change in System policy was contemplated at the time maturing
bills would be replaced to the extent that market conditions warranted.

The discussion also related to the circumstances surrounding
the action of the Board of Governors in April 1938 in reducing re
serve requirements of member banks and the relation of that action
and the Administration's policy of monetary ease to the subsequent
actions of the Federal Open Market Committee.
At the conclusion of the discussion the
motion made by Mr. Harrison at the meeting of
the Committee yesterday afternoon that the
Committee adopt resolutions containing instruc
tions to the executive committee in the same
form as resolutions adopted at the meeting on
December 30, 1938, was put by the chair and
carried, Messrs. Harrison, Szymczak, McKee,
Davis, Fleming, Leach, Martin, and Hamilton
voting "aye", and Messrs. Eccles, Ransom, and
Draper voting "no".
The reasons for the adoption of these
resolutions were substantially the same as
the reasons for similar action taken at the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
on December 30, 1938, which reasons were set
forth, in part, in the minutes of the meet
ing of December 30, 1938, in the public
statement released by the Committee on that
date, and in the record of discussions in
cluded in the minutes of previous meetings
of the Committee.
In connection with his vote Mr. Draper
made the following statement:
"I wish to explain my vote on this resolution. In my
opinion many persons interested in financial affairs, and
many financial officers of business concerns who follow
the Federal Reserve weekly statements, fix their attention
particularly upon the size of the System's portfolio. To
them a change in its size means a definite change in pol
icy. And this is true, I believe, regardless of explana
tory statements to the contrary by officials of the System
or anyone else.

3/7/39
"Therefore, until we are ready to make a real change
in policy, I believe it most important to maintain the
portfolio at its present size. For this reason, as well
as for other reasons given by Chairman Eccles and Mr.
Ransom, at the meeting on December 30, 1938, I wish to
vote No on the Resolution."
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Approved:
Chairman.