A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Monday, May 27, 1940, at 2:45 p.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Sinclair
Mr. Parker
Mr. Schaller
Mr. Day
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Young, Fleming, Leach, Martin, and
Peyton, Alternate Members of the Federal
Open Market Committee
Messrs. Hamilton and Gilbert, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City
and Dallas, respectively
Upon motion duly made and seconded
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
held on March 20, 1940, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the
minutes of the meeting of the executive
committee on March 20, 1940, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.

5/27/40 -2
There were distributed to the members of the Board and the
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks copies of a report prepared
at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York of open market operations
covering the period from March 20 to May 24, 1940, inclusive. Mr.
Rouse reviewed and commented on the important features of the report.
He also said that there were no transactions effected for System ac
count on Saturday, May 25.
Chairman Eccles stated that following the German invasion of
Holland, Belgium, and Luxembourg, the executive committee, in carry
ing out the instructions of the full Committee, had proceeded on the
theory that during the decline from the high level which the market
had reached there should be only such purchases of securities by the
System as might be necessary in accordance with the policy of attempt
ing to prevent disorderly conditions in the market, and that, apparently
because of the prevalent knowledge of the experiences of investors
in the market last fall when prices recovered very rapidly from a
precipitous decline, the situation in the market in the recent past
had been entirely different from that which existed last September
when large amounts of securities were sold at rapidly declining prices.
He said that as long as there were buyers in the market, as there had
been during practically the entire recent period of decline, there
was little need for System intervention, that the only time the Sys
tem had purchased securities was when the dealers through whom System

5/27/40
operations were conducted were unable to find outside bidders and
small purchases were made for System account to avoid further weak
nesses, and that during the entire period of weakness only $10,400,000
of securities were purchased. It was the feeling of the executive
committee, however, Chairman Eccles added, that the System should be
prepared to increase its purchases in the event the market declines
further with the attendant possibility of increased selling.
There was a discussion of the question whether during the
period of recovery following the decline in Government security prices
last September the System should have sold more than the $94,000,000
of securities that were disposed of. Mr. Harrison stated that probably
some additional securities could have been sold without adversely af
fecting the market, but that the existing instructions were to buy
and sell securities only for the purpose of exercising an influence
toward maintaining orderly market conditions, and that even though
the market might have absorbed additional amounts of securities with
out materially affecting market prices it had been felt that the exist
ing instructions did not contemplate sales merely for the purpose of
disposing of securities which were purchased during the September de
cline when such sales were not deemed necessary to prevent disorderly
market conditions. He added, however, that he would favor instruc
tions to sell securities not only for the purpose of exercising a
stabilizing influence in the market but also for the purpose of dis
posing of securities which had been acquired in a period of market

5/27/40 -4
weakness, whenever such sales could be made without adversely affect
ing the market.
During the consideration of Mr. Harrison's suggestion Mr.
McKee stated that it is much more difficult for the System to dis
pose of any substantial amount of securities in the market than it
is for any other holder for the reason that it becomes known quickly
that the System is operating in the market and sales from its account
have a much broader effect than sales from the portfolio of private
holders.
Mr. Sinclair expressed the opinion that it was likely that
the System would be called upon to buy more securities than it would
have occasion to sell for the purpose of exercising a stabilizing in
fluence and that securities should be sold whenever that could be
done without an adverse effect upon market prices so that the System
account would be in a better position to purchase securities in
periods of market weakness. Reference was made in this connection
to the present earnings of the System account and Mr. Sinclair voiced
the further opinion that the question of earnings of the System should
not be a consideration in determining whether securities should be
sold and that the System should be prepared to use its surplus funds
for a time for the payment of its expenses should that become neces
sary.
Chairman Eccles said that he thought that it would be a short
sighted policy to disregard the earning requirements of the System in

5/27/40 -5-
the administration of the System account, that the purchase or sale
of $200,000,000 or $300,000,000 of securities would not have any ma
terial effect on the situation one way or another, and that as long
as the present situation continued the Committee was entirely justified
in holding such amounts of securities as might be deemed necessary to
meet earning requirements. The opinions expressed by Messrs. Sinclair
and Eccles were discussed at some length.
Mr. McKee suggested that in the future the weekly reports of
open market operations prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York show the par value of securities held in the System account, the
unamortized premium paid on such securities, and, on an annual basis,
the total interest income of the account, the net premium amortization,
and the net interest earnings of the account after amortization of
premium. Part of this information has been shown in these reports
and Mr. Rouse stated that he would see that the additional data called
for by Mr. McKee's suggestion is shown hereafter.
Mr. Ransom recommended that the special committee appointed
at the last meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (Messrs.
Ransom, Harrison, and Davis) to study the question of the responsi
bilities of the Federal Open Market Committee with respect to the
Government securities market as well as the question of the relations
of the dealers to the market, be discharged. He stated that, in
view of the changed conditions since the committee was appointed,
together with the fact that the whole subject was under constant

5/27/40 -6
review and discussion by the entire committee, there appeared to
be little value in the study at this particular time and that, inas
much as the members of the staff who would work on the report were
fully occupied on other problems, this additional assignment should
be laid aside.
Upon motion by Mr. Ransom, which was
duly seconded, it was voted unanimously
to discharge the special committee.
Mr. McKee renewed the suggestion made by him at the last
meeting of the Committee that consideration be given to the use of
profits on sales involved in shift transactions for the purpose of
writing down the book value of the replacement securities purchased.
Mr. Rouse stated that, in accordance with the action taken at the
last meeting of the Committee, he and Mr. Smead, Chief of the Division
of Bank Operations of the Board of Governors, had been studying that
question and, if agreeable to the members of the Committee, a report
would be prepared and sent to the members of the Committee before its
next meeting, with the understanding that the report would be con
sidered at that meeting.
The members of the Committee ex
pressed agreement with the procedure sug
gested by Mr. Rouse and, at the suggestion
of Mr. Fleming, it was understood that
copies of the report prepared by Messrs.
Smead and Rouse would also be sent to the
Presidents of Federal Reserve Banks who
were not members of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions

5/27/40 -7-
in the System open market account for the
period from March 20 to May 25, 1940, in
clusive, were approved, ratified and con
firmed.
Chairman Eccles called on Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams
for statements on the business and credit situation.
Mr. Goldenweiser stated that the Division of Research and
Statistics of the Board of Governors had prepared a statement on re
cent business and credit developments which he would distribute among
the members of the Committee and the Presidents. In response to a
request, Mr. Goldenweiser amplified the comments contained in the
statement referred to with respect to the future outlook and the
possible effects of the war upon the American economy.
A statement was also made by Mr. Williams. A summary thereof
and a copy of the prepared statement referred to by Mr. Goldenweiser
have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
During Mr. Goldenweiser's statement, Mr. Wyatt, General
Counsel, joined the meeting.
Following Mr. Williams' statement, Chairman Eccles referred
to the expansion of the powers of the Treasury and other agencies
of the Federal Government in the field of banking and credit since
1933 and to the relative diminution of the powers of the Federal Re
serve System while powers of other agencies of the Government had
been increased greatly. He stated also that central banks of other
countries are entrusted with responsibilities which in this country

5/27/40 -8
have been placed in other agencies. He suggested that the Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks and the Board give thought to such devel
opments and consider what, in their opinion, should be the functions
of the Federal Reserve System. Some aspects of the matter were dis
cussed and at the conclusion of the discussion the meeting recessed
to reconvene at 10:00 a.m. tomorrow.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.

The meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was recon
vened in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, May 28, 1940, at 10:25 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Sinclair
Mr. Schaller
Mr. Day
Mr. Leach (alternate for Mr. Parker)
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Fleming, Martin, and Peyton, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Hamilton and Gilbert, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City
and Dallas, respectively.
Consideration was given to the question whether events since
the last meeting of the Committee called for any change in the exist
ing System policy.
Mr. Harrison referred to the suggestion made by him at the
meeting yesterday that the executive committee be authorized to sell
securities, within limits to be fixed by the full Committee, not only
for the purpose of exercising an influence toward orderly conditions

5/28/40 -2
in the market but also for the purpose of disposing of securities
which had been acquired in a period of market weakness whenever such
sales could be made without adversely affecting the market. He said
the reason for this suggestion was that as the New York Bank inter
preted the existing instructions of the executive committee such sales
had not been authorized. He believed it would be good policy in the
administration of the System account to reduce the account when pos
sible during a stable or rising market after a substantial amount of
securities had been purchased during a decline for the purpose of ex
ercising a stabilizing influence. In this connection he pointed out
that under the authority granted to the New York Bank by the executive
committee the Bank could make such shifts in the System account as
may be necessary for the practical administration of the account or
for the purpose of exercising an influence toward orderly market con
ditions and he suggested that there be added the authority to make
sales of securities when desirable or advisable in the practical ad
ministration of the account, it being understood that the New York
Bank would consult with the members of the executive committee as had
been done in the recent periods. While he did not anticipate that
an opportunity for such action would present itself in the near future
he felt it would be well to permit such an operation should an occa
sion therefor arise.
In the discussion which followed members of the Committee
present concurred in the belief that the existing instructions to

5/28/40 -3
the executive committee were broad enough to permit sales under the
conditions indicated by Mr. Harrison when in the judgment of the ex
ecutive committee sales were desirable or advisable. Mr. Harrison
said that if it were understood that the existing instructions were
sufficiently broad to authorize the New York Bank to sell securities,
which had been purchased in a period of market weakness for the pur
pose of exercising a stabilizing influence, whenever there was a
strong buying market and there were not sufficient offerings, he
felt the resolution of the full Committee would be satisfactory in
its present form. All of the members of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee present indicated agreement that the resolution should be so
interpreted.
Thereupon, Mr. Harrison moved that
the following resolution, which is in the
same form as the resolution adopted at the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee on March 20, 1940, be adopted.
"That the executive committee be directed until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee
to arrange for such transactions for the System Open
Market Account (including purchases, sales, exchanges,
replacement of maturing securities, and letting maturi
ties run off without replacement) as in its judgment from
time to time may be necessary for the purpose of exercis
ing an influence toward maintaining orderly market con
ditions; provided that the aggregate amount of securities
held in the Account at the close of this date shall not
be increased nor decreased by more than $500,000,000."
Mr. Harrison's motion, having been
duly seconded, was put by the chair and
carried unanimously.
Mr. Harrison referred to the question recently submitted by

5/28/40 -4
the Board of Governors to the Federal Advisory Council and to the
boards of directors of the Federal Reserve Banks on the subject of
easy money and stated that at the meeting of the Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks yesterday the statement prepared by the Federal
Advisory Council was read for the confidential information of all
of the Presidents, and that since any comments in that or other state
ments of the Council relating to open market policy would apply to
the Federal Open Market Committee to the extent that it had played
a part in the easy money policy of the System, he would like to get
the reaction of the Board to the replies that had been made.
At Chairman Eccles' suggestion it was
agreed that a meeting of the Board of Gov
ernors with the Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks should be held following
this meeting for the purpose of discuss
ing that matter as well as the question
raised by Chairman Eccles at the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee yes
terday afternoon with respect to the place
of the Federal Reserve System in the bank
ing and monetary problems of the country.
Mr. Harrison said that one of the questions assigned to the
committee which was appointed at the last meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee (Messrs. Ransom, Harrison and Davis) and which was
discharged at the meeting yesterday, was the relation of the dealers
to the Government securities market and that, as he had stated at a
previous meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York had made a study of that problem and had pre
pared a memorandum regarding it, copies of which had been handed to

5/28/40 -5
Messrs. Ransom and Davis. Copies of the memorandum were distributed
during this meeting to the other members of the Committee and to the
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks who were not members of the
Committee, except Messrs. Young and Parker who were absent, and it
was understood that Mr. Rouse would send copies to them.
Mr. Ransom referred to the banking studies which were pre
pared by the staff of the Board of Governors and sent to the Presidents
of all Federal Reserve Banks for their comments. He stated that the
studies were in the process of being edited and it would be helpful
if the Board could have any further suggestions that the Presidents
may have to make as promptly as possible.
Mr. Harrison stated that at the meeting of the Presidents
yesterday the legislative committee appointed by the Presidents' Con
ference handed to the Presidents several memoranda which had been
prepared by the committee on questions which it had had under consid
eration prior to receipt by the Federal Reserve Banks of the question
naire prepared by the Senate Committee on Banking and Currency in
connection with the Wagner Resolution and that copies had not been
submitted to the Board for the reason that it was felt that before
that was done the memoranda should be reviewed by all of the Presi
dents.
In a discussion of the Wagner questionnaire, Mr. Ransom stated
that no one on the Board or its staff had anything to do with the prep
aration of the questionnaire and that the best information available

5/28/40 -6
to the Board was that it was prepared by parties outside the service
of the Government.
The suggestion was made by Chairman Eccles that in view of
the developments which have taken place since the questionnaire was
prepared it was possible that the studies contemplated by the Wagner
Resolution would be postponed indefinitely and that it was possible
that an emergency might arise which would make it necessary for Con
gress to pass banking legislation without prolonged study of the
subject.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.