A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Wednesday, March 20, 1940, at 10:10 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Sinclair
Mr. Parker
Mr. Schaller
Mr. Day
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Young, Fleming, Martin, and Peyton,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Hamilton and Gilbert, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City
and Dallas, respectively
The Secretary reported that records of the election for the
period of one year commencing March 1, 1940, of members and alternate
members of the Federal Open Market Committee representing the Federal
Reserve banks had been received in the office of the Secretary of the
Committee, that each newly elected member and alternate member had
executed the required oath of office (with the exception of Messrs.

3/20/40 -2-
Leach and Martin who shortly would execute their oaths of office as al
ternate members), and that it was the opinion of the Committee's counsel
on the basis of the records of election that the following members and
alternate members were legally qualified to serve:
George L. Harrison, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, with Roy A. Young, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, as alternate member;
John S. Sinclair, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia, with M. J. Fleming, President of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate mem
ber;
Robert S. Parker, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta, with Hugh Leach, President of the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of Richmond, as alternate member;
George J. Schaller, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago, with Wm. McC. Martin, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, as alternate member;
Wm. A. Day, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco, with John N. Peyton, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, as alternate member.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
the following officers of the Federal Open
Market Committee were reelected by unani
mous votes to serve until the election of
their successors at the first meeting of
the Committee after March 1, 1941.
Marriner S. Eccles, Chairman
George L. Harrison, Vice Chairman
S. R. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
E. A. Goldenweiser, Economist
John H. Williams, Associate Economist
Walter Wyatt, General Counsel
J. P. Dreibelbis, Assistant General
Counsel
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the Committee selected the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to execute
transactions for the System Open Market Ac
count until the adjournment of the first meet
ing of the Committee after March 1, 1941.

3/20/40
Mr. Harrison stated that he proposed to recommend to the board
of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York the selection of
R. G. Rouse as Manager of the System Open Market Account.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the Committee ap
proved the selection of Mr. Rouse as Man
ager of the System Open Market Account in
the event of his reappointment by the board
of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York to act in that capacity.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the following were
selected to serve with the Chairman of the
Federal Open Market Committee (who, under
the provisions of the by-laws, is also
chairman of the executive committee) as
members and alternate members of the exec
utive committee until the first meeting of
the Federal Open Market Committee after
March 1, 1941:
Members Alternate Members
M. S. Szymczak Ernest G. Draper
Chester C. Davis Ronald Ransom
George L. Harrison John K. McKee
John S. Sinclair (To serve in the order
named as alternates for
Messrs. Eccles, Szymczak,
and Davis)
George J. Schaller
Robert S. Parker
(To serve in the order
named as alternates for
Messrs. Harrison and
Sinclair)
Mr. Dreibelbis withdrew from the meeting at this point.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the

3/20/40 -4
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
held on December 13, 1939, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the
minutes of the meeting of the executive
committee on December 13, 1939, were ap
proved, ratified and confirmed,
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions in
the System Open Market Account for the
period from December 13, 1939 to March 19,
1940, inclusive, as reported by Mr. Rouse
at the meeting of the executive committee
of the Federal Open Market Committee which
immediately preceded this meeting, were ap
proved, ratified and confirmed.
Statements were then made by Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams
with respect to the current business situation and copies of their
statements have been placed in the Committee's files. Both statements
reached the general conclusion that while there was evidence of con
tinuing decline in business activity, which might go somewhat further,
the pace of the decline had considerably diminished in recent weeks.
Both expressed skepticism of the views which have been voiced by some
economists, based largely upon inventory accumulation following the
outbreak of the war, that there would be a substantial further decline
in business from current levels.
At the conclusion of his statement Mr. Goldenweiser referred
to the change which he considered as having taken place in the primary

3/20/40 -5
purpose of open market operations and suggested that the Committee
undertake to define its responsibilities under existing circumstances
and to formulate a statement of the principles which should govern
its operations. Mr. Ransom suggested that Mr. Goldenweiser be asked
to prepare with the assistance of such other members of the staff of
the Committee as he may desire to call upon, a draft of a statement
of suggested responsibilities and principles for submission to the
members of the Federal Open Market Committee for consideration at
its next meeting.
Mr. Dreibelbis returned to the meeting at this point.
During the discussion of Mr. Ransom's suggestion, Mr. Harrison
briefly reviewed the history of open market operations, commenting that
since helping to maintain orderly conditions in the Government securi
ties market has been a primary objective of policy, the emphasis has
been placed on buying and not on selling. He stated that it is very
human to regard rising markets as orderly and falling markets as dis
orderly, and that in markets such as we have had recently it has been
necessary to buy substantially greater amounts to resist declines than
have needed to be sold to restrain sharp rises. Mr. Harrison then sug
gested that open market policy, under present circumstances, might well
include the selling of securities for the purpose of disposing of pur
chases previously made on the decline, whenever the market would absorb
such sales, instead of waiting for disorderly conditions in rising

3/20/40 -6
markets to force sales.
Chairman Eccles referred to the fact that dealers in the Gov
ernment securities market act in dual capacities, being both dealers
and brokers, and expressed the opinion that this tends to increase
rather than diminish fluctuations in the market and therefore to
create a problem which should be considered by the Committee. Mr.
Harrison stated that he had understood that the members of the Com
mittee in Washington were giving some consideration to the question
raised by Chairman Eccles, that there had been drafted at the New
York Bank a preliminary report on the relationships of dealers to the
market, and that when the report was completed he would send a copy
to the other members of the Committee.
At Mr. Harrison's request, Mr. Rouse reviewed briefly the ac
tivities of the dealers in the market just before and after the recent
announcement of the refunding of Treasury notes which mature on June
15, 1940. Mr. Piser, Senior Economist in the Division of Research
and Statistics of the Board of Governors, joined the meeting at this
point and there was a discussion of the market position taken by the
dealers since the Treasury announcement.
Chairman Eccles suggested that a committee of three be ap
pointed to study the whole question of the responsibilities of the
Federal Open Market Committee with respect to the Government securi
ties market as well as the question of the relations of the dealers
to the market.

3/20/40
In connection with the discussion of the latter point Mr.
Young said that it had been the practice of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis while he was Governor of the bank to buy and sell se
curities for the account of member banks, a practice which was not
followed by the Boston Bank, and that whenever a bank inquired with
respect to the purchase or sale of securities the Boston Bank gave it
a list of several dealers. Most of the Presidents of the other Fed
eral Reserve banks stated that it was the present practice of their
banks to buy and sell Government securities for the account of member
banks.
At the conclusion of the discussion
Mr. Szymczak moved that the Chairman ap
point a committee of three to make the
study suggested by him.
Mr. Szymczak's motion having been
duly seconded was put by the Chair and
carried unanimously.
(Secretary's Note: Following the
meeting Chairman Eccles appointed
Mr. Ransom as Chairman and Messrs.
Harrison and Davis as members of
the committee, with Mr. Sinclair
as alternate for Mr. Harrison.)
At 1:10 p.m. the meeting recessed and reconvened at 2:30 p.m.
with the same attendance as at the conclusion of the morning session
except that Messrs. Young and Piser were not present.
Mr. Harrison stated that, in the absence of a change in open
market policy, there appeared to be no need for a change in the resolu
tion adopted at the last meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

3/20/40 -8-
directing the executive committee to execute transactions in the
System Account. He added that in the more recent period there had
been occasions when shifts might have been made between maturities
in the System Account which might have been desirable but for which
no definite statement of necessity could be made, that these shifts
had not been made for the reason that it was felt that, without first
discussing the matter with the members of the executive committee,
such action should not be taken unless there was more apparent reason
therefor, and that the bank would like to feel that the Committee
would be liberal in allowing the bank to make shifts of this character
when they could be made without disadvantage to the System Account.
This point was discussed and Mr. Harrison stated that when another
occasion for such a shift was presented the New York Bank would
present the facts to the members of the executive committee.
Mr. McKee stated that it appeared that shifts may be made in
the account in larger amounts in the future than in the recent past
for the purpose of exercising a steadying influence in the market,
that the securities taken in such transactions might be at high prices,
and that he would like to have consideration given to the use of the
profits on all sales involved in shift transactions for the purpose
of writing down the book value of the replacement securities pur
chased. He said that he was not ready to make this suggestion with
respect to profits from outright sales from the System Account but

3/20/40 -9-
that inasmuch as the premium on securities held in the Account now ex
ceeded $42,000,000 he was inclined to the opinion that profits on shifts
should be used to write down the cost of new securities acquired as a
means of preventing the growth of the premium account by the amount of
profits resulting from shifts.
Chairman Eccles referred to the fact that it had been some
time since a review was made of the basis for the allocation of se
curities in the System Account and suggested that Messrs. Smead and
Rouse be requested to study the allocation formula as well as the
suggestion made by Mr. McKee with respect to the treatment of profits
on shifts in the Account.
During the consideration of this
matter Messrs. Smead, Chief of the Divi
sion of Bank Operations of the Board of
Governors, and Piser joined the meeting
and at the conclusion of the discussion
Messrs. Smead and Rouse were requested
to study the present basis for allocation
of securities in the Account and the ac
counting procedure followed in connection
with the Account, to make a report at the
next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee which would include a statement
of the various accounting procedures that
might be adopted, and to be prepared to
make recommendations as to the procedure
that should be followed.
Thereupon Mr. Harrison moved the
adoption of the following resolution:
"That the executive committee be directed until

3/20/40 -10-
"otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee
to arrange for such transactions for the System Open Mar
ket Account (including purchases, sales, exchanges, re
placement of maturing securities, and letting maturities
run off without replacement) as in its judgment from time
to time may be necessary for the purpose of exercising an
influence toward maintaining orderly market conditions;
provided that the aggregate amount of securities held in
the Account at the close of this date shall not be in
creased nor decreased by more than $500,000,000."
Mr. Harrison's motion, having been
duly seconded, was put by the chair and
carried unanimously.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved: ,
Chairman.