A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Wednesday, December 18, 1940, at 11:10 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. S zymczak
Mr. M cKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. D avis (latter part of meeting)
Mr. D raper
Mr. Sinclair
Mr. Parker
Mr. Schaller
Mr. Day
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Messrs. Young, Fleming, Leach, Martin, and
Peyton, Alternate Members of the Federal
Open Market Committee
Messrs. Hamilton and Gilbert, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City
and Dallas, respectively
Mr. Kimball, Secretary of the Conference of
Presidents
Mr. Clayton, Assistant to the Chairman of the
Board of Governors
Mr. Bethea, Assistant Secretary of the Board
of Governors
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on September 27, 1940, were
approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the

12/18/40 -2
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the minutes
of the meetings of the executive committee
on September 27 and November 1, 1940, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Prior to this meeting the members of the Federal Open Market
Committee had been furnished with copies of a report prepared at the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York of open market operations during the
period from September 27 to December 14, 1940, inclusive, and copies
of the report were furnished to other Presidents of Federal Reserve
Banks at this meeting. Mr. Rouse commented upon the important features
of the report and, at Mr. McKee's request, discussed briefly the factors
underlying the recent increase in prices of Government securities. Mr.
Rouse's statement was followed by a discussion of factors influencing
the Government securities market.
At this point Mr. Bethea withdrew from the meeting.
Chairman Eccles reviewed briefly the suggestions which had been
considered by the members of the executive committee in connection with
December Treasury financing when that matter was under consideration
recently, the discussions which they had had with the Secretary of the
Treasury and members of his staff, and the reasons for the decision of
the Treasury to do the financing in the form finally decided upon. Prior
to this meeting copies of the memoranda on the subject of Treasury fi
nancing, which had been prepared under dates of December 6 and 7, 1940,
and sent to the Secretary of the Treasury, had been placed in the hands
of the regular members of the Federal Open Market Committee and during

12/18/40 -3
the afternoon session of this meeting copies of the memoranda were
handed to the Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks who are not
regular members of the Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions in
the System account for the period from Sep
tember 27 to December 17, 1940, inclusive,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Before this meeting the Secretary of the Federal Open Market
Committee had sent to each member of the Committee a copy of the re
port of examination of the System open market account made as at the
close of business on September 7, 1940, by the examiners for the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System as a part of the regular ex
amination of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
It was stated that there was nothing
in the report that required action by the
Federal Open Market Committee at this time
and, upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the report was or
dered to be filed.
Mr. Smead, Chief of the Division of Bank Operations of the
Board of Governors, was called into the meeting in connection with
the discussion of the report prepared by him and Mr. Rouse on the
basis for the allocation of securities in the System open market ac
count and the various accounting procedures that might be adopted for
the account. Copies of this report were distributed to the members
of the Board of Governors and the Presidents of Federal Reserve Banks
at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on September 27,

12/18/40 -4
1940, when it was agreed that the report should be placed on the agenda
for consideration at this meeting.
Reference was made to the comments in the report relating to the
basis for the allocation among the Federal Reserve Banks of the securi
ties held in the System open market account and inquiry was made by mem
bers of the Board as to the consideration given by the Presidents in
their meeting yesterday to this phase of the report.
Mr. Schaller replied that the Presidents had voted to request
Messrs. Smead and Rouse to submit a recommendation as to any changes
that they felt should be made in the procedure now being followed with
respect to the allocation of securities in the account.
Mr. Smead stated that it would be his recommendation that a
procedure for the quarterly allocation of securities be adopted, as
outlined in the memorandum, which would (1) allocate sufficient securi
ties to each Federal Reserve Bank to cover expenses not covered by ac
crued earnings on Government securities and estimated earnings from
other sources, (2) allocate a sufficient amount of additional securi
ties to each bank to cover dividend requirements, and (3) allocate any
remaining securities among the banks on the basis of average daily par
ticipations in the System account since June 30, 1936, which is the basis
on which profits on sales of securities in the System account are dis
tributed among Federal Reserve Banks at the present time. Mr. Rouse
joined in this recommendation.
Upon inquiry from President Sinclair, Messrs. Smead and Rouse

12/18/40
stated that they were of the opinion that, if adopted, the proposed
basis of allocation could be put into effect in connection with the
January 1 reallocation of securities in the account.
Inquiry was made whether the Presidents were willing to ap
prove the recommended procedure and all of the Presidents voted to
approve.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the proposed procedure was ap
proved unanimously by the members of the
Federal Open Market Committee with the un
derstanding that if possible the new pro
cedure would be followed in connection with
the January 1, 1941, reallocation.
Reference was then made to the comments in the report submit
ted by Messrs. Smead and Rouse with respect to the manner in which
Government securities should be shown in the weekly statement of con
dition of Federal Reserve Bans and with respect to the disposition
to be made of profits on sales of securities from the account. Upon
inquiry as to the action taken by the Presidents' Conference on these
matters, Mr. Kimball stated that the Presidents had expressed the
opinion (1) that there should be no change in the manner in which Gov
ernment securities are now shown in the weekly statement of condition
of Federal Reserve Banks, and (2) that it should be the uniform policy
of the Reserve Banks to transfer profits on sales of securities from
the System account to reserves for contingencies to the extent that
such profits are available after the payment of ordinary expenses,

12/18/40 -6
dividends, and any special charge-offs.
Mr. Peyton stated that there was the feeling on the part of
some of the Presidents that the latter question was worthy of further
consideration but that for the current year the policy should be as
stated by Mr. Kimball.
At this point Mr. Davis, Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist, and Mr.
Williams, Associate Economist, entered the room.
Mr. McKee stated that he would prefer to apply profits on se
curities sold against the premium on securities held in the account.
The decisions of the Presidents' Conference were discussed
in the light of Mr. McKee's comment and it was the consensus of those
present that the procedure to be followed in the treatment of profits
should be uniform at all Federal Reserve Banks.
There followed a discussion of the pos
sible reasons for the establishment by the
Federal Reserve Banks of contingent reserves
or reserves for other purposes, at the con
clusion of which, upon motion duly made and
seconded, it was voted unanimously to recom
mend to the Board of Governors that no change
be made in the manner in which Government se
curities held in the System open market ac
count are shown in the weekly statements of
condition of Federal Reserve Banks.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, it
was also voted unanimously that for the cur
rent year profits on securities sold from
the System open market account should be
transferred to reserves for contingencies.
Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams were then called upon for com
ments with respect to the problems before the Committee. A copy of the

12/18/40 -7-
statement made by Mr. Goldenweiser and a copy of a paper delivered by
Mr. Williams at the annual meeting of the American Economic Association
in New Orleans on December 28, 1940, which he subsequently submitted as
covering a broader field than his statement at this meeting, have been
placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
During Mr. Williams' statement Mr. Morrill, Secretary, joined
the meeting.
At 1:00 p.m. the meeting recessed and reconvened at 3:00 p.m.
with the same attendance as at the conclusion of the morning session;
and, in addition, Mr. Piser, Senior Economist in the Division of Re
search and Statistics of the Board of Governors.
There was a discussion of the policy to be adopted by the Com
mittee with respect to the transactions to be effected in the System
open market account and reference was made in this connection to the
proposed submission to Congress of a joint statement by the Board of
Governors, the Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, and the Fed
eral Advisory Council, in regard to the present and potential excess
reserve problem. Reference was also made to the substantial sales
that had been made from the account since the last meeting of the
full Committee (which had reduced the total securities in the account
to $2,184,100,000) and to the many uncertainties in the present situa
tion which have a bearing on the Government securities market includ
ing proposals that income from future issues of Government securities
be taxable, the question of the extension of the debt limit, the form

12/18/40 -8
that defense financing will take, the extent to which defense expendi
tures will be met by taxation, and the problems growing out of the
large and increasing volume of excess reserves. Consideration was
given to whether the changes in the situation since the last meeting
of the Committee were such as to require any change from the existing
policy of making sales of securities from the account when such sales
could be made without adversely affecting the market, whether the
policy adopted should contemplate transactions only for the purpose
of exercising an influence toward maintaining orderly market condi
tions, or whether the authority of the executive committee should be
limited to purchases of securities and to making shifts of securities
in the account.
The question was raised as to whether it would be wise to per
mit the account to be reduced to or below an amount, the income from
which would be sufficient to meet the expense and dividend requirements
of the System. It was stated that the amount that would be necessary
for the purpose would depend upon the maturities of securities held
and that, if it should become necessary materially to shorten the ma
turities in the account, earnings on an amount of securities equal to
the present total holdings might be inadequate to meet the expenses of
the System.
Several of the members of the Committee were of the opinion
that under present conditions there was no occasion for further sales

12/18/40 -9-
from the account at this time for the purpose of reducing the account
but that the authority to make purchases and sales for the purpose of
exercising an influence toward maintaining orderly market conditions
should be continued, with the understanding that the whole question of
policy would be reviewed sometime after the first of the year.
Mr. Harrison inquired whether any consideration was being given
by the Board of Governors to the exercise of its remaining authority
to increase reserve requirements. Mr. Eccles replied that the Board
had not recently discussed that question.
There was also discussion of the conditions under which further
sales from the account might be called for and of the possible effects
on the market of the statement proposed to be submitted to Congress by
the Board, the Presidents, and the Federal Advisory Council.
As a result of the various discussions the suggestion was made
that there were many uncertainties in the situation at the present time
which could not be appraised satisfactorily and that therefore the ex
ecutive committee should be in position to act in accordance with its
best judgment in the light of developments from time to time, especial
ly when it might be deemed desirable to exercise an influence toward
preventing disorderly conditions in the market during the interval be
fore another meeting of the full Committee, but that, in view of the
large reduction in the portfolio that had been accomplished during the
past several months, there was no need for making further sales for
the sole purpose of reducing the account, and that, therefore, the

12/18/40 -10-
resolution adopted at the last meeting might be renewed, with a limita
tion of 200,000,000 upon the extent to which the holdings in the Sys
tem account might be increased or decreased.
There was general concurrence in
this suggestion and, after a reading by
Mr. Morrill of the resolution adopted at
the meeting on September 27, Mr. Harrison
offered a motion, which was duly seconded,
that the following resolution be adopted:
That the executive committee be directed un
til otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market
Committee to arrange for such transactions for
the System open market account (including pur
chases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing
securities, and letting maturities run off without
replacement) as in its judgment from time to time
may be advisable in the light of existing condi
tions; provided that the aggregate amount of se
curities held in the account at the close of this
date shall not be increased or decreased by more
than $200,000,000.
Mr. Harrison's motion was put by the
chair and carried, Mr. Draper voting "no".
Mr. Draper stated that he voted "no"
on the above resolution for the following
reasons which were broader in scope than
those outlined by him when voting in the
negative on a similar resolution adopted
at the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee on September 27, 1940:
"I do not believe that in the present circumstances
sales from the portfolio are necessary in order to maintain
orderly market conditions. I have seen no recent evidence
of the market being disorderly. In my judgment, also,
sales from the portfolio for the purpose of maintaining
an orderly market should be resorted to much less fre
quently and less vigorously than purchases at a time when
the market is declining rapidly. Rapid declines are apt
to result in a selling wave amounting to panic, which I

12/18/40 -11
"believe should be prevented when possible. On the other
hand, there is little danger of a panic when the market
advances, and it makes little difference whether a rise
is rapid or slow, so long as the level it reaches is ap
propriate to existing conditions and is not the result
of purely speculative purchases.
"A still more important reason for my belief that
there is no occasion to sell is that our portfolio has
been reduced very substantially and that we shall need
all the ammunition we can muster when reserve require
ments will have been increased and the time comes to
adopt a policy of credit restriction in order to pre
vent inflation."
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Approved:
Chairman.