A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Friday, September 27, 1940, at 2:40 p.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Harrison, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Sinclair
Mr. Parker
Mr. Schaller
Mr. Day
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General
Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System
Open Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to
the Chairman of the Board of Gov
ernors
Mr. Piser, Senior Economist in the
Division of Research and Statistics
of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Young, Fleming, Leach, Martin, and
Peyton, Alternate Members of the Federal
Open Market Committee
Messrs. Hamilton and Gilbert, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City
and Dallas, respectively
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on May 27-28, 1940, were ap
proved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the

9/27/40 -2
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the
minutes of the meeting of the executive
committee on May 27-28, 1940, were ap
proved, ratified, and confirmed.
There were distributed to the members of the Board and the
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks copies of a report prepared
at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York of open market operations
covering the period from May 27 to September 25, 1940, both dates
inclusive. Mr. Rouse reviewed and commented on the important features
of the report. He said that there were no transactions effected for
System account on Thursday, September 26, except the exchange of the
System's holdings of $92,500,000 of 1-1/2 per cent Treasury notes
due December 15, 1940 for 2 per cent Treasury bonds of 1953-55 under
the Treasury offering dated September 25, 1940, referred to in the
last paragraph on page four of his report, this exchange having been
authorized previously by the members of the executive committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System's account for the period
from May 27 to September 26, 1940, both
dates inclusive, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
Vice Chairman Harrison then called upon Messrs. Goldenweiser
and Williams for their reports on the business and credit situation.
Mr. Goldenweiser made a brief report, a copy of which has
been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee and,
at the suggestion of several members, Vice Chairman Harrison requested

9/27/40 -3
that Mr. Goldenweiser send copies of it to all of the Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks.
Following the conclusion of Mr. Goldenweiser's report, a state
ment was also made by Mr. Williams, a copy of which has been placed in
the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Following the conclusion of Mr. Williams' statement, Vice
Chairman Harrison said that it must be borne in mind that there is
the possibility of some sort of an inflation following a business re
covery together with the preparedness program. He felt that we might
find it difficult to use in any substantial volume the only practical
implement of control that we have, which is the portfolio, at a time
when the Treasury might be borrowing large amounts from the market to
finance the defense program. If we do approach inflation there may
be some rise in interest rates, whether because of necessity or be
cause of psychology, and we might be faced then with an effort on the
part of banks and other institutions gradually to liquidate some of
their holdings of Government obligations in preparation for the use
of their funds in other channels. Query, therefore, whether at that
time because of deficit financing and because of our own responsibility
for the banking situation we might not have to begin to bail out some
of their holdings of bonds and possibly envisage an increasing System
portfolio rather than a shrinking portfolio. Mr. Harrison said that
the question as to whether or not we should take advantage of every
opportunity to improve the position of our portfolio in order to meet

9/27/40 -4
such developments brought up for consideration a question raised by
Mr. Ransom in connection with a possible change in the language of
the existing instructions to the executive committee.
Mr. Draper stated that with the defense program beginning to
get under way and the business economy shifting into high gear he felt
that it would be a mistake for the Committee to take an action at this
time which might be construed as having deflationary implications. He
added that he felt caution was particularly necessary at this time not
only because of the domestic situation but also because of the dangerous
war conditions abroad.
Mr. Harrison explained that he meant only liquidating some of
the portfolio and that he had not suggested how much or anything as to
details or duration of the operation. He pointed out that the exist
ing resolutions were to sell or to buy when necessary for the purpose
of exercising an influence toward maintaining orderly market condi
tions and that there was a discussion at the last meeting of the full
Committee of the interpretation of this language. He called attention
to the statement which he had made during the session on May 28, 1940,
to the discussion of that suggestion, and to the agreement on the part
of all the members of the Federal Open Market Committee that the exist
ing directions of the Committee should be interpreted as authorizing
the New York Bank to sell securities, which had been purchased in a
period of market weakness for the purpose of exercising a stabilizing

9/27/40 -5
influence, whenever there was a strong buying market and there were
not sufficient offerings. He said that the executive committee and
the New York Bank had acted in accordance with that interpretation.
He stated that he felt that we should now consider whether we should
not sell from the portfolio, not only for the purpose of exercising
an influence toward maintaining orderly market conditions, but to the
extent that such sales can be made without adversely affecting the
market, putting a limit on the extent to which the executive committee
can go with the understanding that the executive committee will put
a lower limit on the New York Bank. In response to a question, Mr.
Harrison said that the New York Bank had been selling under the ex
isting instructions as interpreted at the last meeting of the full
Committee and that he was not suggesting that greater authority be
given than that conferred by the existing instructions as thus in
terpreted. However he raised the question whether it was not desir
able to change the language of the resolution so that it would conform
more closely to that interpretation.
Mr. Ransom said he thought the objective he had in mind could
be achieved under the existing resolution or at least with some slight
change in the resolution. On the question raised by Mr. Draper as to
whether the proposal of Mr. Harrison meant a change in policy, Mr.
Ransom said so far as his own point of view was concerned it might be
considered a change in policy because he had a very definite feeling

9/27/40 -6
that he would like to get the portfolio down to the point where it
would not be more than sufficient to meet the earning requirements of
the System, whatever that figure might be, with due regard to the fact
that the System could not go into the market and sell merely for the
sake of selling. If the objective were to sell as substantial an
amount as possible regardless of whether the selling was directed at
what some one might regard as a disorderly condition in the market or
as a sale for the purpose of substantially reducing the portfolio,
there might be some difference of opinion, but if it is the policy
of the Committee to go steadily ahead with a selling policy the di
rections of the Committee would then be in a form, Mr. Ransom said,
where he would feel that the instructions to the executive committee
were even clearer than they were under the present directions. He
said that he had had some rewording of the resolution in mind, which
he intended to submit to the present meeting for consideration but
which he did not think should be acted upon necessarily until the
next meeting of the Committee, but that Mr. Harrison had suggested
the possibility of slightly rewording the existing instructions so
that there could be no possible misunderstanding on the part of the
executive committee and the New York Bank and that he thought perhaps
that would be the best thing to do. Mr. Ransom stated that merely
for the sake of discussion and not as a motion he would read the
language which he had in mind. He then read as follows:

9/27/40 -7-
Be it resolved that the Federal Open Market Commit
tee instruct the executive committee to direct the New
York Bank to make sales from the System's portfolio when
ever such sales can be made without adversely affecting
the market, provided that: (1) the total of such sales
does not exceed $400,000,000, and (2) that sales of United
States bonds maturing in more than ten years do not ex
ceed $100,000,000.
Following a brief discussion Vice Chairman Harrison suggested
that the language of the present resolution might be changed by strik
ing out the words "necessary for the purpose of exercising an influence
toward maintaining orderly market conditions" and substituting therefor
the words "advisable in the light of existing conditions",
Thereupon Mr. Ransom moved that the
following resolution be adopted:
"That the executive committee be directed until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee to ar
range for such transactions for the System Open Market Ac
count (including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement
of maturing securities, and letting maturities run off
without replacement) as in its judgment from time to time
may be advisable in the light of existing conditions; pro
vided that the aggregate amount of securities held in the
Account at the close of this date shall not be increased
nor decreased by more than 500,000,000."
Mr. Ransom's motion was seconded
by Mr. Sinclair.
At this point Mr. McKee and Mr. Davis raised the question
whether the Manager of the System Open Market Account should not be
selling some of the notes maturing in March 1941, which otherwise
might have to be exchanged for a new issue of Treasury obligations,
so as to relieve the portfolio to that extent of the necessity for
such an exchange.

9/27/40 -8-
Mr. Draper said that in the light of the discussion he would
vote against the proposed new instructions because the change might
be misconstrued by the public as a change in policy with deflationary
implications.
Mr. Parker said that occasionally there is heard some criti
cism of the System for keeping its portfolio up to the present level
when the banks want securities and they would like to see some reduc
tion in the portfolio.
Mr. Ransom said that he did not have in mind the desire of banks
for additional securities as the reason for the line of action that he
was suggesting. He then asked whether the New York Bank would continue
in the market under the proposed change in instructions in exactly the
same manner as it had been operating in the market under existing in
structions. Mr. Harrison said he did not think there would be any
difference in the attitude of the New York Bank under its instructions
in view of the interpretation unanimously agreed to at the last meet
ing of the full Committee, his only point in the matter being that he
felt that it was wiser to have the language of the directions of the
full Committee to the executive committee and of the executive commit
tee to the New York Bank changed to conform to the interpretation
placed upon those directions rather than rely solely upon the inter
pretation which would appear in the minutes of the Committee but not
in the public record.

9/27/40
Mr. McKee said that he thought that the portfolio would have
been reduced to a greater extent under the existing instructions to
the executive committee and from the executive committee to the New
York Bank if it had not been for the fact that during the intervening
period there had been substantial sales of Government securities by
the Treasury.
During the foregoing discussion Mr. Young withdrew from the
meeting.
Mr. Ransom's motion, having been duly
seconded, was put by the chair and carried,
Messrs. Harrison, Szymczak, McKee, Ransom,
Davis, Sinclair, Parker, Schaller and Day
voting "aye", and Mr. Draper voting "no".
There was then presented a report by Messrs. Smead and Rouse
on the basis for the allocation of securities in the System Open Market
Account and the various accounting procedures that might be adopted
for the account.
Copies of the report were distributed
to all members of the Board of Governors
and to all Presidents of Federal Reserve
Banks, and, upon motion duly made and
seconded, it was agreed that it should
be placed upon the docket for considera
tion at the next meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee.
Mr. Ransom reported that Mr. Eccles had requested him to say
that Mr. Eccles was very much concerned about the provisions of the
Revenue Act of 1940 which would earmark certain taxes for the payment
of certain new Government obligations under the defense program, and

9/27/40 -10
that he would like to have the members of the executive committee con
sider that problem when they are called to consult with the Treasury
Department, for the purpose of determining what if anything they will
want to say about it. In that connection Mr. Harrison called atten
tion to his letter of September 4, 1940, to the Secretary of the Treas
ury on this subject.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Vice Chairman.