A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, June 10, 1941, at 10:05 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Fleming
Mr. Leach
Mr. Davis
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General
Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System
Open Market Account
Messrs. Roy A. Young, Sinclair, C. S. Young,
and Gilbert, Alternate Members of the
Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. McLarin and Day, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and San
Francisco, respectively, and Mr. Leedy,
First Vice President of the Federal Re
serve Bank of Kansas City
Mr. Clayton, Assistant to the Chairman of
the Board of Governors
Mr. Sienkiewicz, Secretary of the Presidents'
Conference
Mr. Alfred H. Williams, Class C director
(President-elect), of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia

6/10/41 -2-
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on March 17, 1941, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the min
utes of the meeting of the executive com
mittee on March 17, 1941, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
There were then distributed copies of a report of open market
operations prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York covering
the period from March 17 to June 7, 1941, both dates inclusive. Mr.
Rouse reviewed the principal features of the report and stated that
there were no transactions in the account on Monday, June 9.
During the discussion of the report Mr. Young of Boston in
quired why few switching operations had been conducted in the account
recently as compared with the number of switches that had been made
previously. Mr. Rouse responded that there had been relatively fewer
opportunities for such switches, that in 1939 and 1940 there were sub
stantial outright purchases and sales for the account which to some
extent eliminated the opportunity or need for switches, and that in
view of the conditions under which operations in the account were con
ducted during the recent period, there was little if any reason for
shifts. In this connection Mr. Rouse referred to the informal under
standing at the last meeting of the Committee that there should be no
switches of tax-free securities in the account into taxable issues

6/10/41 -3
or vice versa and stated that, while there had been some opportunities
for such switches, they had not been made because of this understanding.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System open market account for the period
from March 17 to June 9, 1941, inclusive,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
At this point Mr. Piser, Senior Economist in the Division of
Research and Statistics of the Board of Governors, entered the room.
Mr. Goldenweiser stated that a review of the present business
and credit situation was contained in the current issue of the Federal
Reserve Bulletin, which would be placed in the hands of the members of
the Federal Open Market Committee today or tomorrow, and that, there
fore, he would review only some of the high spots in that situation.
He referred to the present and prospective volume of industrial pro
duction and the course of prices during the present war as compared
with the World War and distributed copies of a chart showing the trend
of prices during the two periods. He also referred to the shortages
that were developing in certain commodities and other problems that
were being created by the defense effort, to the increase in bank as
sets during the past year or so, and to changes in the holdings of Gov
ernment securities by Federal agencies and private holders. He stated
that the existing situation did not appear to call for any action in
the monetary field by the System at the present time, that excess re
serves had been decreased temporarily by increases in Treasury balances
with the Federal Reserve Banks and increases in currency in circulation,

6/10/41 -4
that the System's program should include assistance to the Treasury in
connection with Treasury financing in such ways as might be agreed upon,
that the System should be given the necessary powers to control install
ment credit and excess reserves of member banks, that the question of
authority over installment sales was now being given consideration, and
that he felt that it would be extremely desirable for the System to
have power to regulate member bank reserves for the reason that we were
facing a period of increase in all kinds of bank credit, that some means
of diminishing the pressure of excess reserves was desirable, and that
unless this were provided the country was likely to proceed further on
the road to inflation on which he felt it had already embarked.
Mr. Williams expressed the opinion that we were going through
a revolutionary period during which the controls that were being exer
cised were not merely supplementing central banking policies but were
supplanting them, that as long as the present situation existed the
System could not do much to restrict the supply of credit and, there
fore, finds itself in a secondary or tertiary role, that the question
of specific controls of credit required careful exploration, and that
although the System could not exercise general monetary controls at
this time, it could be of assistance in Treasury financing and legiti
mately should be interested in all questions relating to taxation and
borrowing and other control measures. He also said that the accepted
method prior to the World-War period of preventing inflation, first by
the use of monetary controls, second by the use of fiscal policies,

6/10/41 -5
and then by direct control measures, had been turned around and the
direct control measures were being used first. He added that he was
more worried about other policies than he was about price policies or
the danger of inflation from that direction, that there was more danger
of an income inflation than of a price inflation, that it might be that
we are now on the threshold of a substantial rise in prices, and that in
any case we should act as though we were.
Copies of Messrs. Goldenweiser's and Williams' statements have
been placed in the Committee's files.
There followed a general discussion of some of the problems cre
ated by the defense effort in the field of production, wages, and prices;
the possible effects of the war on our social and economic system; and
the importance of the powers of monetary control in the existing situa
tion.
This discussion was followed by a consideration of the instruc
tions to be issued to the executive committee with regard to transactions
in the System open market account and all of the members of the Committee
agreed that there had been no change in the situation which would re
quire a change in the form of the resolution adopted at the last meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following resolution, which
was in the same form as the resolution
adopted at the meeting of the Committee on
March 17, 1941, was adopted by unanimous
vote:

6/10/41
That the executive committee be directed until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee to ar
range for such transactions for the System open market
account (including purchases, sales, exchanges, replace
ment of maturing securities, and letting maturities run
off without replacement) as in its judgment from time to
time may be advisable in the light of existing conditions;
provided that the aggregate amount of securities held in
the account at the close of this date shall not be in
creased or decreased by more than $200,000,000.
Chairman Eccles referred to the request of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee at its last meeting that the executive committee have
studies made with respect to desirable changes in the present methods
of Treasury financing and that when a draft of program had been pre
pared the Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks be called to Washing
ton for the purpose of discussing it, with the understanding that, if a
program could be agreed upon, it would be presented to the Treasury for
consideration. He stated that, in accordance with that request, the
members of the executive committee, and members of the staff, of the
Federal Open Market Committee had discussed the matter informally, that
the discussions developed certain points of difference as to the sugges
tions that should be made, that the members of the executive committee
also had met with Messrs. Bell, Under Secretary of the Treasury, and
Haas, Director of the Division of Research and Statistics of the Treas
ury Department, and, while the Treasury representatives did not indicate
what the views of the Treasury might be as to possible changes in the
present methods of financing, they stated that the Treasury had given
consideration to the matter and would be glad to discuss it with

6/10/41 -7
representatives of the Committee at any time. It was understood,
Chairman Eccles said, that the representatives of the Federal Open
Market Committee would give further consideration to the matter and
if any suggestions were agreed upon another conference with representa
tives of the Treasury would be held.
Chairman Eccles made the further statement that several drafts
of a memorandum on the subject of methods of Treasury financing had
been prepared by Mr. Goldenweiser which had been discussed with Messrs.
Williams and Rouse, that a draft of memorandum had been sent to the
members of the executive committee under date of May 27, 1941, that the
memorandum had been subsequently revised by Mr. Goldenweiser, and that
Messrs. Williams and Rouse had sent to Mr. Goldenweiser a statement of
their views based on the memorandum of May 27. Chairman Eccles added
that the revised statement by Mr. Goldenweiser expressed in very gen
eral terms the views of the members of the Board of Governors, although
they had taken no action on it.
The latest revision of Mr. Goldenweiser's memorandum and the
statement by Messrs. Williams and Rouse were then read and copies of
both were distributed to those present.
Mr. Goldenweiser's memorandum, after reviewing the situation
which made it desirable to consider changes in the present methods of
Treasury financing, presented the following suggestions as a basis for
discussion:

6/10/41
"I. Tapping of idle funds
"Use of tap issues for reaching individual savings,
particularly in small and moderate amounts, has already
been adopted in the various forms of non-negotiable sav
ings bonds. It is suggested that consideration be given
to offering one or more additional non-negotiable issues
designed especially to obtain idle funds from corporations
and large individual investors - for example, a two-year
tap issue carrying a higher coupon for each semi-annual
period that the security is held, redeemable by the holders
on thirty days' advance notice.
"II. Short-term issues
"Bills and notes of the familiar types would continue
to be used for the purpose of compensating for possible
irregularities in the inflow of funds from long-term is
sues. One other type of issue that is now under consider
ation might be useful, namely, a certificate issued in
anticipation of taxes. Such a certificate would encourage
taxpayers to save funds in advance for their tax payments
and would diminish the lag between tax legislation and the
inflow of funds from additional taxation.
"III. Long-term issues
"For long-term issues the following suggestions are
presented:
1. That a definite rate be established for long
term Treasury offerings, with the understanding that it
is the policy of the Government not to advance this rate
during the emergency. The rate suggested is 2 1/2 per
cent. When the public is assured that the rate will not
rise, prospective investors will realize that there is
nothing to gain by waiting, and a flow into Government
securities of funds that have been and will become avail
able for investment may be confidently expected.
2. That the number and variety of new bond issues
be kept to the minimum and that securities be so planned
as to meet the requirements of different groups of investors,
such as insurance companies, other large corporations,
trusts, and small savers.
3. That the maturities on successive offerings of
new issues be so arranged as to command practically no
premiums in the market. This would greatly reduce over
subscriptions and speculation in new issues.
4. That there be no advance notice of the amount
that the Treasury wishes to raise at the time of an offer
ing. The Treasury would reserve the right to accept any

6/10/41
"part or all of any subscription. This would practically
do away with padding of subscriptions and oversubscriptions
and would eliminate any question of whether an issue is a
success.
5. That at least one long-term market issue for new
money be made available on tap at par plus accrued interest.
It could be kept open for a longer or shorter period and
could be closed when conditions favor such a course. A new
tap issue could then be offered whenever it becomes neces
sary. From the point of view of investors, tap offerings
have the advantage that funds may be invested at any time
without waiting for an issue date and from the point of
view of the Treasury that there is a more even flow of
money, with no pronounced concentration on certain dates.
6. That maturing issues be so handled as gradually
to eliminate practically all of the value of rights.
7. In order to assure the success of such a program,
an understanding should be reached between the Treasury
and the Federal Reserve System to do whatever may be neces
sary for the smooth operation of the financing, and for
reducing to minimum fluctuations in taxable United States
bonds. The authorities will have to stand ready to buy in
the market such portions of an issue as may be necessary
to carry out this policy. They may dispose of securities
so purchased when and if market conditions permit.
"Timing of steps in the program
"As to the timing of the different steps in putting
these proposals into effect, it is suggested that the pub
lic should be informed as soon as feasible of the Govern
ment's decision to finance the defense program at rates
not exceeding 2 1/2 per cent. The authorities could pro
ceed immediately toward stabilization of the market at around
this level. On the next Treasury bond offering the amount
of the premium on a new bond issue could be reduced from,
say, 1 1/4 points to perhaps 3/4 of a point. This would
give notice to holders of maturing issues that the rights'
value is to be materially reduced. On the next succeeding
issue, perhaps in September, which would presumably include
refunding of the December notes, it might be possible to
reduce the rights' value further or practically to eliminate
it altogether, and to price the new cash offering with
practically no premium. At the December issue the policy
of not announcing the desired amount might be inaugurated.
In the meantime, perhaps in August, a market issue could
be offered at tap, that is, be made available until further
notice at par and accrued interest."

6/10/41 -10
The statement submitted by Messrs. Williams and Rouse contained
a discussion of reasons for their belief that the program suggested in
Mr. Goldenweiser's memorandum should be regarded as a series of topics
for informal discussion with the Treasury rather than as a statement of
a program to be submitted to the Treasury, and that what was needed was
a series of meetings with the Treasury and if possible a standardized
procedure for regular conferences, at which consideration would be given
not only to the technique of Treasury financing but also to the entire
field of fiscal and monetary policy.
At 12:55 p.m. the meeting recessed and reconvened at 2:10 p.m.
with the same attendance as at the morning session and in addition
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the Chairman of the Board of Gov
ernors.
Mr. Sproul stated that the question raised by the memoranda
before the Committee was whether it should undertake to formulate a
definite plan for Treasury financing which would be submitted to the
Treasury in the form of a memorandum or whether the Committee should
seek an opportunity for a series of conferences with representatives
of the Treasury at which all of the points that might be suggested by
representatives of the System would be taken up, and that he was satis
fied that the best approach from the standpoint of the most satisfactory
solution of the problem would be the latter course.
Mr. Davis pointed out that the two memoranda expressed dif
ferences as to procedure rather than policy and inquired whether there

6/10/41 -11
were any differences of opinion other than those disclosed in the two
memoranda and whether, if the subject of continuing conferences with
the Treasury were agreed upon, there would be other differences which
would prevent the members of the executive committee from agreeing
upon the suggestions to be presented for discussion. Chairman Eccles
and Mr. Sproul responded that there were such differences and Chairman
Eccles said that in his opinion there would be no useful purpose of
discussing the matter with representatives of the Treasury unless the
Committee had a program to present as a statement of its views which
it wished to submit to the Treasury for the purpose of discussion.
In accordance with a suggestion by Mr. McKee, each of the
Presidents was then called upon to express his views. These state
ments indicated differences of opinion as to the procedure that should
be followed. The Presidents' comments and the intervening discussion
raised numerous questions particularly with respect to the need for
substantial changes in present methods of financing; whether, if a
change in procedure were desirable, it should be made at this time
when the Treasury was faced with the necessity of issuing large amounts
of new securities; the alternatives that might be available in addi
tion to those suggested in Mr. Goldenweiser's memorandum; what was
meant by a tap issue; whether the program contemplated the offering
of a tap issue and other issues at the same time and, if so, whether
this was practicable; the effect of a tap issue on the market and on

6/10/41 -12
outstanding issues; the desirability of a statement by the Treasury
as to the rate at which its long-term financing would be done; the
extent to which any commitment by the System to stabilize the market
should go; and whether it would be more desirable for the Treasury
to undertake the necessary stabilization operations or for the System
to accept responsibility for such operations either entirely or in
cooperation with the Treasury.
Toward the end of the Presidents' statements Mr. Alfred H.
Williams left the meeting.
Several of the Presidents suggested that the Federal Reserve
Banks could be of very material assistance to the Treasury in further
ing the savings bond campaign and, while there was some question whether
the Treasury would welcome an offer of such assistance because of its
position that the sale of savings bonds should be entirely voluntary,
the Presidents and members of the Board felt that the System is in posi
tion to give such assistance, and that an offer of help beyond the mere
handling and sale of the securities should be made to the Treasury.
Chairman Eccles suggested that the Presidents, in their separate
meeting tomorrow, give consideration to the desirability of formulating
a proposal for presentation to the Treasury under which the Federal
Reserve Banks would use their facilities in furthering the campaign,
and to the appointment of a committee to consider the matter further
with the Board and the Treasury.
In connection with this matter, Mr. Davis suggested that com-

6/10/41 -13
mercial banks be permitted to purchase Series F and G Savings Bonds
up to the limit of say $10,000 in any one year on the theory that this
would add a relatively small amount to bank deposits and would be in
the nature of compensation to the banks for services rendered in con
nection with the sale of savings bonds.
In a further discussion the suggestion was made that the whole
problem of Treasury financing be referred back to the executive commit
tee with the understanding that the committee would be free to discuss
the matter with representatives of the Treasury, and Mr. Davis suggested
that the executive committee be instructed to prepare a statement of
the points on which agreement of the members of the Board and the Pres
idents had been indicated as a starting point for further consideration.
At the conclusion of the discussion
of these suggestions, upon motion duly
made and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the whole matter was referred again to
the executive committee for further study.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.