A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Saturday, September 27, 1941, at 10:05 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Fleming
Mr. Leach
Mr. Davis
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Piser, Senior Economist in the Divi
sion of Research and Statistics of the
Board of Governors
Messrs. Roy A. Young, Alfred H. Williams,
C. S. Young, Leedy, and Gilbert, alternate
members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. McLarin and Day, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and San
Francisco, respectively
Mr. Clayton, Assistant to the Chairman
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman
Mr. Sienkiewicz, Secretary of the Presi
dents' Conference
Mr. Morrill stated that Mr. Leedy had been appointed and had
assumed his duties as President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas

9/27/41 -2
City, that in February of this year the Federal Reserve Banks of Min
neapolis, Kansas City, and San Francisco elected the President of the
Kansas City Bank, when appointed, as an alternate to Mr. Peyton as a
member of the Federal Open Market Committee, that a record had been
received of the election of Alfred H. Williams to serve as an alternate
to Mr. Fleming as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, and
that it was the opinion of counsel that Messrs. Williams and Leedy were
qualified to take the oath of office and assume their duties as alter
nate members of the Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on June 10, 1941, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee, as set forth in the
minutes of the meeting of the executive
committee on June 10, 1941, were approved,
ratified and confirmed.
Those present were then furnished with copies of a report pre
pared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York relating to the System
open market account and the Government security market. Mr. Rouse re
viewed the important points in the report and stated that there were
no transactions in the account since the last meeting of the Committee
so that the usual action with respect to the ratification of transac
tions in the account would not be necessary. He also stated that, in
connection with the October first reallocation of securities in the

9/27/41
System account, some study had been given to the earnings and expenses
of the Federal Reserve Banks for the current year and that from the
estimates that had been made it appeared that total expenses would ex
ceed earnings by approximately $500,000 which would be offset by profits
of $504,000 realized from sales from the System account during the
year.
Mr. Szymczak read a memorandum dated September 26, 1941, from
Mr. Smead with respect to the earnings and expenses of the Federal Re
serve Banks during 1941, which was in substantial agreement with the
comments made by Mr. Rouse, and Mr. Szymczak stated that the memorandum
would be checked and copies thereof furnished to the Presidents before
they left Washington. A copy of the memorandum has been placed in the
files of the Federal Open Market Committee. It was understood that
the question of the earnings and expenses of the Federal Reserve Banks
would receive consideration by the Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks in their separate conference which would be held following this
meeting.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
the report submitted by Mr. Rouse was
accepted and ordered filed.
Chairman Eccles stated that, before the reports of Messrs.
Goldenweiser and John H. Williams and the consideration of open market
policy, he would like to suggest that Mr. Ransom make a statement with
respect to the discussions at the Treasury relating to action on reserve

9/27/41 -4
requirements and the subject of Treasury financing.
Mr. Ransom reviewed the discussions which he and Mr. Golden
weiser had had with representatives of the Treasury which culminated
in action by the Board on September 23, 1941, to increase reserve re
quirements of member banks to the maximum of the Board's authority and
the issuance of a joint statement by Chairman Eccles and the Secretary
of the Treasury with respect to the granting of further authority over
bank reserves to the Board of Governors. Mr. Ransom concluded his state
ment with a suggestion that it would be helpful, in further discussions
which were to be had with the Treasury, if the Presidents would adopt
some statement with respect to the desirability of having a pattern of
rates for the financing of the defense program and which the monetary
authorities would support by such measures as might be necessary, in
cluding open market operations by the Federal Reserve System. A copy
of the substance of Mr. Ransom's statement has been placed in the files
of the Federal Open Market Committee.
In a discussion of what might be regarded as reasonable rates
at which Treasury financing could be done, Mr. Ransom referred to the
steady decline in rates that had occurred during recent years and stated
that he had expressed the opinion in the discussions with the Treasury
representatives that it was extremely important that a policy be adopted
which would put a floor under interest rates in order to prevent their
decline to a point which would bring disastrous results. He also said

9/27/41 -5
that he felt the question of the broader application of selective
credit controls should be faced and disposed of.
Mr. Sproul stated that it had been contemplated that before
final action was taken by the Board to increase reserve requirements
a meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Presidents of
Federal Reserve Banks would be held for the purpose of discussing the
matter with them, but that circumstances arose, including the appear
ance of the Secretary of the Treasury at hearings on the price control
bill, which made it necessary for the Board to take action on September
23.
Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams were then called upon for
statements with respect to the present business and credit situation.
Mr. Goldenweiser, after stating that copies of the review of
the month which would appear in the Federal Reserve Bulletin for Oc
tober and would contain a review of current developments in industry
and agriculture would be furnished to those present, referred briefly
to the developments which he said clearly indicated the existence of
an inflationary situation at the present time and the need for further
action to fight inflation.
He addressed the remainder of his remarks to some of the prob
lems arising in connection with Treasury financing. According to esti
mates now available, during the rest of this fiscal year and the fiscal
year 1943, the Treasury would have to borrow approximately $30,000,000,000
($13,500,000,000 in fiscal 1942 and $16,500,000,000 in fiscal 1943)

9/27/41 -6
and, if nothing more were done than was being done at present to sell
Government securities to others than banks, the banks would probably
take not less than $15,000,000,000 of this total. The expansion in
bank deposits that would take place, he said, raised acutely the ques
tion as to the desirability of further powers over reserve require
ments and as to the kind of financing that should be done by the Treas
ury. He stated that the heart of the problem was the rates of interest
at which the Treasury would borrow, that interest rates had declined
to a record low level, but that, in view of the growing demand for
funds by the Government and industry and the decrease in the supply
of funds due to growth of currency in excess of gold imports, there
would probably be no further decline, but a firming tendency. On the
other hand, there was no reason to expect a general or substantial
rise in rates.
He suggested that the alternative courses of action before
the System were: (1) To do nothing and let the market rise or fall
as it saw fit, which he thought was not a policy that should be seri
ously considered. (2) To continue the policy that had been pursued
during the last three or four years of attempting to maintain orderly
market conditions, which implied an underlying conception of a natural
market, a conception which he said did not accord with conditions as
they exist today. In his opinion the orderly market policy was about
as much out of line with reality now as discount rate policy had become
some years ago.

9/27/41 -7
(3) In the event additional powers were obtained, to proceed to tighten
credit controls to a point where excess reserves would almost entirely
disappear, a substantial number of banks would be short of funds, and
interest rates would be allowed to rise. Such a policy would have to
be on the theory that higher interest rates were cheap insurance against
inflation. In present circumstances this would not be a feasible pol
icy for the reason that it would increase the cost of Government bor
rowing without being effective in preventing price rises, and it could
not be carried out with the approval of other agencies of Government.
It would also raise serious problems about the decline in the capital
value of outstanding securities. (4) To adopt a policy under which
a pattern of interest rates would be agreed upon from time to time
and the System would be pledged to support that pattern for a definite
period. The pattern of rates would not need to provide for the same
range of fluctuation on all types of rates. It might limit fluctuations
on long-term rates to a narrow range, and permit intermediate and short
term rates to respond more freely to current market influences. This
appeared to him to be the wisest and most practicable policy at this
time.
He commented that the problem presented by the suggestion of
a pattern of rates was whether it was possible effectively to combat
inflation without having rates rise more substantially than would be
contemplated by the pattern, that there were differences of opinion

9/27/41 -8
on that point, but that he felt that rates probably would not go up
materially in view of the existence of a large volume of funds and the
growth of savings out of a rising income. The support that the System
might need to give to the market would not be, in his opinion, on a
scale that would offset such restrictive actions as the System might
want to take.
Mr. Goldenweiser then referred briefly to the preferential
rates established during the World War on the rediscount by Federal
Reserve Banks of paper secured by Government securities, and expressed
the opinion that in supporting a pattern of rates determined by the
System and the Treasury in the present situation the System would be
following the modern equivalent of that, and that the System would be
well advised if it took that course.
He made the further statement that in any case it was the pri
mary function of a central banking institution in time of war to con
tribute its major efforts toward meeting the needs of the Government,
and that in his opinion the responsibility of the System in the field
of credit control could be met, in so far as credit control could be
effective in combating inflation, without interfering with its ability
to stand by a pattern of rates agreed upon by the System and the Treas
ury.
At the conclusion of Mr. Goldenweiser's statement there were
distributed copies of the review of the month for the October Federal
Reserve Bulletin and memoranda dated September 26, 1941, from Miss

9/27/41 -9
Gunhild Anderson of the Division of Research and Statistics of the
Board of Governors on the estimated Treasury cash requirements for
the fiscal years 1942 and 1943, and by Mr. Piser on the estimated
distribution of the Government debt.
The meeting recessed and reconvened at 2:15 p.m. with the
same attendance as at the morning session, and in addition, Mr.
Thurston.
Mr. Williams expressed the opinion that the rise in industrial
production would be less rapid than during the past year, and that
there was some danger of unemployment resulting from a broad applica
tion of priorities, which indicated that the problem of fighting in
flation was not one of taking all forms of anti-inflationary action
that might be available, but rather a question of the determination
of the character and the timing of the action to be taken. He pointed
out that the System could attack the problem of inflation in only a
limited way, that there were other fronts over which the System had
no control, including agricultural prices and wages and on which little
headway was being made, and that it was not possible to adopt an ef
fective program which did not include effective policies with respect
to these matters.
He felt that the Administration's tax program was progressing
satisfactorily but that sufficient efforts had not been made to tap
non-bank funds for the purchase of Government securities, that a great

9/27/41 -10
deal more could be done in that field, that that was a point on which
the System in its further negotiations with the Treasury could press
for consideration as having a bearing on the System's responsibilities,
an, that before the System could adopt an intelligent program with re
spect to what, if any, further credit restriction was needed, it would
be necessary to ascertain to what extent Treasury needs could be met
from non-banking funds and to agree on a financing program which would
be attractive to non-banking investors.
In connection with references that had been made to what might
be regarded as an artificial market, Mr. Williams expressed the opinion
that it would be a mistake for the Federal Reserve System to create a
situation in the Government security market which would make it appear
that the market had to have continuous support as that eventually would
cast doubt upon the public credit. He stated that something short of
that should be considered, and that he felt that at this stage the Sys
tem should devote itself to a policy which would contemplate (1) full
cooperation with the Treasury in developing a program which would tap
non-banking funds to the fullest possible extent, (2) exploration with
the Treasury of the possibility of stabilizing interest rates, and (3)
a study of the changes that should be made in the basis for determining
reserve requirements, as the present was an excellent time to make such
fundamental changes as would contribute to the stability of the money
market.
On the question whether there should be a further reduction in

9/27/41 -11
excess reserves he felt that the important point was what the effect
would be on the Government security market, that if excess reserves
were going to be reduced in any event by currency withdrawals and an
increase in bank loans and investments the rate of interest could not
be expected to decline much further, that we could not avoid the con
clusion that further increases in reserve requirements would increase
interest rates and create a need for open market action that would
not otherwise exist, and that before any action in that direction was
taken we should examine the motives behind it.
Mr. Williams' statement was followed by a discussion of the
possible effects of the Board's recent action to increase reserve re
quirements, the further steps that might be taken in the field of credit
control, the place that selective credit controls might play in the
picture, and what the immediate future policy of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee might be.
Mr. Sproul stated that the immediate problem before the Com
mittee was what action was to be taken with respect to open market op
erations, that in his opinion there would be further reactions in the
market over the next few weeks to the increase in reserve requirements
which might necessitate some action by the Open Market Committee, but
that any transactions necessitated by that situation undoubtedly could
be handled under existing authorities. Mr. Sproul also stated that he
favored exploration with the Treasury of the possibility of determining
upon a pattern of rates, that the present might be a desirable time to

9/27/41 -12
undertake such a program, but that no commitment should be made by
the System to support such a pattern of rates without regard to what
might be the financing policies of the Treasury, and that any agreement
with respect to rates should be coupled with the adoption by the Treas
ury of a plan of financing designed to attract as many non-banking funds
as possible.
Mr. Ransom stated that any program agreed upon should not be in
the nature of an unconditional commitment by the System to maintain in
terest rates, but that it would not be possible to reach an agreement
on the matter with the Treasury without some commitment on the part of
the System that it would take action within its power to support the
pattern of rates agreed upon.
Mr. Sproul suggested that arrangements be made to have a repre
sentative member of the Federal Open Market Committee participate in the
further discussions with representatives of the Treasury, and there was
unanimous agreement that that should be done.
There followed a discussion of various questions involved in
the matters which were to be the subject of further consideration with
the Treasury and of Mr. Ransom's suggestion that a statement be agreed
upon with respect to a pattern of rates at which the financing of the
defense program would be undertaken and which the monetary authorities
would undertake to support by such measures within their power as might
be necessary. It was the consensus that this suggestion was a matter
which should be taken up at the meeting of the Presidents' Conference

9/27/41 -13
with the Board of Governors to be held tomorrow.
Consideration was then given to the authority to be granted
to the Executive Committee to direct the execution of transactions in
the System account and Mr. Sproul stated that, in his opinion, a renew
al of existing authorities would be adequate to meet any situation that
could be foreseen at the present time and that in the event further ac
tion became necessary another meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee should be called.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the following resolution,
which was in the same form as the reso
lution adopted at the meeting of the
Committee on June 10, 1941, was adopted
by unanimous vote:
That the executive committee be directed un
til otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market
Committee to arrange for such transactions for the
System open market account (including purchases,
sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing securi
ties, and letting maturities run off without re
placement) as in its judgment from time to time
may be advisable in the light of existing condi
tions; provided that the aggregate amount of se
curities held in the account at the close of this
date shall not be increased or decreased by more
than $200,000,000.
Mr. Morrill referred to the fact that under date of August 15,
1941, a letter was received from Under Secretary of the Treasury Bell
stating that there was being published in the monthly Treasury Bulletin
a tabulation showing the ownership, by issues, of direct and guaranteed
obligations of the United States, that in this tabulation the securities

9/27/41 -14-
held in the System account were included with securities held by in
vestors other than banks and insurance companies and Government agencies
and trust funds, and that authority was desired to include the System's
holdings with the holdings of Government agencies and trust funds under
the caption "Held by Government Agencies and Trust Funds and by Federal
Reserve Banks". After conferring with Mr. Rouse, and with the approval
of Chairman Eccles, Mr. Morrill sent a letter to Mr. Bell, on August
21, 1941, stating that there would be no objection to the publication
of these figures in the manner indicated, with the understanding that
separate figures showing the holdings of Government agencies and trust
funds would not be released in some other connection in such manner as
to make it possible by subtraction to determine the Federal Reserve
Banks' holdings of individual outstanding issues, and that it would be
preferable as long as the publication of the figures was continued in
the form proposed, to continue the lag of approximately two months
between the date as of which the figures were published and the release
of the Treasury Bulletin.
The action of Chairman Eccles in au
thorizing the letter to Mr. Bell was ap
proved and ratified by unanimous vote.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Chairman.