A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Monday, March 17, 1941, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Sproul
Mr. Fleming
Mr. Leach
Mr. Peyton
Mr. C. S. Young (alternate for Mr. Davis)
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
Mr. Piser, Senior Economist in the Divi
sion of Research and Statistics of
the Board of Governors
Messrs. Roy A. Young, Sinclair, and Gilbert,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee
Mr. Day, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco, and Messrs. McLarin, Hitt,
and Leedy, First Vice Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, St. Louis,
and Kansas City, respectively
Mr. Sienkiewicz, Secretary of the Presidents'
Conference
It was agreed that before taking up other business it would
be desirable to hear the reports of Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams

3/17/41 -2
as Economist and Associate Economist of the Committee.
After reviewing the existing business situation, Mr. Golden
weiser discussed the prospective upward trend of business activity
and the problems of credit control and suggested that consideration
should be given by the System to plans for selective credit controls,
particularly in the field of installment credit. He also referred to
an analysis prepared by the Board's staff of the reserve position of
member banks as of the week ending January 15, 1941, and said that
the analysis had led him to feel that any new powers to increase re
serve requirements for the purpose of absorbing excess reserves of
member banks should be under the so-called "ceiling plan" rather than
by specific percentage increases in reserve requirements which would
apply indiscriminately to all banks or to certain classes of banks.
He referred to the problem facing the Treasury in connection with fi
nancing the defense program and suggested that a System committee be
appointed to work out a plan for reducing the types of Government se
curities outstanding and simplifying financing procedure which could
be submitted to the Treasury with a plan for cooperation by the System
with the Treasury in financing the defense program.
Mr. Williams expressed the opinion that the more pressing
problems at the moment were shortages in certain materials which must
be met by action outside of the Federal Reserve System and the need
for a clarification of the fiscal program of the Treasury with an in
dication of the Treasury's financing needs over the next fifteen months,

3/17/1 -3
and that the policy of the System should be one of cooperating in
the solution of these problems and of letting it be known that it
did not contemplate action in the monetary field at this time.
Copies of the statements made by Messrs. Goldenweiser and
Williams have been placed in the Committee's files.
There ensued a discussion of several of the questions raised
by Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams and particularly of the problems
involved in financing the defense program and how the System could
cooperate in the solution of these problems. During this discussion
the suggestion was made that the executive committee of the Federal
Open Market Committee be asked to serve as the committee suggested by
Mr. Goldenweiser for the development of a plan of Government financ
ing for submission to the Treasury.
While the discussion was in progress Mr. Dreibelbis left the
meeting.
At 12:50 p.m. the meeting recessed and reconvened at 2:30 p.m.
with Messrs. Eccles, Szymczak, McKee, Ransom, Davis, Draper, Sproul,
Fleming, Leach, Peyton, C. S. Young, Morrill, Carpenter, Goldenweiser,
Williams, Wyatt, Dreibelbis, Rouse, and Thurston in attendance.
Mr. Morrill reported that records of the election of members
and alternate members of the Federal Open Market Committee represent
ing the Federal Reserve Banks for the year beginning March 1, 1941,
had been received in the office of the Secretary of the Committee,
that each newly elected member and alternate member had executed the

3/17/41 -4
required oath of office (with the exception of Mr. Davis, who had not
yet resigned as a member of the Board of Governors and assumed his
duties as President of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis), and
that it was the opinion of Counsel on the basis of the records of
election that had been received (1) that the following members and
alternate members were legally qualified to serve at the present time,
(2) that, upon assuming his duties as President of the Federal Re
serve Bank of St. Louis, Mr. Davis would be qualified to take the oath
of office and assume his duties as a representative member of the Com
mittee, and (3) that when the person to be appointed as President of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City assumed the duties of that of
fice he would be qualified to take the oath of office and assume his
duties as an alternate for Mr. Peyton:
Allan Sproul, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, with Roy A. Young, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston, as alternate member;
M. J. Fleming, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Cleveland, with John S. Sinclair, President of the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, as alternate member;
Hugh Leach, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond, with R. R. Gilbert, President of the Federal Re
serve Bank of Dallas, as alternate member;
C. S. Young, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, as alternate for Mr. Davis; and
John N. Peyton, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
the following officers of the Federal Open
Market Committee were elected by unanimous
votes to serve until the election of their
successors at the first meeting of the
Committee after March 1, 1942:

3/17/41 -5-
Marriner S. Eccles, Chairman
Allan Sproul, Vice Chairman
S. R. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
E. A. Goldenweiser, Economist
John H. Williams, Associate Economist
Walter yatt, General Counsel
J. P. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the Committee selected
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to ex
ecute transactions for the System open mar
ket account until the adjournment of the
first meeting of the Committee after March
1, 1942.
Mr. Sproul stated that the board of directors of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York had selected R. G. Rouse as Manager of the
System open market account, subject to the New York Bank being se
lected as the Bank to execute transactions for the System open market
account and to his approval by the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the selection of
Mr. Rouse as Manager of the System account
was approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the following were
selected to serve with the Chairman of the
Federal Open Market Committee (who, under
the provisions of the bylaws, is also chair
man of the executive committee) as members and
alternate members of the executive committee
until the selection of their successors at the
first meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee after March 1, 1942:
Members Alternate Members
Ronald Ransom Ernest G. Draper

3/17/41 -6
Members: (Continued) Alternate Members
John K. McKee M. S. Szymczak
Allan Sproul (To serve in the order
Hugh Leach named as alternates
for Messrs. Eccles,
Ransom, and McKee)
M. J. Fleming
John N. Peyton
(To serve in the order
named as alternates
for Messrs. Sproul and
Leach)
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on December 18, 1940, were ap
proved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the min
utes of the meeting of the executive com
mittee on December 18, 1940, were ap
proved, ratified, and confirmed.
During the meeting Mr. Rouse distributed copies of a report
of open market operations prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York covering the period from December 17, 1940, to March 15, 1941,
inclusive, and at this point he reviewed the principal features of
the report.
During Mr. Rouse's statement Mr. Piser, Senior Economist in
the Division of Research and Statistics of the Board of Governors, en
tered the room.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions

3/17/41 -7-
in the System open market account for the
period from December 17, 1940, to March 15,
1941, inclusive, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
There ensued a discussion of the instructions to be issued
to the executive committee with respect to transactions in the System
open market account and there was agreement that there was no occa
sion at this time for a change in the form of resolution adopted at
the last meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. Mr. Sproul
raised the question whether, in view of the possible emergencies that
might develop before another meeting of the Committee is held, the
limit of 200,000,000 contained in the resolution on increases or de
creases in the amount of securities held in the account should be in
creased. It was agreed, however, that if it should appear likely that
occasion would arise for the purchase or sale of securities for the
System account beyond the limit fixed by the resolution, another meet
ing of the Federal Open Market Committee should be called.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following resolution, which
was in the same form as the resolution
adopted at the meeting of the Committee on
December 18, 1940, was adopted by unanimous
vote:
That the executive committee be directed until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Com
mittee to arrange for such transactions for the Sys
tem open market account (including purchases, sales,
exchanges, replacement of maturing securities, and
letting maturities run off without replacement) as
in its judgment from time to time may be advisable
in the light of existing conditions; provided that

3/17/41
the aggregate amount of securities held in the
account at the close of this date shall not be
increased or decreased by more than $200,000,000.
Mr. Morrill stated that under date of December 16, 1940, a
request was received from the Treasury Department for authority (1)
to publish in the annual report of the Secretary of the Treasury
schedules of the holdings of the Federal Reserve Banks as of June 30,
1940, which would show separately the holdings of direct and guaran
teed obligations, and (2) to continue to publish in a table in the
Treasury monthly bulletin the amount of direct obligations held by
the Federal Reserve Banks as well as the holdings of guaranteed obli
gations, the latter being grouped with similar holdings of Government
trust funds and agencies. The request of the Treasury, Mr. Morrill
said, was taken up with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and un
der date of December 23, 1940, a letter was received from Mr. Rouse
in which it was stated that it would appear desirable to authorize
the Treasury to publish the information in the Secretary's annual re
port but that the question of the publication of separate figures on
direct and guaranteed obligations in the Treasury's monthly bulletin
was of a somewhat different nature in that it supplied the market with
recent information not otherwise available, and that, while at the
present time it was not of importance, conditions could be visualized
in which it might not be desirable to have the information available
so quickly. Mr. Rouse's letter suggested that the Treasury be allowed
to use the figures in the monthly bulletin provided the amount of

3/17/41 -9
direct obligations be omitted from the bulletin table as a separate
item and lumped with those of "other holders" or those of Government
agencies and trust funds in the same manner as guaranteed obligations
were shown. Inasmuch as the annual report of the Secretary of the
Treasury was ready to go to the press when the matter came up the
question was presented to Chairman Eccles, as Chairman of the Federal
Open Market Committee, who authorized the Secretary's office to advise
the Treasury that no objection would be made to the publication of the
information in the annual report of the Secretary of the Treasury.
Mr. Rouse stated that the question involved was one of prin
ciple whether the Committee wished to authorize the Treasury to pub
lish information with respect to the System account before it was
published by the Federal Reserve System itself, that the matter was
of no particular importance at this time because of the small amount
of holdings of guaranteed obligations, but that if at any time there
should be a considerable volume of transactions involving guaranteed
issues and information with respect to these transactions were cur
rently released it might have an undesirable effect on the market and
the information might be taken advantage of by speculators.
In the discussion which ensued, Mr.
McKee moved that the action taken by Chair
man Eccles in this matter be ratified, that
the Committee recommend to the Board of
Governors that separate figures with respect
to direct and guaranteed holdings of the
Federal Reserve Banks be shown in the weekly
statements of condition of Federal Reserve
Banks published by the Board and in the

3/17/41
-10-
Federal Reserve Bulletin, and that the
Treasury be advised that no objection would
be made to the publication in the Treasury
monthly bulletin of data with respect to
direct and guaranteed holdings of the Fed
eral Reserve Banks in the manner in which
they were shown in the table on page 17
of the January 1941 Treasury bulletin.
During the discussion of Mr. McKee's motion, Mr. Sproul sug
gested that the publication by the Federal Reserve System of separate
figures with respect to direct and guaranteed holdings of the Federal
Reserve Banks be in the Federal Reserve Bulletin and not in the weekly
statement of condition of Federal Reserve Banks for the reason that
if publication in the latter form were adopted it would be difficult,
if not impossible, to discontinue the weekly publication of the fig
ures and it might be found, should it become necessary again to carry
out substantial operations in guaranteed obligations, that current
publication of such information would be undesirable.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
Mr. McKee's motion, which was duly seconded,
was adopted by unanimous vote.
At this point Messrs. Roy A. Young, Sinclair, Gilbert, Day,
McLarin, Hitt, Leedy, and Sienkiewicz reentered the room and Mr.
Rouse reviewed for their information the conditions in the Government
security market during the recent period.
Chairman Eccles suggested for discussion the question of the
place of the Federal Reserve System as a central banking system in
the existing situation, particularly in view of the lack of adequate

3/17/41 -11
authority in the System to control the credit situation. He also
suggested that consideration should be given to the part that the
System should play in assisting the Treasury in regard to the financ
ing operations of the Government.
There followed a discussion of the questions raised by Chair
man Eccles and of changes that might be made in the procedure for
issuing Government securities. Chairman Eccles suggested that the
executive committee be requested to have some preliminary studies
prepared which could be presented to, and discussed with, the Presi
dents of all Federal Reserve Banks before taking the matter up with
the Treasury.
Mr. McKee suggested a review of the available information as
to the financing procedure followed during the last war.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
Mr. Sproul moved that the executive commit
tee have studies prepared along the lines
suggested during the discussion and that,
when a draft of program had been prepared,
the Presidents be called to Washington for
the purpose of discussing the program with
the understanding that, if a program could
be agreed upon, it would be presented to the
Treasury for consideration.
Mr. Sproul's motion, having been duly
seconded, was put by the Chair and carried
unanimously.
Mr. Fleming suggested that if possible, copies of the draft
of program prepared for discussion with the Presidents be sent to them
before a meeting is called so that they will have an opportunity to
study it.

3/17/41 -12
In a further discussion, the suggestion was made by Mr. Davis
that the program prepared by the executive committee should be formu
lated in the light of the entire economic situation rather than on
the narrower basis of the problems immediately connected with Govern
ment financing.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.