A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
iWn ashington on Friday, December 12, 1941, at 10:40 a.m.
PRSENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Fleming
Mr. Leach
Mr. Davis
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Piser, Senior Economist in the
Division of Research and Statistics
of the Board of Governors
Mr. Clayton, Assistant to Chairman Eccles
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on September 27, 1941, were ap
proved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the
minutes of the meetings of the executive
committee on September 27 and November
24, 1941, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Reference was made to the informal
action of the members of the Federal Open
Market Committee on December 8, 1941, fol
lowing the outbreak of war with Japan, in

12/12/41 -2
increasing to $400,000,000 the limit on
the authority granted to the executive com
mittee to arrange for such transactions
for the System account as in its judgment
from time to time might be advisable in
the light of existing conditions, and up
on motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, this action on the part
of the members of the Committee was ap
proved, ratified, and confirmed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System account during the period
from September 27 to December 11, 1941,
both dates inclusive, as reported by Mr.
Sproul at the meeting of the executive
committee which immediately preceded
this meeting, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
Statements were then made by Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams
with respect to certain aspects of the business and monetary picture
which they felt the Committee should have in mind and summaries of
these statements have been placed in the files of the Federal Open
Market Committee.
Following these statements, there was a discussion of the
kinds, degrees, and causes of inflation; possible conditions follow
in the war; and the kinds of controls that might be applied during
and after the war period. Mr. Davis made a brief statement of his
reasons for not feeling that there would be a general food shortage
but that it might be necessary to apply controls to agricultural
prices, and Chairman Eccles referred to some of the matters that had
been discussed in conferences which he had attended with other Government

12/12/41 -3
officials in connection with the Government's tax program. There
was general concurrence in the suggestion that, in order adequately
to meet the problems that would arise during the war period, it was
highly desirable that a general economic program be developed under
which all elements of the situation could be integrated effectively.
At 12:50 p.m. the meeting recessed and reconvened at 2:20
p.m. with the same attendance as at the morning session except that
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to Chairman Eccles, was in attend
ance.
Reference was made to the discussion had by members of the
Board of Governors yesterday with Mr. Bell, Under Secretary of the
Treasury, on the question which had been raised at the Treasury whether
something should be done about issues of Government securities which
were out of line in the market in relation to the two new issues which
were being purchased by the System at par, and to the understanding
had at that time that Mr. Bell might attend the meeting of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee today for the purpose of expressing any
views that he might wish the Committee to consider. Chairman Eccles
talked to Mr. Bell on the telephone and the latter advised that sev
eral matters had come up which made it inadvisable for him to be away
from his desk today.
In response to a request from Chairman Eccles that Mr. Sproul
discuss what he felt should be the future open market policy of the

12/12/41 -4
System in relation to Treasury financing, the latter stated that the
Treasury and the System are in a better position now, from the stand
point of the rate structure and the national situation, to establish
a pattern of rates which the Federal Reserve System would undertake
to maintain within a range that would be fair to the Treasury as to
the cost of funds and would provide a living return to banks and in
vestment institutions. He pointed out that the attitude of the Open
Market Committee had been that a 30-year bond at 2-1/2 per cent was
perhaps a maturity which placed on the market the burden of taking
risks which it should not be asked to take, and that the pattern of
rates eventually adopted, while retaining the long-term 2-1/2 per cent
rate, should have a shorter maturity, possibly 20-25 years. He felt
that unless the market again moved upward substantially the System and
the Treasury were in a position where such a pattern of rates could be
established without serious dislocation in the market, that if such a
pattern were established the new issue of 67-72s would sell above 98
which would not be serious from the standpoint of Treasury financing
or the banks, and that, therefore, the present was an appropriate time
for the Committee to go back to the Treasury with its suggestion re
lating to the establishment of a pattern of rates. With such a pattern,
he said, the Committee could watch with equanimity the further decline
in excess reserves, being prepared through open market operations or bor
rowing by member banks to maintain an easy position so that the banking
system would be in a position at all times to take whatever Government

12/12/41 -5
securities might be necessary at a reasonable rate. He added that
such a situation would be possible without the existing volume of
excess reserves if it were clearly understood that the System intended
to maintain an easy position and if the respectability of borrowing
from the Reserve Banks were restored.
Mr. McKee raised the question whether, because of the psycho
logical effect on the public, the Committee should permit quotations
on Government securities to fall below par, and there ensued a dis
cussion of whether the new 67-72s should be maintained at par, which
would require that future long-term 2-1/2 per cent issues have a
maturity of 20-25 years in order to give them the necessary premium
in the market, or whether the pattern of rates should be based on a
15-20 year maturity which might result in the new 67-72 falling below
par. In this connection it was agreed that if an adjustment downward
were made in the rate it should be made very clear to the market that
it was in the nature of a fundamental adjustment and one that would
establish rates to be maintained during the war period.
Mr. Draper expressed the opinion that regardless of the tech
nical necessities of the situation it would be a serious mistake for
the country to begin its war financing program by allowing long-term
Government bonds to sell at a discount and that, therefore, the
1967-72s should be supported at not less than par to the seller for
as long a period of time as this policy would be effective.

12/12/41
Mr. Peyton inquired whether the Committee was satisfied that a
pattern of rates could be determined upon at this time which could be
maintained throughout the emergency and there was general agreement that,
if the Committee and the Treasury could agree upon a program and that
program were carried out, a pattern of rates could be decided upon and
maintained and that the basic question was at what point the rates and
maturities would be fixed.
The discussion indicated a difference of opinion on the part
of the members of the Committee whether, if an adjustment in rate were
made, it should be to a 2-1/2 per cent bond with a 20-25 year or a
15-20 year maturity. The suggestion was made that a downward adjust
ment might necessitate the retirement from the market of the new
67-72s and 51-55s and it was felt by some of the members present that
this could be accomplished either by refunding the issue into another
security or by the purchase of the issue by the Federal Reserve Banks
and the Treasury.
In response to the question whether the Treasury would agree
to a downward adjustment in rates, Chairman Eccles stated that if it
should be decided to maintain the present rates the Committee should
propose to the Treasury that in the future as few long-term issues as
possible be put on the market, that short-term securities be designed
for banks to the extent that it was necessary to depend on the banks
to finance the Government's needs, and that other nonmarket issues

12/12/41 -7-
be put out to tap savings funds.
Mr. Williams suggested that the problem should also be con
sidered in the light of the effect of the pattern of rates on the
excess reserve position and that the higher the level of rates the
easier it would be to maintain a low level of excess reserves.
Mr. Sproul raised the question as to what would be best for
the market and suggested that the market reaction would be better if
the 67-72s were allowed to go below par and future new long-term
issues carried a correspondingly shorter maturity.
At the conclusion of the discussion Chairman Eccles suggested
that the Treasury be advised that it was felt by the Federal Open
Market Committee that there were two alternatives that might be adopted,
the first of which would contemplate that the 67-72s would be held at
par which would make it necessary that future long-term issues have
a maturity somewhere in the neighborhood of 20-25 years in order to
provide the premium necessary to sell the securities in the market,
in which case the Committee would feel that a program should be
adopted which would permit of financing with more specialized issues
such as short-term securities designed for banks and a tap issue de
signed to reach savings funds. Under the second alternative, Chairman
Eccles said, the 67-72s would be allowed to go below par to a point,
probably not less than 98, where future issues of 2-1/2 per cent bonds
would carry a maturity of 15-20 years, the market would be depended

12/12/41 -8
on generally to take these issues, and less emphasis would be placed
or. the specialized issues suggested in the first alternative.
During the discussion of Chairman Eccles' suggestion there
was unanimous agreement that, regardless of the basis finally adopted,
before a pattern of rates could be agreed upon it would be necessary
for the Treasury to decide upon a general program to be followed in
connection with future Treasury financing.
It was agreed unanimously that Chair
man Eccles would advise Mr. Bell that the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Comrittee would like to have a meet
ing with him sometime next week for the
purpose of discussing problems relating to
Treasury financing and the Government securi
ties market which were considered by the
Federal Open Market Committee at its meet
ing today.
Mr. Sproul suggested that, in view of the continued uncer
tainty in the market and the possibility that the System might be
called upon to buy further substantial amc.mts of Government securi
ties, it would be desirable to increase to $500,000,000 the limit in
the resolution of authority to the executive committee to direct the
purchase or sale of securities in the System account, with the under
standing that if it should appear that authority was needed beyond
that amount another meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee would
be called.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the fol
lowing resolution was adopted:

12/12/41 -9-
That the executive committee be directed
until otherwise directed by the Federal Open
Market Committee to arrange for such trans
actions for the System open market account
(including purchases, sales, exchanges, re
placement of maturing securities, and letting
maturities run off without replacement) as in
its judgment from time to time may be advis
able in the light of existing conditions;
provided that the aggregate amount of securi
ties held in the account at the close of this
date shall not be increased or decreased by
more than $500,000,000.
In connection with the adoption
of the above resolution, Chairman Eccles
stated that the Treasury had advised
that it stood ready to resell the securi
ties which had been purchased this week
for its account whenever the market was
ready to take them, and the action of
the Committee in adopting the resolu
tion was taken with the unanimous under
standing that, when the market recovered
and conditions justified, the System
would participate equally with the Treas
ury in the resale of the bonds purchased
during the current week and that the
System's holdings of bills would also be
disposed of.
Mr. McKee referred to the meeting of Treasury and Federal Re
serve representatives which had been called by the Secretary of the
Treasury in Chicago on Tuesday, December 16, 1941, for the purpose of
considering methods that might be adopted to increase the sale of de
fense bonds and stated that arrangements were being made to have Mr.
Bethea, the Board's liaison officer with the Treasury in connection
with the defense bond campaign, attend that meeting. Mr. Sproul said
that, as Chairman of the Defense Savings Bond Committee of the Presidents'

12/12/41 -10
Conference, he had asked Mr. Young, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago, to attend the meeting as a representative of the
Presidents' Conference and suggested that Mr. Peyton, because of the
special experience which he had had with the campaign in his district,
might also be present. Mr. Peyton said that he would be glad to at
tend.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary
Approved:
Chairman.