A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Monday, June 22, 1942, at 10:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Alfred H. Williams
Mr. Gilbert
Mr. Young
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. John H. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open Mar
ket Account
Mr. Piser, Chief, Government Securities
Section, Division of Research and Sta
tistics of the Board of Governors
Mr. Berntson, Clerk in the Office of the
Secretary of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Paddock, Fleming, McLarin, Davis, and
Day, alternate members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Leach and Peyton, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and Min
neapolis, respectively
Mr. Clayton, Assistant to the Chairman of the
Board of Governors
Mr. Smead, Chief of the Division of Bank
Operations of the Board of Governors
Mr. Sienkiewicz, Secretary of the Presidents'
Conference

6/22/42 -2
Mr. Edmiston, Assistant Vice President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
May 8, 1942, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the execu
tive committee of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee as set forth in the minutes of the
meeting of the executive committee held on
May 8, 1942, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account during the period from May 8
to June 20, 1942, inclusive, as reported by
Mr. Rouse at the meeting of the executive com
mittee immediately preceding this meeting, at
which all members of the Federal Open Market
Committee were present, were approved, rati
fied, and confirmed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the purchase by the New
York Bank as of June 16, 1942, of the special
Treasury certificate of indebtedness in the
amount of 58,000,000 and the handling for
the System account, in the manner outlined
by Mr. Rouse at the meeting of the executive
committee, of the special certificates sub
sequently purchased were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
Chairman Eccles stated that, since the last meeting of the Com
mittee, members of the executive committee and of the staff had had
several discussions and telephone conversations with representatives
of the Treasury relating to Treasury financing, that an informal ar
rangement had been made under which members of the executive committee

6/22/42 -3
meet usually every two weeks with Mr. Bell and members of the Treasury
staff for the purpose of discussing problems relating to Treasury fi
nancing, and that in accordance with this arrangement it was contemplated
that another conference would be held on Tuesday, June 23, 1942, at 3:00
p.m.
Chairman Eccles then reviewed briefly the important problems
relating to Treasury financing which had been considered with the Treas
ury since the last meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. He
stated that, because of the success of the May financing and the very
substantial increase in the amount of tenders for Treasury bills result
ing from the efforts of the Federal Reserve Banks, the pressure for a
reduction in reserve requirements of member banks had been greatly re
lieved. He also said that in one of the recent conferences the position
had been taken by the Federal Reserve representatives that there should
be further increases in the weekly offerings of Treasury bills to a
point where some of the bills purchased would be offered to the Federal
Reserve Banks by holders, and that as a result of discussions at the
conference Secretary Morgenthau indicated that the weekly offering of
bills would be increased by an additional $50,000,000 beginning July 1,
1942. He added that it was felt that this method of supplying reserves
to the market gradually as they were needed was much to be preferred
to an over-all reduction in reserve requirements, which would increase
excess reserves by a large amount, with possible disturbing effects on
short-term rates. If the bill which would give the Board authority to

6/22/42 -4
reduce reserve requirements for banks in central reserve cities were
passed, Chairman Eccles said, it might be found desirable to reduce
requirements at those points gradually as a means of supplying needed
reserves without taking action looking toward a general reduction in
reserve requirements.
Chairman Eccles made the further statement that in all of the
conferences with the Treasury members of the executive committee had
urged that everything possible be done to devise issues of securities
which would be taken by nonbank investors, and thereby reduce the a
mount of Government financing that would have to be done through the
banks. In this connection, he suggested that it would be helpful if
the Presidents' Conference, in its separate session tomorrow, would
adopt a statement for submission to the Treasury recommending that
types of securities be designed that could be used effectively in
reaching the different kinds of funds available, other than bank funds,
for investment in Government securities, and that responsibility be
placed upon the Victory Fund Committees to see that these securities
were sold. He said that these Committees could be fully effective
only if they were given an opportunity to sell securities of a type or
types which would attract the maximum amount of funds from outside the
banking system, and that it was his feeling that if this were done it
might be possible for the Treasury to raise as much as $1,000,000,000
a month through the medium of these issues. He felt that it would be
extremely helpful if a determination could be made of the maximum

6/22/42 -5
amount of funds that it would be possible to get outside the banks so
that the extent to which the banks would have to be relied on could
be ascertained and decisions reached on that basis on questions of
policy with respect to open market operations and changes in reserve
requirements.
In a statement by Mr. Sproul supplementing Chairman Eccles'
comments, he referred to the attitude of the bankers with whom the
Treasury had consulted that it would be unwise to increase the number
of nonmarket issues, and this point was discussed. He also stressed
the fact that the present situation was one in which the Federal Open
Market Committee could not do anything more than was being done until
the remaining major problems relating to a Treasury financing program
had been decided by the Treasury, which would furnish a basis upon
which System open market policy could be determined. He added that,
with this in mind, he sent to Chairman Eccles under date of June 19 a
list of questions which he felt should be discussed with the Treasury
and which would indicate to the Presidents the questions that he
thought should be decided from the standpoint of a financing program.
Messrs. Goldenweiser and John H. Williams were then called upon
for statements, and they discussed some of the effects of the war on
the economy and the problems of war financing during and following the
war period. Summaries of their comments have been placed in the files
of the Federal Open Market Committee.

6/22/42 -6
In the discussion which ensued, there was agreement upon the
position that, from the standpoint of credit control, it was highly
desirable during the war period to sell securities as far as possible
outside the banks so as to avoid the creation of an unnecessarily large
volume of additional deposit funds and a resulting reserve situation
over which the Federal Reserve System would have no effective power of
control in the period following the war when the pressure for relaxa
tion of direct methods of control would be very strong.
At the conclusion of the discussion, Chairman Eccles suggested
that while the Presidents were in Washington there be a discussion of
the list of questions which had been suggested by Mr. Sproul for con
sideration with the Treasury, so that the members of the executive com
mittee would have the benefit of the views of the Presidents in their
conferences with the Treasury representatives.
Mr. Sproul proposed that, inasmuch as further developments in
System open market policy were dependent upon decisions by the Treasury
in connection with the financing program, consideration be given at
this point to the instructions to be issued by the Federal Open Market
Committee to the executive committee, after which the views of the
Presidents could be obtained on the matters to be discussed with the
Treasury representatives in future conferences.
The suggestion was made that the resolution adopted by the
full Committee should include language expressly authorizing such
transactions in the System account as might be necessary in the prac
tical administration of the account. In addition, Mr. Wyatt suggested

6/22/42 -7-
that, in order that the language of the resolution might clearly cover
the purchase of special short-term certificates of indebtedness to pre
vent Treasury overdrafts, the resolution should expressly authorize
transactions for the purpose of granting temporary accommodation to the
Treasury.
There was unanimous agreement that both
of these changes in the resolution should be
made, and, upon motion duly made and seconded,
the following resolution was adopted by unani
mous vote:
That the executive committee be directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to ar
range for such transactions for the System open market account,
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury (in
cluding purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing
securities, and letting maturities run off without replacement),
as may be necessary in the practical administration of the ac
count, or for the purpose of maintaining about the present gen
eral level of prices and yields of Government securities, or
for the purpose of maintaining an adequate supply of funds in
the market, or for the purpose of granting temporary accommoda
tion to the Treasury; provided that the aggregate amount of
securities held in the account at the close of this date
(other than Treasury bills purchased pursuant to the direction
of the Federal Open Market Committee issued under date of
April 30, 1942) shall not be increased or decreased by more
than $500,000,000.
The meeting then recessed and reconvened at 2:15 p.m. for the
purpose of considering the list of topics submitted by Mr. Sproul for
discussion with representatives of the Treasury. The attendance was
the same as at the morning session except that Messrs. Dreibelbis,
Clayton, Smead, and Berntson were not present.
At the beginning of the discussion, Chairman Eccles stated that
it was assumed that there was no difference of opinion on the part of

6/22/42 -8
the members of the Board and the Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks that a reduction in reserve requirements should be avoided as
long as possible and that a program of Government financing should be
devised which would result in as much of the necessary financing as
porsible being done outside the banks. No disagreement with Chairman
Eccles' statement was indicated.
There was a discussion of a question raised by Mr. Peyton as
to the amount of additional funds that could be attracted into bills
by a slightly higher rate. Mr. McLarin suggested that consideration
be given to an arrangement under which the investor could purchase
bills at a fixed rate up to a certain amount and could bid for any
bills desired in excess of that amount.
At Chairman Eccles' request, a memorandum prepared by Mr.
Piser under date of March 19, 1942, on the subject of Canadian financ
ing was read. Chairman Eccles stated that the memorandum indicated
that Canada was doing a very much better job in financing its require
ments outside the banks than was being done in this country.
On the question of the amount of bills and certificates of in
debtedness that might be issued by the Treasury, Mr. Sproul suggested
that the Treasury could very well gradually increase its bill offerings
to $400,000,000 weekly and could offer certificates of indebtedness in
the amount of $1,500,000,000 or $2,000,000,000 each quarter, which would
result in a total of between $11,000,000,000 and $13,000,000,000 of
short-term obligations outstanding. He also expressed the opinion that

6/22/42 -9
this volume of short-term securities would be well within the capacity
of the market to absorb and would be desirable in the light of the
volume of financing to be done, even if it were necessary to increase
the rate on bills to 1/2 per cent to reach that volume. In response
to an inquiry, he stated that he felt the Treasury should adopt a
fixed rate and a fixed maturity on the certificates of indebtedness,
and that, if the bill rate were 1/2 per cent, he would consider a rate
of 5/8 per cent for a six months' certificate or 3/4 per cent for a
nine months' certificate as desirable. In the discussion of Mr.
Sproul's suggestion, it was pointed out that if a short-term open-end
issue were offered it might not be necessary to have as large a volume
of bills and certificates outstanding as otherwise might be the case.
Mr. Ransom doubted the wisdom of raising with the Treasury at
this time the question of an increase in short-term rates. Mr. Sproul
suggested that the System representatives could not advocate an increase
in the volume of outstanding short-term securities without taking the
position that they would approve some increase in rate if it should
develop that that was necessary. The point was made in this connection,
however, that assurance should be given that, if the rate on bills were
increased, bills purchased before the increase could be sold to the Fed
eral Reserve Banks at the discount rate of 3/8 per cent as long as they
were outstanding. There was unanimous agreement that any change in the
rate at which the Federal Reserve Banks should stand ready to buy bills
should not affect the buying rate already established as to bills out
standing at the time of the change.

6/22/42 -10
Mr. Ransom suggested that consideration be given to the pos
sibility of maintaining present rates for the duration of the war.
The discussion did not develop an agreement on this point.
At Chairman Eccles' request, copies of a memorandum prepared
by Mr. Kennedy of the Board's staff on the subject of distribution of
Treasury bills were handed to the Presidents at this point. Mr.
Goldenweiser referred to a chart showing the decline in recent years
in the proportion of short-term Government securities to the total out
standing direct debt and suggested that there was ample justification
for increasing the proportion of such securities.
With respect to proposals to increase to $5,000 the amount of
Series A tax anticipation notes which could be purchased in any one
calendar year and to increase the rate of interest paid on Series B
tax anticipation notes to .60 per cent, it was agreed that the in
crease in the limit on the Series A notes might be recommended to the
Treasury and the suggestion made that consideration be given to in
creasing the rate on the Series B notes at the proper time.
There was a discussion of whether the short-term open-end
registered issue which had been suggested to the Treasury should be
made available to banks as a means of meeting the objection that the
banks were the best customers of the Treasury, that they were denied
the opportunity of subscribing for riskless issues offered by the
Treasury, and that they could buy only market issues on which they
assumed market risks. There was general agreement that the short
term open-end issue was desirable, that the executive committee

6/22/42 -11
should continue to urge its use, and that as a means of making the is
sue more attractive it should be made eligible as collateral for bor
rowing from banks.
Chairman Eccles stated that it was contemplated that the Treas
ury would be faced with the necessity of doing about $4,000,000,000 of
new financing in July and August in addition to savings bonds and tax
anticipation notes. He said that it was expected that the 2-1/2 per
cent registered bond would be reopened and the weekly offering of bills
increased, but that there would still be approximately $3,000,000,000
which would have to be financed by market issues, and that he was of
the opinion that, if the short-term open-end issue were offered and
the Victory Fund Committees given the responsibility for selling it,
as much as $1,500,000,000 or $2,000,000,000 could be reached by that
means. He inquired whether the Presidents thought the Victory Fund
Committees could sell as much as $1,500,000,000 of the short-term is
sue. Some of the Presidents replied in the affirmative while others
felt they had no basis for estimating the amount which might be sold.
They also expressed the opinion that it was important that the Victory
Fund Committees be given something specific to do, and the suggestion
was made that the Presidents' Conference, in its separate session to
morrow, adopt a statement to that effect which could be transmitted
to the Treasury. Mr. Davis suggested that since Messrs. Sproul and
Alfred H. Williams had participated in the conferences with the Treas
ury they undertake the preparation of a draft of such a statement for
consideration by the Presidents' Conference.

6/22/42 -12
In connection with a discussion of the desirability of split
offerings and serial issues, Mr. Davis inquired whether the Board had
made an analysis of the latter. Chairman Eccles stated that Mr. Piser
discussed this proposal in a memorandum dated May 27, 1942, and copies
of the memorandum were distributed to the Presidents during the meet
ing. It appeared to be the sense of the meeting that, because of the
difficulty of pricing split offerings, they should be avoided as much
as possible and that the objections to serial issues outweighed the
advantages they might have.
Question was raised whether the 2-1/2 per cent registered is
sue should be reopened in connection with the forthcoming financing in
July and August. The opinion appeared to be that this was desirable
and that the announcement of such offering should be made before July 6
when the 60-day period during which the outstanding issue could not be
traded would expire, so that trading in the issue would not begin at a
premium which would be eliminated if the reopening of the issue were
subsequently announced. Mr. Sproul suggested that the issue might be
kept open for a considerable time and that it should be made eligible
for use in payment of estate and inheritance taxes. This suggestion
appeared to be concurred in by the Presidents.
In connection with a discussion of the responsibility of the
Victory Fund Committees with respect to Series F and G war savings
bonds, Chairman Eccles stated that, although it was now understood
by the Treasury that the Committees would do whatever they could to

6/22/42 -13
assist in the sales of these securities, the matter required some
clarification, as its present status was not satisfactory from the
standpoint of the Committees.
Thereupon, the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.