A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Monday, December 14, 1942, at 10:20 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Alfred H. Williams
Mr. Gilbert
Mr. Young
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. John H. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open Mar
ket Account
Mr. Clayton, Assistant to the Chairman of
the Board of Governors
Mr. Piser, Chief, Government Securities
Section, Division of Research and Sta
tistics of the Board of Governors
Mr. Berntson, Clerk in the Office of the
Secretary of the Board of Governors
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
September 28-29, 1942, were approved.
Early in October, in connection with the October Treasury fi
nancing, it became evident that it would be necessary for the System to
purchase increased amounts of securities for the System account in order
to carry out the policy which had been agreed upon. Therefore, on Octo
ber 9 the members of the Committee increased to $2,500,000,000 the lim
itation on the authority of the executive committee to increase or de
crease the amount of securities in the System account. In connection

12/14/42 -2
with the development of the Treasury's program of December financing, in
formal assurances had been given to the Secretary of the Treasury by the
members of the executive committee and the other members of the full Com
mittee in Washington that the Committee would endeavor to maintain dur
ing the December campaign total excess reserves for the country as a
whole at not less than $2,500,000,000 with around $500,000,000 of that
amount in New York City. In view of the increased volume of purchases
that were being made for this purpose, the members of the full Committee
on December 9, 1942, approved an increase to $3,000,000,000 in the au
thority of the executive committee to increase or decrease the amount of
securities held in the System account.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the members
of the Federal Open Market Committee as set
forth above were approved, ratified, and con
firmed.
Mr. Rouse then read a report of open market operations during
the period from September 28 to December 9, 1942, inclusive. He made a
supplementary report covering transactions conducted for the System ac
count during the period from December 10 to December 12, 1942, inclusive.
Copies of these reports have been placed in the files of the Federal
Open Market Committee.
During the discussion of Mr. Rouse's reports, Chairman Eccles
stated that, while the maintenance of existing prices of Government se
curities seemed desirable during a financing campaign, he questioned the
advisability of continuing to maintain present prices of outstanding
premium bonds. It was his opinion that after the current financing was

12/14/42 -3
over these issues should be allowed to decline to a point where they
found their own level in the market and would not be overpriced in re
lation to the more recent issues of 2 and 2-1/2 per cent bonds.
During hairman Eccles' statement, Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant
General Counsel of the Committee, joined the meeting.
Mr. McKee referred to the difficulty experienced by the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York during the recent period in purchasing sufficient
amounts of Government securities, other than longer-term premium bonds,
to supply needed funds to the market in connection with the Treasury fi
nancing operations without disturbing the existing pattern of rates.
There was general agreement with his suggestion that, if in connection
with future financing campaigns the needed reserve funds were to be sup
plied through open market operations alone, it would be necessary for the
Treasury to issue very substantial additional amounts of bills and certif
icates. In this connection, the statement was made that the Treasury had
approved an increase to $600,000,000 in this week's issue of Treasury bills.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account during the period from Septem
ber 28 to December 12, 1942, inclusive, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the execu
tive committee of the Federal Open Market
Committee as set forth in the minutes of the
meeting of the executive committee held on
September 28, 1942, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
Mr. Rouse stated that under date of November 25, 1942, he re
ceived from Under Secretary of the Treasury Bell a letter requesting

12/14/42 -4
that the New York Bank furnish to the Treasury, for its use in connection
with its studies of Federal Reserve operations in Government securities
and it s survey of ownership of securities issued or guaranteed by the
United States, (1) a daily list of transactions in Government securities
during the 24 hours ended at 4:00 o'clock each afternoon, including bills
purchased under repurchase agreements and held in the accounts of the in
dividual Reserve Banks, (2) a reconciliation of the figures shown in the
daily lists with the change in total Federal Reserve Bank holdings from
Wednesday of one week to Wednesday of the next week, and (3) a list of
holdings of all 12 Federal Reserve Banks as of the last day of each
month showing each direct and guaranteed issue separately, except that
Treasury bills should be lumped together, the latter amount to include
bills held by the individual Federal Reserve Banks under repurchase
options. Mr. Rouse said that it seemed entirely proper to him to send
to the Treasury the list referred to in item (3) above, as is now done
by other large holders of Government securities, with the understanding,
however, that the Treasury would recognize the confidential nature of
the data and the importance of withholding them from publication in a
form which would permit identification of individual securities as hold
ings of the Federal Reserve System. The information requested in items
(1) and (2) above, Mr. Rouse said, was being furnished the Treasury,
with the approval of the Federal Open Market Committee, by telephone and
in copies of the daily letter and weekly report sent by the New York
Bank to the members of the executive committee of the Federal Open Market
Committee and certain members of the Committee's staff, so that the

12/14/42 -5-
members of the Treasury staff to whom the information was submitted were
receiving all of the information with respect to operations in the Sys
tem account that was received by the members of the Federal Open Market
Committee. Mr. Rouse felt that in these circumstances, and in view of
the extreme difficulty that the New York Bank was experiencing in find
ing trained men, the Bank should be relieved of the necessity of pre
paring any more reports than were absolutely necessary, and he said he
would like to be authorized by the Committee to inform Mr. Bell that,
because of the existing situation, he would prefer not to submit the
first two reports requested.
After a discussion of Mr. Rouse's sug
gestion, it was agreed unanimously that he
should discuss the matter informally with
Mr. Bell, stating that it had been taken up
with the Federal Open Market Committee, that
while the Committee was glad to authorize
the furnishing to the Treasury of a list of
security holdings of the 12 Federal Reserve
Banks as of the last day of each month, pro
vided the confidential nature of the informa
tion was recognized as suggested by Mr. Rouse,
the other two reports requested would require
a considerable amount of work to prepare at a
time when the New York Bank was already short
of trained personnel, and that, inasmuch as
the Treasury was now receiving all of the in
formation with respect to transactions in the
System account that was being sent to the
members of the executive committee of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee and its staff, from
which the Treasury should be able to make such
computations as it might desire, the Committee
would appreciate it if the necessity for pre
paring the two reports in question could be
avoided. It was understood that Mr. Rouse
would confirm his understanding with Mr. Bell
by letter, a copy of which would be sent to
Mr. Morrill for the records of the Federal
Open Market Committee.

12/14/42
Chairman Eccles then reviewed briefly the informal discussions
with representatives of the Treasury since the last meeting of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee relating to Treasury financing operations,
particularly with respect to the open market operations conducted for
the System account in connection with the October financing and the
major financing campaign being conducted at the present time. He re
ported that during a conference at the Treasury on November 11, 1942,
which was attended by Messrs. Alfred H. Williams and C. S. Young and
himself, Secretary Morgenthau stated that before he announced the De
cember financing campaign he wanted to have the assurance of the Sys
tem that, if at any time during the campaign he should feel that addi
tional reserves should be supplied and should request the System to
furnish an additional amount of excess reserves, such action would be
taken. Chairman Eccles also said that, without speaking for the Board
or the Federal Open Market Committee, he and Messrs. Williams and Young
had agreed that, if the Treasury felt it could not finance the war suc
cessfully without larger excess reserves than were provided by the Sys
tem and a request were made by the Secretary that additional reserves
be provided, the System should comply with that request. Following the
meeting at the Treasury, Chairman Eccles said, the matter was taken up
with the Board, and Secretary Morgenthau was advised informally that
so far as the members of the Board were concerned they would assure hi
that, if at any time during the financing, after representatives of the
System had had an opportunity to present reasons for the policy being
followed, he felt that additional reserves should be supplied, the

12/14/42 -7
System, upon receipt of a request from the Secretary, would put additional
reserves into the market in the amount requested.
In connection with Chairman Eccles' statement, there was a dis
cussion of the informal understanding with the Secretary of the Treasury
that the System would endeavor to maintain a total of $2,500,000,000 of
excess reserves in the country as a whole and around $500,000,000 in
New York City banks. There was general agreement with the expressed
opinion that under present circumstances it was not possible as a prac
tical matter to maintain continuously a minimum of $500,000,000 of ex
cess reserves in the New York money market banks, for the reason that as
the funds were supplied they were invested by the banks in short-term
securities. This placed the System and the commercial banks in a com
petitive position in the market and resulted particularly in pressure
on the discount rate for bills. It was agreed that an undertaking to
maintain a specified amount of excess reserves was not entirely consist
ent with the policy of urging banks to keep fully invested and of main
taining a pattern of rates on outstanding issues of Government securities.
In this connection, it was stated that the existing understanding relat
ing to the maintenance of a stated amount of excess reserves would and
at the close of the present financing drive.
Reference was made to the full-page advertisements which had
been prepared by Doremus and Company at the request of the Treasury and
placed in newspapers suggested by that Company at the beginning of the
current financing campaign. It had been agreed that the cost of these
advertisements would be paid by the Federal Reserve Banks, and Mr. Morrill

12/14/42 -8
stated that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York had paid the bills
covering the cost of the advertisements. Mr. Sproul suggested in a let
ter dated December 10, with which he forwarded the paid bills for the
advertising in the districts other than New York, that arrangements be
made with the other Federal Reserve Banks to reimburse the New York
Bank, and Mr. Morrill stated that this was being done.
The representative members of the Federal Open Market Committee
stated that they had received a number of complaints from newspapers
and radio stations with respect to the manner in which the advertising
was handled, and Mr. Williams suggested that it would be helpful in
avoiding that situation if similar advertisements placed in the future
could be handled by the Federal Reserve Banks.
Messrs. Sproul and Eccles stated that the Treasury had felt
that it was necessary to have some kind of newspaper advertising of the
campaign, that it had been arranged hurriedly with a realization that
it might be the cause of some criticism, and that a better arrangement
would be worked out prior to another major financing operation. Chair
man Eccles also stated that it had been estimated that, with the con
templated increase in the weekly offering of Treasury bills to
$600,000,000 beginning with the issue of December 16 and to $700,000,000
in January and with the increase of the February 1, 1943, issue of certif
icates to $2,500,000,000, it might be possible to defer further major
financing operations until April, and that during the intervening period
a opportunity would be afforded on the basis of experience to work out
a procedure which would avoid many of the difficulties encountered in
the current campaign.

12/14/42 -9
In this connection, Chairman Eccles suggested that it would be
advisable to hold another meeting of the full Committee in January of
next year which would be attended by the Presidents of all the Federal
Reserve Banks, with the understanding that while the Presidents were
here they would meet as the Chairmen of the Victory Fund Committees
for a review of their experience in the current financing operation and
with representatives of the Treasury for the purpose of discussing plans
for future campaigns. The first three days of either the week of Jan
uary 18 or the week of January 25 were suggested as possible dates for
the meetings. Messrs. Ransom and Evans stated that they had made other
arrangements for the week of January 18.
It was understood that Mr. Morrill
would ascertain from Mr. Szymczak (who
was absent from this meeting because of
the death of a sister) and the Presidents
of the other Federal Reserve Banks wheth
er January 25 would be agreeable to them
and, if so, that the meetings would be
called to begin on that date.
Chairman Eccles stated that during the preparation for the pres
ent financing campaign it became evident that the problem would be con
siderably simplified if there could be a substantial increase in the
number of war loan deposit accounts maintained by banks throughout the
country. He said that telegrams were sent to the Presidents of the Fed
eral Reserve Banks calling their attention to the matter, that the Presi
dents undertook to encourage the opening of such accounts by banks in
their districts, but that a number of banks objected to taking such ac
tion for the reason that they did not want to pay the Federal Deposit

12/14/2 -10
Insurance Corporation assessment on deposits of Government funds held in
the accounts and some banks objected to maintaining reserves against such
deposits. He went on to say that when this information came to the Board
the matter was taken up with the Treasury and the Federal Deposit Insur
ance Corporation, and that it was agreed that a draft of bill should be
prepared which, for the duration of the war and six months thereafter,
would relieve insured banks of the necessity of paying Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation assessments on war loan deposits and member banks
of the necessity of maintaining reserves against such deposits. When
the bill was prepared, Chairman Eccles said, he, Mr. McKee, and Mr.
Crowley, Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, dis
cussed it with Mr. Steagall, Chairman of the House Banking and Currency
Committee, and Senator Prentiss Brown, a member of the Senate Banking
and Currency Committee, and, while they were both favorable to the leg
islation and were of the opinion that, if it were presented after the
turn of the year when the new Congress convened, it could be enacted
without a great deal of difficulty, they felt it would be impossible to
obtain its enactment at this time because of the general legislative
situation and the desire of members of Congress to bring about an early
adjournment.
Mr. Goldenweiser was then called upon for a statement as Econ
omist for the Federal Open Market Committee. After reviewing briefly
the situation with respect to production and prices in connection with
the war effort and the funds that would be needed to finance the war,
he discussed the possibilities of inflation inherent in the increasing

12/14/42 -11
amounts of funds which would be supplied by bank purchases of Government
securities as compared with what the situation would be if funds were
used by the public for the purpose of purchasing Government securities
instead of bidding up prices of the reduced volume of available con
sumers' goods. He also made certain suggestions with respect to changes
that might be made in fiscal and Treasury financing policies and with
respect to the policies to be followed by the Federal Reserve System in
connection with war financing. A copy of Mr. Goldenweiser's statement
has been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Following Mr. Goldenweiser's statement, the meeting recessed
and reconvened at 2:30 p.m. with the same attendance as at the close of
the morning session except that Mr. Dreibelbis was not present.
Mr. John H. Williams was called upon for a statement as Asso
ciate Economist for the Committee and, after commenting upon the expan
sion that had taken place in production and the effectiveness of direct
controls to prevent inflation, he discussed the relative importance of
fiscal and monetary policies and selective or direct credit controls
and made suggestions as to the means by which the System's monetary
policies might be implemented. A copy of Mr. Williams' statement has
also been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
While Mr. Williams was making his statement, Mr. Dreibelbis,
Assistant General Counsel of the Committee, rejoined the meeting. After
the statement, Mr. Berntson withdrew.
During the course of a discussion of the effectiveness of avail
able controls in preventing inflation, there was general agreement on

12/14/42 -12
the part of the members of the Committee that the System alone could not
do more in the field of monetary and credit policy than to keep abreast
of developments, to exert its influence wherever possible, and to adapt
its policies to the needs of the war program. It was agreed that the
members of the executive committee should continue the procedure that
had been followed in the past of making suggestions to the Treasury
with respect to fiscal and financing policies with a view to bringing
about the adoption of such changes in these policies from time to time
as might result in financing the war effort in the most effective way
with the least possible adverse effect on the war and post-war economy,
and that this should be one of the matters for discussion at the meet
ings to be held next month.
In connection with a discussion of whether any change should be
made in the existing arrangement under which Federal Reserve Banks pur
chase all Government bills offered to them on a discount basis at a
rate of 3/8 per cent per annu, there was agreement with the suggestion
that consideration should be deferred until the meeting in January of
the questions (1) whether bills should be made available by the Treas
ury up to a stated amount to any one purchaser at a flat rate of dis
count and (2) whether, instead of purchasing bills in the market to re
place maturing bills held in the System account, an arrangement should
be made with the Treasury for direct replacement of such bills.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
there was unanimous agreement that no change
should be made in the direction issued to the
Federal Reserve Banks at the meeting of the

12/14/42 -13
Federal Open Market Committee on September
28, 1942, to purchase all bills offered at
the posted rate of 3/8 per cent.
In connection with the above action, Mr. McKee stated that he
questioned the advisability of permitting the Federal Reserve Banks to
hold in their individual accounts instead of the System open market ac
count the bills purchased under repurchase options, and that he would
like to review the record of the action of the Committee on this ques
tion and to reserve the right to bring the matter up for discussion at
a later meeting of the Committee.
Reference was then made to the authority to be granted to the
executive committee to direct the execution of transactions for the Sys
tem open market account pending another meeting of the full Committee.
There was a discussion of the question as to the amount of securities
that it might be necessary to purchase during that period to offset any
increase that might occur in currency in circulation, to provide reserves
for deposits resulting from bank purchases of Treasury certificates and
increased offerings of bills, and to maintain the agreed pattern of rates
on Government securities. In this connection, mention was made of the
arrangement that had been made under which the Federal Reserve Banks
would place in circulation their existing stocks of Federal Reserve Bank
notes, amounting to approximately $660,000,000, which would add that
amount to member bank reserves. All of the members of the Committee
were in agreement that the renewal of the authority granted at the last
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee would be ample to meet the
situation pending the next meeting of the Committee, with the understanding,

12/14/42
however, that separate authority should be given to purchase short-term
certificates of indebtedness for the temporary accommodation of the
Treasury and that, in the event of a contingency requiring authority for
additional purchases of Government securities, such authority could be
granted upon the telephonic, telegraphic, or written approval of a ma
jority of the members of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following resolution was
adopted by unanimous vote:
That the executive committee be directed until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for
such transactions for the System open market account, either
in the open market or directly with the Treasury (including
purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing securi
ties, and letting maturities run off without replacement),
as may be necessary in the practical administration of the
account, or for the purpose of maintaining about the present
general level of prices and yields of Government securities,
or for the purpose of maintaining an adequate supply of funds
in the market; provided that the aggregate amount of securi
ties held in the account at the close of this date (other
than special short-term certificates of indebtedness pur
chased from time to time for the temporary accommodation of
the Treasury and Treasury bills purchased pursuant to the
directions of the Federal Open Market Committee issued under
dates of April 30, August 3, and September 28, 1942) shall
not be increased or decreased by more than $1,000,000,000.
That the executive committee be further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to
arrange for the purchase for the System open market account
airect from the Treasury of such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the amount of such certificates held in the ac
count at any one time shall not exceed $1,000,000,000.
Reference was made to certain sugges
tions that might be made to the Treasury
in connection with future financing opera
tions, and there was unanimous agreement
that Mr. Morrill should send to the Presi
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks who were

12/14/42 -15-
not members of the Federal Open Market
Committee, for their information pending
the discussion of Treasury financing at the
meetings to be held in January, copies of
(1) the memorandum prepared by Mr. Sproul
setting forth his views on credit policy
and Treasury financing which he sent to
the members of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee under date of December 10, 1942, and
(2) Mr. Goldenweiser's memorandum entitled
"Treasury Financing and the Banks: 1943 and
1944". It was also understood that Chair
man Eccles would send a copy of Mr. Sproul's
memorandum to the Secretary of the Treasury
with the statement that if he had any com
ments to make with respect to the questions
presented therein the members of the Federal
Open Market Committee would be pleased to
have them.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.