A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Monday, March 2, 1942, at 10:10 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Alfred H. Williams
Mr. Gilbert
Mr. C. S. Young
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Piser, Chief, Government Securities
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics of the Board of Governors
Mr. Clayton, Assistant to Chairman Eccles
Messrs. Paddock, McLarin, Davis, and Day,
alternate members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Mr. Leach, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond, and Mr. Zurlinden, First
Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Cleveland
Mr. Sienkiewicz, Secretary of the Presidents'
Conference
Mr. Morrill stated that advices of the election for the period
of one year commencing March 1, 1942, of members and alternate members
of the Federal Open Market Committee representing the Federal Reserve
Banks had been received, that each newly elected member and alternate

3/2/42
member had executed the required oath of office (with the exception of
Mr. Fleming, who, because of illness, was not in attendance at this
meeting but to whom the form of oath of office would be sent for execu
tion), and that it was the opinion of the Committee's Counsel on the
basis of the advices received that the following members and alternate
members were legally qualified to serve:
Allan Sproul, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, with W. W. Paddock, First Vice President
(President elect) of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,
as alternate member;
Alfred H. Williams, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia, with M. J. Fleming, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate member;
R. R. Gilbert, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Dallas, with W. S. McLarin, Jr., President of the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of Atlanta, as alternate member;
C. S. Young, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago, with Chester C. Davis, President of the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of St. Louis, as alternate member; and
H. G. Leedy, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Kansas City, with William A. Day, President of the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of San Francisco, as alternate member.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the following officers of
the Federal Open Market Committee were re
elected to serve until the election of their
successors at the first meeting of the Commit
tee after March 1, 1943:
Marriner S. Eccles, Chairman
Allan Sproul, Vice Chairman
S. R. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
E. A. Goldenweiser, Economist
John H. Williams, Associate Economist
Walter Wyatt, General Counsel
J. P. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank

3/2/42
of New York was selected to execute trans
actions for the System open market account
until the adjournment of the first meeting
of the Committee after March 1, 1943.
Mr. Sproul stated that at the last meeting of the board of di
rectors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Mr. Rouse was selected
as manager of the System open market account, subject to the selection
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York by the Federal Open Market Com
mittee as the Bank to execute transactions for the System open market
account and to his approval by the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the selection of Mr. Rouse
as manager of the System open market account
was approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the following were selected
to serve with the Chairman of the Federal Open
Market Committee (who, under the provisions of
the bylaws, is also chairman of the executive
committee) as members and alternate members of
the executive committee until the selection of
their successors at the first meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee after March 1,
1943:
Members Alternate Members
M. S. Szymczak John K. McKee
Ernest G. Draper Ronald Ransom
Allan Sproul (To serve in the order
Alfred H. Williams named as alternates
for Messrs. Eccles,
Szymczak, and Draper)
R. R. Gilbert
C. S. Young
(To serve in the order
named as alternates
for Messrs. Sproul and
Williams)

3/2/42 -4
At the suggestion of Messrs. Szymczak and McKee, Chairman Eccles
reviewed briefly the suggested program of Treasury financing set forth
in the memorandum which was sent to the Treasury on January 28, 1942.
He also discussed the difficulties which it was felt were created by
the failure of the Treasury to adopt a long-term program of financing,
the discussions which members of the executive committee of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee had had with representatives of the Treas
ury with respect to a financing program, and the attitude of members
of the Treasury staff towards the problem. If substantially the pres
ent methods of financing were continued, he said, it would be necessary
to create a large volume of excess reserves for the purpose of placing
the banks under pressure to purchase Government securities. He stated
that the program suggested in the memorandum sent to the Secretary of
the Treasury on January 28, 1942, proposed special types of tap issues
which were designed to attract as many non-bank funds as possible and
to meet the requirements of different classes of investors which it was
hoped would reduce the amount of open market financing and the amount
of securities that would have to be purchased by banks to the lowest
possible minimum. He made the further statement that it was felt that
the members of the executive committee had done about all they could
in the way of suggesting a desirable long-term program to the Treasury.
He went on to say that the representatives of the Open Market Committee
had indicated that, if the suggested program were carried out so as to

3/2/42 -5-
reduce the amount of open market financing to a minimum, the Federal Re
serve System would do everything within its power to insure the success
of such financing. The Chairman added that it would be helpful if the
Presidents' Conference could agree to a statement, which might be sent
to the Treasury, expressing their agreement with the suggested program
and their willingness to assume responsibility for the marketing of the
special issues proposed in the program.
Reference was made to the status in Congress of the second War
Powers Act which contains an amendment to section 14(b) of the Federal
Reserve Act which would authorize the Federal Reserve Banks to purchase
Government securities direct from the Treasury, and it was stated that
present indications were that the bill would go to conference and that
the amendment would be adopted in its original unrestricted form. In
connection with a discussion of this amendment, Chairman Eccles sug
gested that the Presidents be furnished with copies of the memorandum
prepared by Mr. Goldenweiser under the title ". . . But Only in the
Open Market". A copy of the memorandum was handed to each of the Presi
dents during the course of the meeting.
Reference was made to the memorandum prepared by Mr. Piser under
date of February 23, 1942, summarizing the discussions at the meeting
with representatives of the Treasury on February 20, and to the state
ment attached thereto, which had been prepared at the Treasury, and which
contained certain suggestions with respect to the open market financing

3/2/42 -6
program. There was a discussion of the likelihood of the Treasury tak
ing the position at some time in the future that reserve requirements
should be reduced and of what might be regarded as the minimum maturity
of the long-term issues which it was expected would carry a rate of 2-1/2
per cent. Chairman Eccles reviewed the discussions at the Treasury on
the latter point and stated that it had been agreed that, if a public
statement were made with respect to the intention of the Treasury to un
dertake to finance the war at a rate not to exceed 2-1/2 per cent, the
statement would be made by the Treasury, that in order to provide the
necessary flexibility no reference would be made in that statement to
the question of maturities, but that any securities with a maturity of
15 years or longer would be regarded as long-term issues which would
carry the 2-1/2 per cent rate. It was also agreed, he said, that the
point at which support would be given to the market by the System would
be determined in discussions with the Treasury from time to time, that,
if at any time the pressure on the long-term market were such that it
became necessary for the System to purchase large amounts and financ
ing could not be done on the basis upon which the market was being sup
ported, the Treasury would want to consider the matter further, but
that, if the market should decline to par on a 2-1/2 per cent 15-year
issue, the market should be held at that point for the reason that any
further decline would mean that the Treasury was paying more than 2-1/2
per cent on long-term securities.
Mr. Sproul pointed out that in speaking of a pattern of rates

3/2/42 -7
it had not been contemplated that rates would be fixed for the shorter
term securities, but that flexibility in those rates would be permitted
to meet conditions, and that it was believed that this point in the sug
gested program was now understood by the Treasury. In this connection,
Chairman Eccles said that it was made clear to the Treasury representa
tives that long-term securities might be anything from 15 to 25 years
and that the rate on 90-day bills could be anywhere from 1/4 to 1/2 per
cent.
The letter transmitting the memorandum of January 28, 1942, to
the Secretary of the Treasury was then read, and Chairman Eccles called
particular attention to the fact that the memorandum did not represent
action by the executive committee of the Federal Open Market Committee
or of the full Committee but was the unanimous view of the persons re
ferred to in the letter as having participated in the preparation of
the memorandum.
Mr. Leach stated that the short-term tap issue suggested in the
memorandum of January 28 would provide for redemption after six months
on 60 days' notice. He said that at a recent joint meeting in Baltimore
of the directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond and its
Baltimore Branch this point was discussed, without mentioning the pro
gram under consideration, and that it appeared that at the present time
corporations and other large investors would be unwilling to commit
many of their short-term funds unless provision were made for redemp
tion in less than six months, and that, therefore, the short-term

3/2/42 -8
issue would be taken in much larger amounts if provision were made for
redemption in four months or less even though no interest were allowed
in the event of redemption within six months.
In a discussion of this point, during which Mr. Sproul stated
that the Treasury might be willing to reduce the six months' period if
the rate were reduced, Chairman Eccles stated that if corporations were
not willing to commit their funds for six months they could invest in
bills, the amount of which it was hoped would be increased for the pur
pose of giving the necessary flexibility to the short-term market.
In response to an inquiry from Mr. Draper, Chairman Eccles stated
that the recent discussions at the Treasury had been with members of the
Treasury staff and not with Secretary Morgenthau, and that it was not
known what the attitude of the Secretary would be toward the program
suggested in the memorandum of January 28.
In a discussion of what, if any, further action might be taken
by representatives of the System with respect to the adoption of a long
term financing program, it appeared to be the consensus that the members
of the executive committee of the Federal Open Market Committee should
take advantage of every opportunity to follow the matter to a conclusion
and that Under Secretary of the Treasury Bell should be advised that
the members of the executive committee would be glad to have further dis
cussions with members of the Treasury staff at any time.
Mr. Ransom stated that, if the Presidents adopted a statement in
support of the program suggested in the memorandum of January 28, 1942,

3/2/42 -9
he would assume that if, in subsequent discussions with the Treasury, a
modification of the program were decided upon the Presidents would have
an opportunity to discuss the proposed changes.
Mr. Sproul said that it would be his understanding that, in the
event such a statement were adopted by the Presidents, the members of
the executive committee of the Federal Open Market Committee would be
at liberty to continue discussions with the Treasury with respect to
rates and other points of detail, but that if substantial changes were
made the Presidents would be given an opportunity to consider the
changes.
Chairman Eccles stated that before a decision could be reached
on a program it would be necessary for members of the executive committee
to meet with the Secretary of the Treasury, that he (Chairman Eccles)
would like to feel that in such a meeting the members of the executive
committee would be in a position to agree to as much of the suggested
program as they could get the Secretary of the Treasury to accept and
that, if the Treasury would not accept the entire program, the members
of the Federal Open Market Committee should be in a position to commit
the System to the extent that a program could be agreed upon without
being under the necessity of referring the matter back to the other
Federal Reserve Bank Presidents.
Mr. Davis expressed the opinion that it was desirable that a
decision be reached on the question of a long-term program before the
Treasury was again faced with the necessity of going into the market

3/2/42 -10
for additional funds, and he suggested that the submission of any state
ment adopted by the Presidents be used as an occasion for a further dis
cussion with the Treasury.
Chairman Eccles then called upon the Presidents for an expres
sion of their views with respect to the program suggested in the memo
randum of January 28. All of the Presidents and First Vice Presidents
in attendance at the meeting, with the exception of Messrs. Sproul,
Leach, and Williams who had participated in the discussions at the
Treasury and whose views were known, expressed themselves as being in
agreement with the proposed program and indicated that they would be
agreeable to the adoption by the Presidents' Conference of a statement
in support of the program.
Mr. Leach renewed his suggestion that the initial redemption
period on the short-term issue referred to in the memorandum be reduced
to two or four months with provision for no interest in the event of
redemption before six months from date of issue. Several of the Presi
dents concurred in this suggestion.
Chairman Eccles stated that, if it were felt that Mr. Leach's
suggestion was an important one, it could be proposed as a matter of
detail at the proper time without making it an issue in the discussions
with the Treasury with respect to the adoption of the general program.
Mr. Zurlinden said that, if the Treasury were unwilling to adopt the
suggestion, the program could be put into effect without it and it could
be determined on the basis of experience whether the change should be

3/2/42 -11-
made.
Mr. Gilbert stated that it would be desirable if the present
rate on Treasury bills were increased somewhat for the reason that a
higher rate would broaden the distribution of bills and effect a better
distribution of bank reserves.
During the Presidents' statements, reference was made to the
suggestion that the Federal Reserve Banks offer to handle the sale of
the special issues proposed in the memorandum of January 28, 1942, and
Chairman Eccles stated that he felt that such an offer would be ac
ceptable to the Treasury and would facilitate the adoption of a pro
gram.
Chairman Eccles then inquired whether the Presidents felt that
there was any other form of open market security that could be offered
by the Treasury that would meet the needs of investors as well as a
long-term tap issue which, in effect, would be an extension of the
Series G issue on somewhat less favorable terms and would enable in
vestors to avoid the speculative element of market issues, the padding
of subscriptions to get a desired amount, or the payment of premiums
in the open market. Mr. Davis stated, and other Presidents indicated
agreement, that the position was implicit in the program that had been
offered to the Treasury that market issues could not meet the needs
of certain investors as well as the suggested special issues.
Chairman Eccles stated that it would be of considerable assist
ance to the members of the executive committee in their further discussions

3/2/42 -12
with the Treasury if the Presidents' Conference would adopt a state
ment along the lines that had been proposed, and that the statement
might well include the Presidents' reasons for supporting the program
and a statement of the willingness of the Federal Reserve Banks to un
dertake the distribution of the special issues contemplated in the
program.
Mr. Day, as Chairman of the Presidents' Conference, stated
that the Presidents would meet in a separate session to consider the
matter.
Reference was then made to the open market policy that should
be followed pending another meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee, and Mr. Sproul stated that this question was so closely related
to the financing policies adopted by the Treasury that, until a de
cision was reached by the Treasury on what its future financing pro
gram would be, the Federal Open Market Committee had little choice
other than to continue the open market policy now in effect, and that,
therefore, he would suggest the renewal of the resolution adopted at
the last meeting of the Committee.
Mr. Ransom inquired of Mr. Wyatt whether the limitation of 5
billion dollars, which had been approved by the House of Representa
tives, on the proposed authority of the Federal Reserve Banks to pur
chase securities directly from the Treasury, should be taken into
consideration by the Federal Open Market Committee in connection with

3/2/42 -13
the renewal of the authority granted to the executive committee to ef
fect transactions in the System account. Mr. Wyatt replied that, since
the War Powers Bill which contained the amendment had not yet been
passed by Congress and it was expected that the limitation would not
be in the amendment in its final form, the limitation would have no
effect on the authority of the Federal Open Market Committee to take
the suggested action.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following resolution was
adopted by unanimous vote:
That the executive committee be directed until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee to ar
range for such transactions for the System open market
account (including purchases, sales, exchanges, replace
ment of maturing securities, and letting maturities run
off without replacement) as in its judgment from time to
time may be advisable in the light of existing conditions;
provided that the aggregate amount of securities held in
the account at the close of this date shall not be increased
or decreased by more than $500,000,000.
The resolution adopted by the Federal Advisory Council at its
last meeting, in which it was suggested that consideration be given to
the desirability of an increase in the amount of weekly Treasury bill
offering, was then read. Mr. Morrill stated that copies of this reso
lution and of a second resolution adopted by the Federal Advisory Coun
cil, in which the position was taken that reserve requirements of
member banks should be kept as stable as possible, had been sent by
the Board of Governors to the Treasury for its confidential informa
tion.

3/2/42 -14
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.