A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Saturday, February 28, 1942, at 10:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairan
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Leach
Mr. Davis
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Alfred H. Williams (alternate for Mr. Fleming)
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. John H. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Piser, Chief, Government Securities
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics of the Board of Governors
Mr. Clayton, Assistant to Chairman Eccles
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to Chairman
Eccles
Mr. Berntson, Clerk in the Office of the
Secretary of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Gilbert, C. S. Young, and Leedy, alter
nate members of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee
Messrs. McLarin and Day, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and San
Francisco, respectively
Messrs. Paddock and Zurlinden, First Vice Presi
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston
and Cleveland, respectively
Mr. Sienkiewicz, Secretary of the Presidents'
Conference

2/28/42 -2
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on December 12, 1941, were ap
proved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the min
utes of the meeting of the executive com
mittee on December 12, 1941, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Rouse read a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York covering operations in the System open market account during
the period from December 12, 1941, to February 25, 1942, both dates in
clusive, and discussed the important features of the report. He also
referred to the transactions in the System account on February 27, as
reported by him at the meeting of the executive committee just prior
to this meeting.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System account during the period
from December 12, 1941, to February 27,
1942, both dates inclusive, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
On January 14, 1942, the Board's Examiner in Charge submitted
to the Secretary of the Federal Open Market Committee a copy of the re
port of examination of the System account made at the close of business
on October 25, 1941, by the examiners of the Board of Governors as part
of the regular examination of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and
copies of this report were sent to the members of the Federal Open Market

2/28/42 -3
Committee under date of January 20, 1942.
It was stated that there was nothing
in the report that required action by the
Federal Open Market Committee at this time,
and, upon motion duly made and seconded and
by unanimous vote, the report was received
and ordered filed.
Statements were then made by Messrs. John H. Williams and Golden
weiser in which they discussed questions arising out of the problem of
war financing. At the request of the members of the Committee, Mr. Wil
liams agreed to prepare a comprehensive memorandum covering the matters
referred to in his statement with the understanding that when completed
the memorandum would be sent to Mr. Morrill who would forward, copies to
the members of the Board and the Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks.
A summary of Mr. Goldenweiser's comments has been placed in the files of
the Federal Open Market Committee.
A discussion ensued of questions raised by Messrs. Goldenweiser
and Williams in their statements, of the place the Federal Reserve Sys
tem should occupy in the war and post-war periods, and of the part the
System should play in the war financing program.
At the request of Chairman Eccles, there were distributed to the
Presidents copies of (1) the statement of a suggested program of Treas
ury financing which was sent to the Secretary of the Treasury under date
of January 28, 1942, with the comment that the statement expressed the
unanimous view of the members of the Board and Messrs. Sproul, Leach,
Alfred H. Williams, Goldenweiser, John H. Williams, Rouse, and Piser,

2/28/42 -4
and (2) a memorandum prepared by Mr. Piser under date of February 23,
1942, summarizing discussions relating to a war financing program at a
meeting of members of the executive committee of the Federal Open Market
Committee with representatives of the Treasury on February 20. Chairman
Eccles suggested that the members of the Board and the Presidents read
the two memoranda over the week end as a preliminary to a discussion of
Treasury financing at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
on Monday, March 2, 1942, and that because of the confidential character
of the memoranda the copies handed to the Presidents be returned at that
meeting.
Mr. Rouse reported that, although the market had shown a firmer
tone this morning, the 2 per cent bonds of 51-55 were in supply and it
was necessary to purchase an additional $600,000 of this issue.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, this purchase was
approved, ratified, and confirmed. Earlier
in this meeting the Federal Open Market
Committee ratified all transactions in the
System account through February 27, so that,
with ratification of the purchase today,
all transactions in the System account were
approved by the Committee.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.