A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Friday, May 8, 1942, at 10:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Alfred H. Williams
Mr. Gilbert
Mr. Young
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. John H. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Piser, Chief, Government Securities
Section, Division of Research and Sta
tistics of the Board of Governors
Mr. Berntson, Clerk in the Office of the
Secretary of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Paddock, Fleming, McLarin, and Day,
alternate members of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee
Messrs. Leach and Peyton, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and Min
neapolis, respectively
Mr. Attebery, Vice President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Mr. Sienkiewicz, Secretary of the Presidents'
Conference
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, Mr. Evans was se
lected to srve, until the selection of

5/8/42
his successor at the first meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee after March
1, 1943, as the third alternate for Messrs.
Eccles, Szymczak, and Draper as members of
the executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meetings of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on February 28 and March 2, 1942,
were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee as set forth in the minutes
of the meetings of the executive committee
held on February 28 and March 2, 1942, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions in
the System account during the period from
March 2 to May 7, 1942, inclusive, as re
ported by Mr. Rouse at the meeting of the
executive committee just before this meet
ing at which all members of the full Com
mittee were present, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
Chairman Eccles referred to the discussions had with representa
tives of the Treasury on the subject of Treasury financing since the
last meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, and particularly to
the agreement reached at the meeting at the Treasury on March 20, 1942,
when, as a part of a temporary program of war financing, the members of
the executive committee agreed (1) "that the Federal Reserve System, act
ing through the Federal Open Market Committee, would support the Treasury
bill market at approximately the present rates-that is, we are to use

5/8/42 -3
our best judgment with respect to this market and with regard for its
relation to the general financing program, which might include beginning
our support if and when the rate on Treasury bills reaches 1/4 of 1%,
and supporting with increasing strength as the rate approaches 3/8 of
1%", and (2) "The general market to be maintained on about the present
curve of rates, but this does not mean special support for issues which
may be out of line and specifically does not mean that we must hold the
2's of 1951-55 or the 2-1/2's of 1967-72, or any other issue, at par,
or any other fixed price". Chairman Eccles also reviewed the discus
sions with representatives of the Treasury subsequent to March 20 which
resulted in the submission to the Treasury on April 29 by the members of
the executive committee of a revised memorandum of recommendations as to
the general principles and methods to be adopted in connection with Treas
ury financing and specific suggestions for May financing operations, the
adoption of the May financing program as announced on April 30, 1942, and
the issuance on that date by the members of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee, following agreement by telephone by all of the members of the
Committee who had not participated in the discussions, of a direction to
the 12 Federal Reserve Banks to purchase for the System open market ac
count all Treasury bills that might be offered to such Banks on a discount
basis at the rate of 3/8 per cent per annum.
During the discussion by Chairman Eccles, Mr. Thurston entered
the meeting.
The memorandum of April 29, which had been prepared largely to

5/8/42 -4
meet objections made at the Treasury to the program outlined in the
memorandum submitted to the Treasury under date of January 28, 1942,
was read. In explanation of the direction to the Federal Reserve Banks
to purchase bills, Chairman Eccles said that the Treasury's original ap
proach to the May financing had been one of increasing excess reserves
of banks, preferably through a reduction in reserve requirements, and
the use of market issues, relying on the pressure of excess funds in
the market to effect distribution of the issues. When this procedure
was opposed by the Federal Reserve representatives, the suggestion was
made by the Treasury representatives that the Federal Reserve Banks
post a buying rate of 3/8 per cent for bills, and, when this was agreed
to, the Treasury concurred in the program suggested by the members of
the executive committee in the memorandum of April 29 above referred
to which was designed to attract as many funds as possible from sources
other than banks. Chairman Eccles concluded with the statement that,
if an effective organization were set up in the various Federal Reserve
districts for the distribution of Government securities, a great deal
of progress would have been made toward establishing a program for war
financing.
Following a discussion of various
points commented on during Chairman Eccles'
statement, upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the agreement reached
by the members of the executive committee
with the Treasury as a part of the temporary
program of war financing discussed and agreed
upon at the meeting at the Treasury on March
20, 1942, was approved, ratified, and con
firmed.

5/8/42 -5
The members of the Committee were in
complete agreement that, in accordance with
the understanding reached with representatives
of the Treasury on April 30, 1942, the direc
tion to the Federal Reserve Banks to purchase
bills at a rate of 3/8 per cent per annum
should be continued, and, upon motion duly
made and seconded, it was voted unanimously
to approve, ratify, confirm, and continue in
effect, until otherwise directed, the direction
issued on April 30 to the 12 Federal Reserve
Banks to purchase for the System open market
account all Treasury bills that might be of
fered to such Banks on a discount basis at
the rate of 3/8 per cent per annum.
The above action was followed by a discussion of the future open
market policy of the Committee and the instructions to be issued to the
executive committee to implement that policy. Mr. Sproul suggested that
it would be desirable to amend the resolution adopted at the last meet
ing of the Committee so as to recognize the present authority of the Fed
eral Reserve Banks to purchase and sell Government securities directly
from and to the Treasury, and, as a means of relating the resolution more
closely to existing conditions, to provide for such transactions as might
be necessary for the purpose of maintaining about the present general
level of prices and yields of Government securities or for the purpose
of maintaining an adequate supply of funds in the market. In connection
with the first point, Mr. Sproul stated that the Treasury regulations
which had prohibited the sale by the Treasury of bills directly to the
Federal Reserve Banks had been revised to permit such sales.
Mr. Rouse stated that from time to time some of the Federal Re
serve Banks might find it necessary to purchase Treasury bills for cash

5/8/42 -6
delivery, and said that there was a question of accounting procedure
involved, which might make it necessary for the Banks to carry such
purchases temporarily in their investment accounts, with the understand
ing that they would be transferred to the System account on the next
business day.
This point was discussed, and it was
agreed unanimously that the procedure should
be left to the Manager of the System account
and the staff of the Board of Governors to
work out.
A draft of resolution incorporating the suggestions made by Mr.
Sproul was then read, and the opinion was concurred in that it should
be further revised so as to make it clear that the resolution imposed
no limitation on the amount of bills purchased pursuant to the direction
issued to the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, but that it would apply to other
bills purchased for the System account by the New York Bank as agent to
accomplish the purposes of the resolution.
Mr. Ransom inquired what the responsibility of the executive
committee was for the bill purchases made by the Federal Reserve Banks
in accordance with the direction of the full Committee, and the response
was made that the authority for such purchases was given to the Federal
Reserve Banks directly by the full Committee and that for that reason
the direction by the full Committee to the executive committee should
relate to open market transactions other than the purchase of bills pur
suant to that authority.

5/8/42
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following resolution was
adopted by unanimous vote:
That the executive committee be directed until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee to
arrange for such transactions for the System open market
account, either in the open market or directly with the
Treasury (including purchases, sales, exchanges, replace
ment of maturing securities, and letting maturities run
off without replacement), as may be necessary for the
purpose of maintaining about the present general level
of prices and yields of Government securities or for the
purpose of maintaining an adequate supply of funds in the
market; provided that the aggregate amount of securities
held in the account at the close of this date (other than
Treasury bills purchased pursuant to the direction of the
Federal Open Market Committee issued under date of April
30, 1942) shall not be increased or decreased by more than
$500,000,000.
Thereupon, the meeting adjourned, with the understanding that
the Presidents and the Board of Governors would meet immediately to dis
cuss the problem of an organization to further the distribution of Gov
ernment securities, other than war savings bonds.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.