A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Monday, June 28, 1943, at 9:20 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Paddock
Mr. Fleming
Mr. McLarin
Mr. Day
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Messrs. John H. Williams, MacKenzie, Bryan,
and Wheeler, Associate Economists
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Clayton, Assistant to the Chairman of
the Board of Governors
Messrs. Piser and Kennedy, Chief and As
sistant Chief, respectively, of the
Government Securities Section, Division
of Research and Statistics of the Board
of Governors
Mr. Miller, Assistant Vice President of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
(in the absence of Mr. Rouse, Manager
of the System Account, who had remained
in New York in connection with the
Treasury financing that had just been
announced)
Mr. Berntson, Clerk in the Office of the
Secretary of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Leach, Young, and Peyton, alternate
members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Alfred H. Williams, Leedy, and Gilbert,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Philadelphia, Kansas City, and Dallas, re
spectively

6/28/43 -2
Messrs. Hitt and Powell, First Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of St. Louis and Minneapolis,
respectively
Messrs. Sienkiewicz and Edmiston, Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Philadelphia and St. Louis, respec
tively
Mr. Dolley, Economic Adviser of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on May 15, 1943, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the
minutes of the meeting of the executive
committee held on May 15, 1943, were ap
proved, ratified, and confirmed.
During the meeting there were distributed copies of a report
prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York of open market opera
tions conducted for the System account during the period May 17 to June
23, 1943, inclusive, and Mr. Miller discussed the principal features of
the report. He also submitted a supplemental report of operations in
the account for the period June 24 to June 26, inclusive, and copies of
both reports have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
During the course of Mr. Miller's report, there was a discus
cussion of the effect on the market of the financing just accounced by

6/28/43 -3
the Treasury, the possible effects of present market trends on the es
tablished pattern of rates on Government securities, and the problems
that might be created for the System by the continued increase in the
proportion of shorter maturities of securities held in the account
through the purchase of Treasury bills and the sale of notes and bonds.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
upon motion duly made and seconded and by
unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account during the period May 17
to June 26, 1943, inclusive, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
At this point Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the Chairman
of the Board of Governors, and Mr. Smead, Chief of the Division of
Bank Operations of the Board of Governors, joined the meeting.
Mr. Szymczak stated that in accordance with the action taken
at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on May 15, 1943,
consideration had been given by members of the staff of the Board of
Governors, the Federal Open Market Committee, and the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York to simplification of the procedure under which the
participations of the Federal Reserve Banks in the System account could
be pledged as collateral for Federal Reserve notes, that while the es
sentials of a suggested procedure had been agreed upon the final draft
of a statement was not complete, and that it was suggested, therefore,
that Mr. Wyatt be requested to outline the proposed procedure after
which, if agreeable to the members of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee, the plan could be approved in principle with the understanding

6/28/43 -4
that it would be submitted in final form for approval by the Board
of Governors, the Federal Reserve Banks, and the Federal Reserve Agents
before being placed in operation.
Mr. Wyatt stated that the present procedure involves the segre
gation of specific securities in the System account when they are
pledged by a Federal Reserve Bank as collateral for its Federal Re
serve notes, and that this requires a great amount of detailed work
which can be eliminated by permitting each Bank to pledge a portion
of its undivided interest in the System account without any segrega
tion of the securities. He said that this involved no new principle,
since it was substantially what was done when a Bank's undivided in
terest in the Agents' Gold Certificate Fund was pledged as collateral
for Federal Reserve notes. Therefore, he was of the opinion that the
plan would constitute at least a substantial compliance with the law.
Mr. Wyatt summarized the operation of the proposed plan as
follows: All of the securities in the System account would be held
in the joint custody of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the
Federal Reserve Agent at New York. Each Bank desiring to pledge a
portion of its participation in the System account would deliver to
the Federal Reserve Agent at such Bank an appropriate document evi
dencing such pledge and would notify the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York and the Federal Reserve Agent at New York that a specified dollar
amount of its participation in the System account had been pledged as

6/28/43 -5
collateral for Federal Reserve notes. Changes in the amount of se
curities pledged would be effected by a similar procedure. It was
contemplated that, in so far as practicable, each Bank would keep at
least 5 per cent of its participation in the System account unpledged
to facilitate sales from the account, and that, if it should become
necessary to sell more than the unpledged portion of any Bank's par
ticipation in the account, an appropriate adjustment would be made
in a manner provided for in the plan.
After a discussion of various points
in the proposed procedure, upon motion duly
made and seconded and by unanimous vote, the
procedure was approved in principle, with
the understanding that, after such refine
ments as were found to be necessary were
made by the staff, it would become effec
tive when it had been approved by the Fed
eral Reserve Banks, the Federal Reserve
Agents, and the Board of Governors.
Messrs. Clayton and Smead withdrew from the meeting at this
point.
In accordance with a suggestion by Mr. Goldenweiser as to the
order of presentation, statements were made by Messrs. Bryan, John H.
Williams, and Goldenweiser in that order. Mr. Bryan discussed the
impact of the April war loan drive on interior banks. Messrs. Williams
and Goldenweiser discussed the plans that had been advanced, and ques
tions that had been raised in connection with such plans, for postwar
international monetary stabilization. Transcripts of these statements
have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.

6/28/43 -6-
While Mr. Bryan's statement was being made, Mr. Gardner,
Senior Economist in the Division of Research and Statistics of the
Board of Governors, joined the meeting.
During a discussion of questions in connection with the mone
tary stabilization plans and in response to a question by Mr. Alfred
H. Williams, Mr. Goldenweiser explained that participation by members
of the Board's staff in discussions with staff members of the Treas
ury Department and other agencies of this Government, and later with
the technical staff experts of allied and associated nations, had
been at the request of the Treasury.
Mr. Gardner stated that the Treasury plan was being redrafted
on the basis of the discussions that had taken place, that the revised
draft was nearing final form so far as the technical level was con
cerned, and that it was possible that it would be submitted within a
week or 10 days for consideration of the interested departments and
agencies of the Government with the thought that a conference of fi
nance ministers of the allied countries might be called for sometime
this fall, after which any plan agreed upon would be submitted to the
Congress of the United States for approval.
It was also stated in this connection by Chairman Eccles and
Mr. Ransom that the Board as such had not yet been asked for its views
but that it had been made clear that the Board would be entirely free
to express whatever views it might desire at such time as it might be

6/28/43 -7
appropriate for it to do so.
Chairman Eccles referred briefly to the possible effects that
any plan for international monetary stabilization might have on the
ability of the System to control the domestic credit situation, and
stated that he had taken the position that the System should be given
whatever powers were necessary to enable it effectively to offset any
influences that the operation of the plan might have on the internal
credit situation in the United States.
Reference was also made to the fact that no monetary stabiliza
tion plan could be successful in the absence of a broad program of
postwar adjustment of the more fundamental conditions upon which such
a plan would depend, and that there was danger that the importance
of this point would be overlooked because of the wide attention being
given to the monetary stabilization plans at this time without adequate
discussion of the more basic problems.
Thereupon the meeting recessed and reconvened at 2:15 p.m.
with the same attendance as at the end of the morning session except
that Messrs. Edmiston, Gardner, and Berntson were not present and Mr.
Clayton and Mr. Upgren, Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, were in attendance.
Reference was made to the revised report dated April 6, 1943,
submitted by the committee appointed in accordance with the action
taken at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on January

6/28/43 -8
26, 1943, to make a study of the significant aspects of the relation
ship of the Government security dealers to the Government security
market. Chairman Eccles stated that the report did not appear to him
to cover adequately certain aspects of the problem and that at his re
quest a memorandum had been prepared under date of June 26, 1943, by
Messrs. Piser and-Kennedy which presented certain questions in rela
tion to the regulation of the Government security market that he would
like to have considered. The committee report and the memorandum of
June 26 were read, and Chairman Eccles amplified his views with respect
to the points covered by the memorandum. He also said that developments
in the future might make the regulation of the activities of the dealers
under a voluntary arrangement much more difficult than in the past,
particularly if, as had been suggested, the number of dealers increased
materially. In these circumstances, he felt that the Federal Open
Market Committee should develop with the Manager of the System Account
something in the nature of regulations which would govern the relation
ship with the dealers in somewhat the same manner as would be done under
a statutory requirement, and that, while there was no criticism of the
relationship of the Manager of the account with dealers in the past,
it was believed that that relationship should not be left to be deter
mined solely by the Manager of the account but should be carried on
under at least a broad outline that would be determined by the Federal
Open Market Committee. He thought that the matter had reached a point

6/28/43 -9
where a committee of the Federal Open Market Committee should meet
with the Manager of the account for the purpose of working out a pro
gram that would be approved by the Committee, and that if the dealers
were unwilling to accept regulation of this kind the Federal Open
Market Committee should undertake to get the necessary statutory au
thority to handle the situation. He would not eliminate the Government
security dealers but suggested that consideration be given to changing
the situation along the lines that he had discussed.
Mr. McKee felt that the principal cause for complaint against
the dealers was their failure to control the advice given by their field
offices and representatives to small banks, and that unless they were
regulated or were willing to regulate themselves in this particular he
was at a loss to know how the small banks throughout the country could
be expected to carry out sound investment programs.
Mr. Sproul expressed himself as being increasingly in accord
with the report submitted by the special committee, and in that connec
tion observed that such a report would necessarily represent a concil
iation of different points of view. He stated that, while he recognized
some of the difficulties referred to in the memorandum of June 26 men
tioned above, he questioned the desirability and effectiveness of an
attempt more formally to regulate dealers' activities. In connection
with the possibilities of large profits to dealers growing out of trans
actions of the System account, he was of the opinion that these profits

6/23/43 -10
were not large either actually or in relation to the value of the
services rendered. He said that the principal question raised by the
statement in the memorandum of June 26 was whether the System needed
to have more control over the activities not only of Government security
dealers but of all other elements in the Government security market,
which would mean that the System would have to control activities of
practically everyone dealing in Government securities. He added that
he would want to consider carefully any further regulation of the
market for the reason that it might create a more difficult situation
than the one existing at the present time.
Mr. Alfred H. Williams inquired whether the situation might
be met by making available to the members of the Federal Open Market
Committee copies of stenographic transcripts of the conferences of
the Manager of the System Account with dealers' representatives. Mr.
Sproul replied that, while he was in agreement that the members of the
Committee should have full reports, he was of the opinion that the
introduction of a stenographer in these conferences would tend to re
strain effective exchange of information between the dealers and the
Manager of the System Account. He also said that if there should be
further regulation of the dealers he thought it would be preferable
from the standpoint of the System to have statutory regulation, in
stead of more formal administrative regulation, in place of the vol
untary arrangement existing at the present time.

6/28/43 -11
Chairman Eccles suggested that between now and the next meet
ing of the full Committee the executive committee meet with the Manager
of the System Account and review the instructions that had been given
to the dealers and be prepared to submit at the next meeting of the
full Committee recommendations in connection with the question whether
the relationship with the dealers should be formalized somewhat fur
ther than at present.
Mr. Sproul made the statement that so long as policy is de
termined in Washington in general terms to be carried out in New York
there will be differences as to whether the full intent of the policy
and its execution are in complete conformity, for the reason that no
two people retain exactly the same understanding of such a policy de
cision and the means of its execution, and that unless that fact were
clearly understood and allowed for no such arrangement could work out
with entire satisfaction to every one.
At the conclusion of the discussion, it was understood that the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York would prepare a full statement of the
present relationship with the dealers, that this statement would be
sent to and reviewed by the members of the executive committee, and
that the executive committee would make a report for consideration at
the next meeting of the Committee.
Mr. Gilbert inquired as to the attitude of the Treasury toward
direct replacement of maturing securities held in the System account,

6/28/43 -12
and Chairman Eccles stated that there had been no objection on the
part of the Treasury to direct replacement of maturing longer-term
issues but that it had expressed no opinion on the direct replacement
of Treasury bills.
Mr. Sproul repeated his former objection to the direct pur
chase of securities from the Treasury, stating that so long as the
people retain confidence in the Government's credit the financing of
the war is relatively simple, and that to jeopardize that confidence
is too great a risk to take to achieve a measure of improvement in
the mechanical handling of our Government security transactions.
Mr. Miller also questioned the desirability of direct replace
ment of bills for the reason that the dealers made little or no profit
on the transaction when they bid for bills and sold to the System ac
count the bills which they were unable to place in the market, and
stated that if replacements were taken directly from the Treasury
the dealers might lose some of their interest in bills and materially
reduce or discontinue their efforts to effect a broad distribution.
In connection with the discussion of the instructions to be
issued to the Federal Reserve Banks with respect to the purchase of
Treasury bills and to the New York Bank in connection with the execu
tion of transactions for the System account, Chairman Eccles referred
to the difficulty being experienced at the present time in maintaining
the pattern of rates which was agreed upon when the proportion of

6/28/43 -13
short-term securities in relation to total Government securities out
standing was much smaller than at present. He suggested that when
the present program of increasing the weekly bill offering to
$1,000,000,000 was completed the amount of the weekly offering should
not be increased further and that it might be desirable to issue a
security with a nine months' maturity and a 3/4 per cent rate which
the System would stand ready to purchase under a repurchase option
as is now done with bills, which would make it unnecessary for the
System to undertake to maintain a pattern of rates on maturities of
less than nine months.
Mr. Sproul felt that such an arrangement might create more of
a problem than existed at the present time, and he doubted the wisdom
of undertaking to guarantee a 3/4 per cent rate on what in effect would
be a one-day bill. He was of the opinion that such an arrangement would
not solve the problem of "playing the pattern of rates" as that was al
ready moving into notes and bonds where the profits were larger, and
that the change proposed by Chairman Eccles would encourage that
tendency.
There was some discussion of Chairman Eccles' suggestion, fol
lowing which he reviewed the discussions which members of the executive
committee had had with the Treasury, and the recommendations which they
had made to the Treasury, in connection with the financing which had
just been announced. There was also a discussion of the procedure fol
lowed by the Treasury in this instance of conferring with members of

6/28/43 -14
the executive committee and talking on the telephone with several of
the Presidents, and there was agreement on the part of those present
that it would be helpful if a procedure could be developed by which
the Presidents would have an opportunity to learn of the recommenda
tions of the members of the executive committee before the Presidents'
individual conversations with the Treasury took place.
All of the members of the Federal Open Market Committee were
in agreement with the suggestion that the direction with respect to
the purchase of bills issued to the Federal Reserve Banks at the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 2, 1943, should
be changed to conform to the understanding reached at the meeting on
May 15, 1943, that the Federal Reserve Banks would treat all purchases
made pursuant to the direction as being subject to the condition that,
upon request of the seller before the maturity of the bills, the Re
serve Bank would sell to him Treasury bills of like amounts and ma
turities at the discount rate of 3/8 per cent per annum.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the following direction
was approved by unanimous vote, with the
understanding that resales of Treasury
bills held under option would be for
immediate delivery when so requested by
the option holder:
Until otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market
Committee, the 12 Federal Reserve Banks are directed to
purchase all Treasury bills that may be offered to such
Banks on a discount basis at the rate of 3/8 per cent per
annum, any such purchases to be upon the condition that
the Federal Reserve Bank, upon the request of the seller

6/28/43 -15-
before the maturity of the bills, will sell to him Treas
ury bills of like amount and maturity at the same rate
of discount. All bills purchased under this direction
are to be held by the purchasing Federal Reserve Bank in
its own account and prompt reports of all such purchases
are to be made to the Manager of the System open market
account.
There was also agreement that in the absence of some unfore
seen development it would not be necessary to hold another meeting of
the Federal Open Market Committee before a date in the early part of
September, which it was suggested might be the 6th or 7th of that
month, and that in order that the executive committee might have suf
ficient authority during that interval the limitation on the authority
to increase or decrease the amount of securities held in the account
should be increased.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the following direction
was approved by unanimous vote, with the
understanding that the limitations con
tained in the direction were understood
to include commitments for purchases or
sales of securities for the System ac
count:
That the executive committee be directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to ar
range for such transactions for the System open market ac
count, either in the open market or directly with the
Treasury (including purchases, sales, exchanges, replace
ment of maturing securities, and letting maturities run
off without replacement), as may be necessary in the prac
tical administration of the account, or for the purpose
of maintaining about the present general level of prices
and yields of Government securities, or for the purpose
of maintaining an adequate supply of funds in the market;
provided that the aggregate amount of securities held in

6/28/43 -16-
the account at the close of this date (other than special
short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treas
ury and Treasury bills purchased pursuant to the direc
tions of the Federal Open Market Committee issued under
dates of March 2 and June 28, 1943) shall not be increased
or decreased by more than ,1,500,000,000.
That the executive committee be further directed,
until otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Com
mittee, to arrange for the purchase for the System open
market account direct from the Treasury of such amounts
of special short-term certificates of indebtedness as
may be necessary from time to time for the temporary ac
commodation of the Treasury; provided that the amount
of such certificates held in the account at any one time
shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.