A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Tuesday, March 2, 1943, at 10:10 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Evans
Mr. Paddock
Mr. Fleming
Mr. McLarin
Mr. Peyton (alternate for Mr. Day)
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. John H. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Clayton, Assistant to the Chairman of
the Board of Governors
Mr. Thomas, Assistant Director of the
Division of Research and Statistics of
the Board of Governors
Mr. Piser, Chief, Government Securities
Section, Division of Research and Sta
tistics of the Board of Governors
Mr. Berntson, Clerk in the Office of the
Secretary of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Leach and Young, alternate members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Alfred H. Williams, Leedy, and Gilbert,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Philadelphia, Kansas City, and Dallas, re
spectively
Messrs. Bryan and Clerk, First Vice Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and
San Francisco, respectively
Messrs. Sienkiewicz, MacKenzie, and Upgren,
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve

3/2/43 -2
Banks of Philadelphia, Cleveland, and
Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Edmiston, Assistant Vice President of
the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Mr. Rice, Manager of the Research and Sta
tistical Department at the Federal Re
serve Bank of Dallas
Mr. Morrill stated that advices of the election for the period
of one year commencing March 1, 1943, of members and alternate members
of the Federal Open Market Committee representing the Federal Reserve
Banks had been received, that each newly elected member and alternate
member had executed the required oath of office (with the exception of
Mr. Day, who, because of illness, was not in attendance at this meeting
but to whom the oath of office had been sent for execution), and that it
was the opinion of the Committee's Counsel on the basis of the advices
received that the following members and alternate members were legally
qualified to serve:
W. W. Paddock, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston, with Hugh Leach, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Richmond, as alternate member;
Allan Sproul, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, with L. R. Rounds, First Vice President of the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate member;
M. J. Fleming, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland, with C. S. Young, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago, as alternate member;
W. S. McLarin, Jr., President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta, with Chester C. Davis, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, as alternate member; and
William A. Day, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco, with J. N. Peyton, President of the Federal Re
serve Bank of Minneapolis, as alternate member.
Upon motions duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the following officers of
the Federal Open Market Committee were re
elected to serve until the election of their

3/2/43 -3
successors at the first meeting of the Commit
tee after March 1, 1944:
Marriner S. Eccles, Chairman
Allan Sproul, Vice Chairman
S. R. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
E. A. Goldenweiser, Economist
Walter Wyatt, General Counsel
J. P. Dreibelbis, Assistant General
Counsel
Chairman Eccles referred to the approval given at the last meet
ing of the Federal Open Market Committee to the suggestion that the Re
serve Bank members of the Committee arrange to have the economists from
their respective Banks attend future meetings of the Committee with the
understanding that they would be called upon from time to time at the
meetings to discuss business and credit conditions. He said that the
further suggestion had been made that all of these economists be elected
as Associate Economists of the Committee.
This suggestion was agreed to and, upon
motion duly made and seconded, it was voted
unanimously to elect as Associate Economists of
the Federal Open Market Committee to serve until
the first meeting of the Committee after March 1,
1944, the five economists from the Federal Re
serve Banks of Boston, New York, Cleveland, At
lanta, and San Francisco who would be designated
by the respective Reserve Bank members of the
Committee for that purpose.
In accordance with this action, the follow
ing designations were made:
John H. Williams, by Mr. Sproul
K. H. MacKenzie, by Mr. Fleming
Malcolm H. Bryan, by Mr. McLarin
Mr. Paddock stated that at a later date he would
designate an economist from the Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston, and it was understood that Mr.
Clerk would advise Mr. Day of the Committee's
action so that a designation could be made by

3/2/43 -4-
him of an economist from the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York was selected to execute transactions for
the System open market account until the ad
journment of the first meeting of the Committee
after March 1, 1944.
Mr. Sproul stated that the board of directors of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York had selected Mr. Rouse as manager of the System
open market account, subject to the selection of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York by the Federal Open Market Committee as the Bank to ex
ecute transactions for the System open market account and to his approval
by the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the selection of Mr. Rouse
as manager of the System open market account
was approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the following were selected
to serve with the Chairman of the Federal Open
Market Committee (who, under the provisions of
the bylaws, is also chairman of the executive
committee) as members and alternate members of
the executive committee until the selection of
their successors at the first meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee after March 1,
1944:
Members Alternate Members
Ronald Ransom John K. McKee
R. M. Evans M, S. Szymczak
Allan Sproul Ernest G. Draper
W. W. Paddock (To serve in the order
named as alternates for
Messrs. Eccles, Ransom,
and Evans)

3/2/43 -5
Members (Cont'd) Alternate Members
M. J. Fleming
W .S. McLarin, Jr.
(To serve in the order
named as alternates for
Messrs. Sproul and Paddock)
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
January 25-26, 1943, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the execu
tive committee of the Federal Open Market
Committee as set forth in the minutes of the
meeting of the executive committee held on
January 25-26, 1943, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
At this point, Mr. Davis, an alternate member of the Committee,
joined the meeting.
Mr. Rouse submitted a report prepared at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York of open market operations conducted for the System
account during the period from January 26 to February 24, 1943, both
inclusive, and supplemental reports covering transactions during the
period from February 25 to March 1, 1943, both inclusive. He reviewed
the important parts of the principal report, and referred particularly
to the changes that had taken place in the account during the period
from January 24 to and including March 1, 1943. Copies of Mr. Rouse's
reoorts have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee.
In connection with the table on page 6 of the principal report
showing the distribution of accepted tenders on Treasury bill offerings,

3/2/43 -6
Mr. McKee suggested that consideration might be given to the desirability
of selling bills from the System portfolio to meet tax situations such as
occur in the Chicago and Minneapolis Districts, rather than to permit
buyers in the affected areas to bid in the market and disturb the normal
distribution of bills. Following a discussion of this suggestion, Mr.
McKee expressed the opinion again that the option on the part of the
seller to repurchase Treasury bills sold to the Federal Reserve Banks
should be limited to 15 days, which would avoid immobilizing the bills
in the hands of the Federal Reserve Banks in recognition of the option
running for the life of the bills. There was a discussion of reasons
why a 15-day option might not be effective in accomplishing this result.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account during the period from January
25 to March 1, 1943, inclusive, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Goldenweiser, as chairman of the committee appointed in ac
cordance with the action taken at the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee on January 26, 1943, to make a study of the significant aspects
of the relationship of the Government security dealers to the Government
security market, distributed copies of the preliminary report of the com
mittee and stated that because of the time limitation the report was
hastily prepared and that, while it made certain recommendations, none of
them involved radical changes in the present procedure.
It was understood that the report would
be placed on the agenda for discussion at the
next meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee, that the members of the Committee

3/2/43 -7-
would study it in the meantime, and that the
special committee might continue its studies
and, if found desirable, submit a revised re
port.
Reference was made to the direction issued by the Federal Open
Market Committee on September 28, 1942, with respect to the purchase of
Treasury bills by the Federal Reserve Banks, and Mr. McKee suggested
that the new Open Market Committee renew the direction.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following direction was ap
proved by unanimous vote, with the under
standing that resales of Treasury bills
held under option would be for immediate
delivery when so requested by the option
holder:
Until otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Com
mittee, the 12 Federal Reserve Banks are directed to purchase
all Treasury bills that may be offered to such Banks on a dis
count basis at the rate of 3/8 per cent per annum, any such
purchases, if desired by the seller, to be upon the condition
that the Federal Reserve Bank, upon the request of the seller
before the maturity of the bills, will sell to him Treasury
bills of like amount and maturity at the same rate of dis
count. All bills purchased outright are to be purchased for
the System open market account. All bills purchased under
option to repurchase are to be held by the purchasing Federal
Reserve Bank in its own account and prompt reports of all such
ourchases are to be made to the manager of the System open
market account.
In accordance with the suggestion pre
viously made by Mr. McKee, it was again un
derstood that the executive committee would
undertake to arrange with the Treasury for an
amendment to the terms under which the vari
ous issues of Government securities are of
fered so as to permit full allotment to the
System of securities, issued to refund matur
ing direct obligations, to the extent that
replacement of such securities held in the
System account appeared to the executive com
mittee to be desirable.

3/2/43 -8
On this action, Mr. Sproul voted "no"
for the reasons stated by him at the meeting
of the Committee on January 26, 1943.
The question of the limitations to be placed on the authority
of the executive committee to execute transactions in the System open mar
ket account was considered in the light of discussions at an informal
meeting yesterday of the Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks and the
Board of Governors with respect to the organization to be set up to handle
the forthcoming April financing drive and the program for, and the types
of securities to be offered during, the drive. It was suggested that
the bill now pending before Congress, which would remove the requirement
that reserves be maintained against war loan deposits and reduce re
quired reserves by a substantial amount, might not be approved before the
April drive, and that in that event the System might be called upon to
purchase very substantial amounts of securities before and during the
drive for the purpose of supplying reserves. There was agreement that,
in view of the unprecedented size of the April financing and the decline
in member bank reserves, the limitation on the authority of the execu
tive committee (1) to increase or decrease the amount of securities in
the System account, and (2) to purchase short-term certificates for the
te oorary accommodation of the Treasury, should be increased from
$1,000,000,000 to $1,500,000,000.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following direction was ap
proved by unanimous vote:
That the executive committee be directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for

3/2/43 -9-
such transactions for the System open market account, either
in the open market or directly with the Treasury (including
purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing securities,
and letting maturities run off without replacement), as may be
necessary in the practical administration of the account, or
for the purpose of maintaining about the present general level
of prices and yields of Government securities, or for the pur
pose of maintaining an adequate supply of funds in the market;
provided that the aggregate amount of securities held in the
account at the close of this date (other than special short
term certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time
for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury and Treasury
bills purchased pursuant to the directions of the Federal Open
Market Committee issued under dates of September 28, 1942, and
March 2, 1943) shall not be increased or decreased by more than
$1,500,000,000.
That the executive committee be further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to
arrange for the purchase for the System open market account di
rect from the Treasury of such amounts of special short-term
certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to
time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided
that the amount of such certificates held in the account at any
one time shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
Chairman Eccles stated that the members of the executive commit
tee of the Federal Open Market Committee were to meet with the Secretary
of the Treasury this afternoon to discuss the issues to be offered in the
April financing and that, in view of the announcement by the Treasury
that tne minimum goal of the April drive would be $13,000,000,000, he
(Chairman Eccles) would like to suggest to the Treasury that the 7/8 per
cent certificate be eliminated from the list of securities offered during
the drive, with the understanding (1) that a 2 per cent bond would be of
fered to banks at the beginning of the drive, (2) that at the end of the
drive a certificate would be offered to refund the issue of certificates
maturing on May 1 and to raise whatever additional funds might be desired
as a part of the April drive, and (3) that the subscriptions for the

3/2/43 -10
certificates be allotted in full up to $100,000 and the balance on a
percentage basis regardless of the source of the subscription. The
reason for this suggestion, Chairman Eccles said, was that, as long
as the present policy of maintaining a pattern of rates was continued,
holders of certificates could realize a profit by selling the shorter
term certificates and purchasing new issues as they were offered, and
in his opinion there was no justification in these circumstances for
offering certificates to the public in unlimited quantities. In this
connection, he referred to the successful experience in Canada of sell
ing bonds to the public rather than short-term securities, and he felt
that the same policy should be adopted in the United States and that,
if the April drive included a 2-1/2 and a 2 per cent bond, the Series
E, F, and G war savings bonds, and the tax note, the investment needs
of the public could be adequately met without offering during the drive
a certificate which would mature within a year and which would add to
the refunding problems of the Treasury in a period when the total offer
ings of securities were being substantially increased.
During Chairman Eccles' statement, Mr. Kennedy, Assistant Chief
of the Government Securities Section, Division of Research and Statistics
of the Board of Governors, joined the meeting.
Mr. Sproul stated that the suggestion might be made to the
Treasury that a 1-1/4 per cent note be offered during the drive in lieu
of the 7/8 per cent certificate,
Mr. Piser pointed out that, if certificates were to be offered
at the end of the drive on an allotment basis for delivery on May 1, the
offering would have to be announced several days before that date. In a

3/2/43 -11-
discussion of this point, the suggestion was made that the issue of cer
tificates maturing on May 1 might be paid off and a new issue announced
at the end of the April drive with payment on the subscriptions in May.
All of these possibilities were discussed, and there was tenta
tive agreement that a program along the lines suggested by Messrs. Eccles
and Sproul should be proposed by the members of the executive committee
when they meet with the Treasury this afternoon.
The meeting then recessed and reconvened at 4:30 p.m. with the
same attendance as at the beginning of the morning session except that
Messrs. Dreibelbis, Rice, and Berntson were not present.
Mr. Sproul made a statement substantially as follows:
At the meeting of the Treasury today Under Secretary of
the Treasury Bell, after reviewing the estimated need for funds
over the next few months, stated that it was the present plan
to raise $13,000,000,000 in the April financing drive, exclusive
of savings bonds in the amount of 800,000,000, tax notes in
the amount of $600,000,000, and Treasury bills in the amount
of $800,000,000, or a total during the financing period of
$15,200,000,000.
There was a discussion of the question of the amount of
excess reserves that should be maintained during the financing
period, and Mr. Bell mentioned $2,500,000,000. Chairman Eccles
stated as the view of the members of the Board and the Presidents
that it would be undesirable to fix any figure of excess reserves
to be maintained during the financing or for the System to make
any commitment in that connection. He discussed the use of Treas
ury bills as excess reserves and the difficulty, as indicated by
the experience during the December drive, of attempting to force
any volume of excess reserves into the market as long as the
present bill program continued.
With respect to the types of securities to be offered dur
ing the present drive, Chairman Eccles stated the reasons pre
viously discussed by us why it was believed certificate issues
should not be used to raise nonbank funds but should be used to
obtain funds from banks between drives. It was also stated that
it was the feeling of the Federal Reserve representatives that
the securities offered during the drive should be a 2-1/2 and

3/2/43 -12-
a 2 per cent bond and possibly a 1-1/4 per cent note. If because
of the shortness of time for organization of the selling drive,
and the large amount of funds to be raised, it was not possible
to carry out this kind of a program in connection with the April
drive, it should certainly be the policy in future drives not to
offer certificates in unlimited amounts to the public.
In connection with the timing of the offering, it was sug
gested by the Federal Reserve representatives that the 2 per cent
bond be offered at the beginning of the drive to banks and to
others throughout the drive together with the 2-1/2 per cent bond
the lowest denomination of which would be $100, and that these
issues and the 1-1/4 per cent note, savings bonds, Series C tax
notes, and $200,000,000 of new money each week from bills would
provide all of the funds that would be needed, except that at the
end of the drive a certificate might be offered for the purpose
of obtaining such additional amount of funds as might be necessary
to make the drive fully successful.
Mr. Bell discussed the use of certificates in the last war and
suggested that consideration be given to the possibility of adopt
ing a similar procedure in connection with future financing. We
again took the position that the sale of certificates to banks be
tween drives and their refunding with the proceeds of bonds sold
during drives, as in the last war, might be a way of meeting our
suggestion that certificates should only be offered to banks be
tween drives and that longer-term securities should be offered to
investors other than banks during the drives.
Chairman Eccles said that when the Secretary of the Treasury
joined the conference there was a further discussion of the amount of
funds to be raised curing the April drive and that it was stated that the
members of the Board and the Presidents felt that $15,000,000,000 was too
high a figure, that $14,000,000,000 was the maximum that should be set as
a goal, end that some felt that $12,000,000,000 or $13,000,000,000 was all
that should be asked for, with the understanding that there would be some
bank financing between drives. The Secretary, Chairman Eccles said, did
not disagree with this position and requested that the members of the
executive committee return to the Treasury on Tuesday, March 9, at 11:00
a.m. for a further discussion of the whole program.

3/2/43 -13
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved: