A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Monday, January 25, 1943, at 10:15 a. m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Alfred H. Williams
Mr. Gilbert
r. Young
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. John H. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Clayton, Assistant to the Chairman
of the Board of Governors
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
Mr. Piser, Chief, Government Securities
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics of the Board of Governors
Mr. Berntson, Clerk in the Office of the
Secretary of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Paddock, Fleming, McLarin, Davis, and
Day, alternate members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Leach and Peyton, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and
Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Sienkiewicz, Secretary of the Presidents'
Conference

1/25/43 -2
Mr. Edmiston, Assistant Vice President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
December 14, 1942, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the execu
tive committee of the Federal Open Market
Committee as set forth in the minutes of the
meeting of the executive committee held on
December 14, 1942, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
Mr. Rouse read a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York of open market operations conducted during the period
from December 14, 1942, to January 20, 1943, inclusive. He also made
a supplemental report covering the transactions conducted for the
System open market account during the period from January 20 to 23,
19 , inclusive. Copies of Mr. Rouse's reports have been placed in
43
the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account during the period from Decem
ber 14, 1942, to January 23, 1943, inclusive,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Under date of December 22, 1942, the Board's examiner in
charge submitted to Mr. Morrill, as Secretary of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee, a copy of a report of examination of the System account
made as of the close of business on October 3, 1942, by the Board's
examiners as part of the regular examination of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, and copies of this report were sent to the members

1/25/43 -3
of the Federal Open Market Committee on December 29, 1942. The report
contained no criticisms or recommendations.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the report was received
and ordered filed.
Chairman Eccles stated that the Washington members of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee would like to suggest that the representa
tive members of the Committee bring the economists from their respective
Banks to future meetings of the Committee, and that an arrangement be
adopted under which one or two of the economists would discuss busi
ness and credit conditions at each of these meetings. It was felt, he
said, that such a procedure would bring further aid to the Committee
in its work, and would stimulate the interest of the economists and of
the economic and research staffs of the Federal Reserve Banks. It
would be understood also, Chairman Eccles said, that a President who
was not a member of the Committee would be at liberty to have the
economist from his Bank accompany him to the meetings which he might
attend whenever he believed it to be desirable and when the hotel and
transportation situation made it appropriate. All of the Presidents
indicated agreement that such a procedure would be a desirable one.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, approval was given to the
suggestion that the representative members of
the Committee arrange to have the economists
from their respective Banks attend future meet
ings of the Committee and that the other Presi
dents be invited to bring the economists from
their Banks to the Committee meetings which
they might attend.

1/25/43 -4
The Chairman then said that in order to facilitate the consid
eration at this meeting of Treasury financing and open market policies
two memoranda had been prepared, one entitled "Treasury Financing and
Open Market Policies" by the Board's staff under date of January 22,
1943, and one by Mr. Sproul under date of December 10, 1942, on the
subject "Credit Policy and Treasury Financing". The Chairman said
that Mr. Sproul's memorandum was briefly discussed at the last meeting
of the Committee and following that meeting copies had been sent to
the Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks who were not members of
the Committee. Copies of the memorandum prepared by the Board's staff
had been sent to all of the Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks a
few days prior to the present meeting. The two memoranda were read
(all but the last section of the memorandum prepared by Mr. Sproul)
and there was a general discussion of the several questions raised by
the memoranda.
Chairman Eccles stated that, while the December financing cam
paign had been a success when judged on the basis of the total amount
of securities sold, there were many things that would have to be done
in future campaigns to improve the procedure, particularly for the
purpose of reducing the proportion of new securities sold to banks.
He felt that a continuation of the present volume of bank subscriptions
would indicate a failure of the Victory Fund Committees to achieve
their primary purpose of selling securities to nonbank investors, and
that the assumption that it would be necessary to sell as much as

1/25/43 -5
$30,000,000,000 of securities to the banks in the current year should
be abandoned. He added that every effort should be made to bring
about the adoption by the Government of an adequate program of taxation
and compulsory saving.
The meeting recessed and reconvened at 2:10 p.m. with the same
attendance as at the close of the morning session except that Messrs.
McKee and Dreibelbis were delayed, and Mr. Thomas, Assistant Director
of the Division of Research and Statistics of the Board of Governors,
was in attendance.
Chairman Eccles reviewed some of the suggestions that were
being considered by the Government with respect to a "pay-as-you-go"
income tax plan, a withholding tax, and other fiscal policies, and
there was a discussion of Treasury financing and open market policies
in the light of a probable budget deficit in excess of $60,000,000,000.
There was a unanimous feeling that, although it very likely would not
be possible to hold the amount of bank purchases of Government secu
rities to the minimum indicated by the chart attached to the memoran
dum prepared by the staff of the Board of Governors and previously
referred to at this meeting, everything possible should be done to
achieve that objective.
During this discussion, Messrs. McKee and Dreibelbis rejoined
the meeting.
Reference was made to suggestions previously offered that
Treasury bills be sold at a fixed rate of discount up to $100,000 to

1/25/43 -6
any one purchaser or that the Federal Reserve Banks purchase bills
directly from the Treasury for resale at a fixed discount rate, and
to the further suggestions that the Treasury adopt a policy of offer
ing its bills at the fixed rate of 3/8 per cent, or that the offerings
be at a fixed rate up to a stated amount to any one purchaser and on
a bid basis for the balance.
The additional suggestion was offered by Mr. McKee that the
weekly issues of bills be allotted to the Federal Reserve districts
on the basis of excess reserves held by the member banks in the re
spective districts with a view to larger sales of bills to banks
having excess reserves.
In an informal poll of the Presidents as to their attitude
toward the purchase of bills by the Federal Reserve Banks directly
from the Treasury for resale, a majority of the Presidents were of
the opinion that this should not be resorted to at this time but that
other suggestions designed to obtain a wider distribution of bills
should be adopted. In a further discussion there appeared to be gen
eral agreement that at least for the time being, and in view of the
established method of issuing bills and the possible attitude of the
Treasury on the matter, the best procedure would be for the Treasury
to accept all bids for bills at a 3/8 per cent rate up to $100,000 to
any one purchaser with the balance being sold on a competitive bid
basis.
Turning to the question of the problem before the Federal

1/25/43 -7
Open Market Committee of maintaining an agreed pattern of rates on
Government securities and supplying reserve funds to the market for
the purpose of financing the war, Chairman Eccles felt that a strong
case could and should be made to the Treasury for the separation of
drives for nonbank funds from offerings to banks, for the reason that
during the nonbank campaigns the Committee would be faced only with
the problem of maintaining the pattern of rates, that securities could
be offered to the banks between drives in relatively small amounts
which could be handled with smaller excess reserves than were believed
to be necessary in the past, and that greater emphasis could be placed
on the sale of securities to nonbank purchasers. There should be a
determination also, he said, as to how funds are to be put into the
market so as to avoid the condition that existed during the December
financing when, in order to maintain a certain volume of reserves in
the market, as well as to maintain the pattern of rates, the System
was forced to buy an undesirable proportion of bonds selling at sub
stantial premiums. It was his opinion that, since we know we shall
have to provide a certain amount of reserve funds during this period
of heavy war financing, provision should be made for direct purchases
from the Treasury to the extent believed to be necessary of portions
of the weekly offerings of bills, which, through the redemption of
maturing bills held by the public in the amount of the System's pur
chases, would put the desired funds directly into the market.

1/25/43 -8
Mr. Sproul stated that in his opinion, and because he be
lieved nothing should be done which might create public concern about
the credit of the Government, direct purchases of this kind should
not be resorted to for the purpose of supplying reserve funds until
necessity forced such action, which is not the case at present. He
said that a further effort should be made to convince the Treasury
and banks that, when the latter hold substantial amounts of Treasury
bills that can be immediately realized upon, the amount of excess re
serves is no longer of primary importance. He did not believe, there
fore, that the Open Market Committee should undertake to determine be
forehand the amount of excess reserves needed in connection with
financing operations and to supply them in this way. If a particular
financing job appears to require that additional funds be supplied to
tone up the market, a better way to accomplish the purpose would be to
allow Treasury balances to run down before a financing operation and
to meet the Treasury's temporary cash requirements during that period
through the purchase by the Federal Reserve Banks of special one-day
certificates of indebtedness. This practice, he said, has the virtue
of flexibility, of the automatic extinction of the credit created as
the Treasury's balances are replenished by the sale of securities, and
of public acceptance through previous experience with it. He added
that to embark on a program of direct buying of Treasury bills from
the Treasury would unnecessarily involve the System in a question of
public policy which he felt should not be raised at this time.

1/25/43
During a discussion of the opinions expressed by Messrs.
Eccles and Sproul, the former stated that another aspect of the prob
lem was whether the System should continue to replace in the market
maturing bills and certificates held in the System account or whether
arrangements should be made with the Treasury for the direct replace
ment of these maturities which would be in increasing amounts in the
future. It was agreed that this point should be considered when the
meeting reconvened tomorrow.
Thereupon the meeting recessed to reconvene at 9:30 o'clock
tomorrow morning.
ecretary.
Approved:
Chairman.

The meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was reconvened
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, January 26, 1943, at 9:40 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Alfred H. Williams
Mr. Gilbert
Mr. Young
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Mr. John H. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open Mar
ket Account
Mr. Clayton, Assistant to the Chairman of
the Board of Governors
Mr. Piser, Chief, Government Securities
Section, Division of Research and Sta
tistics of the Board of Governors
Mr. Berntson, Clerk in the Office of the
Secretary of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Paddock, Fleming, McLarin, Davis, and
Day, alternate members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Mr. Leach, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond
Mr. Sienkiewicz, Secretary of the Presidents'
Conference
Chairman Eccles stated that, in view of the increased amount of
maturing bills and certificates which it was expected would be held in
the System account in the future, he would like to see the Committee

1/26/43 -2
reach an understanding pursuant to which, under the authority given to
the executive committee by the Federal Open Market Committee, the ex
ecutive committee would arrange with the Treasury for the direct re
placement, in full, of such maturities as well as of other maturing
issues on which the right of exchange might not be extended to all other
purchasers. His reason for this position was that such a procedure
would eliminate the necessity of the System competing for replacement
securities in the market (on which it would be necessary to pay the
dealers' commissions) as well as the disturbance to the market that might
result from such purchases which would be in addition to System purchases
of some $3,000,000,000 to $9,000,000,000 during the current year for the
purpose of supplying the market with needed funds. He stated that in the
current offering of certificates of indebtedness bank subscriptions in
excess of $100,000 are to be allotted on the basis of only about 14 per
cent of the amount subscribed. He added that, in all the circumstances,
it would be his suggestion that in future offerings dealers should not
be given full allotment but should be given an allotment on the same
basis as banks accepting demand deposits.
Mr. Sproul said that the latter suggestion does not involve mere
ly the question of denying full allotment to a few dealers in Government
securities but the broader question of how far underground you wish to
drive the practice of heavy subscriptions to issues of Government securi
ties on which it appears a quick profit will be realizable. Consideration
must also be given, he said, to the treatment to be accorded to brokerage
houses, corporations, and individuals who purchase to resell and who, in

1/26/43 -3
many cases, are not now policed strictly as are the so-called Govern
ment security dealers with respect to the amount of their subscriptions,
With respect to the replacement of maturing securities in the
System account, in cases where no exchange offering is made by the Treas
ury, Mr. Sproul suggested that the System should not seek a change in
the Treasury's offering circulars so as to make possible full replacement
by the System under all circumstances. Having regard for his own bias
against any extension of direct dealings with the Treasury, he said he
thought the better procedure would be to let the market take the securi
ties it wanted and, if necessary, to replace System maturities with other
securities the market wishes to sell. In the case of the current offer
ing of certificates, he said that the small allotment percentage to Fed
eral Reserve Banks and other banks accepting demand deposits was an
indication that the market does not need the funds which would be sup
plied by full replacement of the System's holdings of the maturing certif
icates, and that to the extent additional funds are needed Treasury
bills are being sold to the Reserve Banks.
During the discussion of the opinions expressed by Messrs. Eccles
and Sproul, Messrs. McKee, Peyton, and Leedy, and Mr. Thomas, Assistant
Director of the Division of Research and Statistics of the Board of Gov
ernors, joined the meeting.
Reference was made in the discussion to the function that Govern
ment security dealers should be expected to perform in the present war
financing situation, and Mr. McKee suggested that a study be made, in
cooperation with the dealers, of the functions they should perform and

1/26/43 -4
how their operations should be fitted into the financing program. It
was his thought in making this suggestion that such a committee might
be able to work out a program for the dealers during the war period
that would facilitate the Treasury's financing and the operations of
the Federal Open Market Committee.
Mr. Rouse stated that he met with representatives of the dealers
on Friday of each week for the purpose of discussing all phases of the
market situation and how the dealers could be most helpful, and that the
dealers were trying to cooperate with the Treasury and the Federal Re
serve System.
Mr. Williams moved that a committee be ap
pointed by Chairman Eccles to make a study of
the significant aspects of the relationship of
the Government security dealers to the Govern
ment security market, it being understood (1)
that the committee would be a small one and
would complete its study promptly, if possible
by the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee, and (2) that the committee would de
termine to what extent representatives of the
dealers should be consulted.
Mr. Williams' motion was put by the chair
and carried unanimously.
In a further discussion of the method by which maturing securi
ties in the System account should be replaced, reference was made again
to the question whether the System should arrange with the Treasury for
full allotment of new securities when no exchange offering is made. Mr.
Sproul said he did not favor full replacement in the manner suggested
for the reasons which he had previously stated.
Inquiry was made as to the purpose of the amendment authorizing
direct purchases from the Treasury, and Chairman Eccles stated that in

1/26/43 -5
testifying on the bill he had not stated that the authority would be
used only for the purpose of purchasing special short-term certificates
of indebtedness from the Treasury but rather that it would not be used
as a means of financing Treasury requirements. He distinguished between
direct purchases for the purpose of supplying funds to the market and
for the purpose of replacing maturing securities. In the discussion of
this point, reference was made to the opinions submitted by the Com-
mittee's Counsel last year that, to the extent that allotments of new
securities were permitted to be paid for by the delivery of maturing
securities, the transaction would, in fact, be an exchange and should not
be charged to the System's authority to purchase direct from the Treas
ury.
At the conclusion of the discussion, during which it was evi
dent that there was a division of opinion as to the course to be followed,
Chairman Eccles stated that under the directions issued to the executive
committee it had authority to arrange with the Treasury for direct re
placement of maturing securities and that he had referred to the matter
at this time in order to ascertain whether any change should be made in
the executive committee's authority.
Mr. Morrill stated that Mr. Black, Governor of the Farm Credit
Administration, recently suggested to Mr. Evans that it would be desir
able if the 3/8 per cent posted rate on Treasury bills were extended to
cover Federal intermediate credit bank debentures for the reason that in
the present circumstances the debentures were somewhat handicapped in
the market by the preference for bills.

1/26/43 -6-
In this connection, Mr. Leedy stated that complaint had been
made in his district because the preferential rate of 1/2 per cent
established by the Federal Reserve Banks on advances to member banks
on short-term Government securities was not extended to advances se
cured by Federal intermediate credit bank debentures, the statement
being made that this was the first time any distinction had been made
on the basis of rate.
It was pointed out that the 3/8 rate on Treasury bills and the
preferential rate on advances to member banks were established as aids
to the war financing program and that therefore there was no reason
for applying these privileges to Federal intermediate credit bank de
bentures.
There was unanimous agreement that no
change should be made in the direction issued
to the Federal Reserve Banks at the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee on Sep
tember 28, 1942, to purchase all bills offered
at the posted rate of 3/8 per cent.
All of the members of the Committee were in agreement that the
renewal of the authority granted to the executive committee at the last
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee would be ample to meet the
situation pending the next meeting of the Committee.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and sec
onded, the following resolution was adopted by
unanimous vote:
That the executive committee be directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for
such transactions for the System open market account, either
in the open market or directly with the Treasury (including
purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing securities,

1/26/43
and letting maturities run off without replacement), as may
be necessary in the practical administration of the account,
or for the purpose of maintaining about the present general
level of prices and yields of Government securities, or for
the purpose of maintaining an adequate supply of funds in
the market; provided that the aggregate amount of securities
held in the account at the close of this date (other than
special short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the
Treasury and Treasury bills purchased pursuant to the direc
tion of the Federal Open Market Committee issued under date
of September 28, 1942) shall not be increased or decreased
by more than $1,000,000,000.
That the executive committee be further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to
arrange for the purchase for the System open market account
direct from the Treasury of such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the amount of such certificates held in the
account at any one time shall not exceed $1,000,000,000.
Mr. McKee suggested that it be understood that under the author
ity granted to the executive committee it would undertake to arrange
with the Treasury for an amendment to the terms under which the various
issues of Government securities are offered so as to permit full allot
ment to the System of securities issued to refund all maturing direct
obligations, to the extent that replacement of such maturing securities
held in the System account appeared to the executive committee to be
desirable.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
this suggestion was adopted, Messrs.
Sproul and Williams voting "no",
The statement was made that the terms of the present representa
tive members of the Federal Open Market Committee would expire on Febru
ary 28, 1943. It was indicated that a meeting of the Presidents' Con
ference probably would not be held at that time and therefore some of

1/26/43 -8
the Presidents who were now members of the Committee would not be in
Washington unless their presence was deemed necessary.
It was agreed that, inasmuch as the last
day of February would fall on Sunday, the next
meeting of the Committee should be held on Mon
day, March 1, and that the Secretary should
obtain from the members whose terms would ex
pire at that time advice of their approval of
the transactions up to that date, which should
be reported at the meeting.
Chairman Eccles stated that the special committee of the Ameri
can Bankers Association on Treasury financing was anxious to meet with
him, Mr. Bell, and some of the Chairmen of the Victory Fund Committees,
that the committee had discussed the matter with Mr. Bell, and that it
was suggested that the group arrange to meet with the committee some
time next week. It was understood that Messrs. Eccles, Sproul,
Williams, and Young would attend the meeting.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman,