A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Saturday, May 15, 1943, at 3:45 p.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Paddock
Mr. Fleming
Mr. McLarin
Mr. Day
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Messrs. John H. Williams, MacKenzie, and
Bryan, Associate Economists
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Messrs. Piser and Kennedy, Chief and Assist
ant Chief, respectively, of the Government
Securities Section, Division of Research
ana Statistics, Board of Governors
Messrs. Leach, Young, and Peyton, alternate
members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Alfred H. Williams, Leedy, and Gilbert,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Philadelphia, Kansas City, and Dallas, re
spectively
Mr. Hitt, First Vice President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Messrs. Sienkiewicz and Edmiston, Vice Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia
and St. Louis, respectively
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
March 2, 1943, were approved.

5/15/43 -2
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the execu
tive committee of the Federal Open Market
Committee as set forth in the minutes of the
meeting of the executive committee held on
March 2, 1943, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Copies of a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York covering open market operations conducted for the System account
during the period from March 3 to May 12, 1943, both dates inclusive,
were distributed by Mr. Rouse during the meeting, and he reported orally
tne transactions which had been effected for the System account on May
13, 14, and 15. A copy of Mr. Rouse's written report has been placed in
the files of the Federal Open Market Committee, and the transactions re
ported by him orally are shown in the daily reports by the Federal Reserve
Bank to the members of the executive committee and will be covered in de
tail in the report covering the weekly period ending May 19, 1943, which
will be sent to all members of the Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account during the period from March
2 to May 15, 1943, both dates inclusive, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
In connection with his report, Mr. Rouse referred to the action
taken at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on June 21, 1939,
with respect to the distribution of the weekly report of open market op
erations prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and stated that
question had arisen whether the report should be sent to all of the Asso
ciate Economists of the Committee.

5/15/43 -3
Mr. Leedy suggested that it would be helpful if the report could
be sent to the officer in charge of the research department at each Fed
eral Reserve Bank regardless of whether the President of the Bank was
serving as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee. It was the
consensus of the members of the Committee, however, that, inasmuch as
tne Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks who were not members of the
Open Market Committee received copies of the weekly report, it would be
a better procedure if they would make their copies of the report avail
able in each case to the officer in charge of the Bank's division of
research and statistics.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, the
distribution of the weekly report to the fol
lowing was approved unanimously:
1. The members of the Board of Governors;
2. The Presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve
Banks;
3. The Secretary, the Economist, and the
Associate Economists of the Federal Open
Market Committee;
4. The Secretary of the Treasury;
5. The Under Secretary of the Treasury;
6. The Chief of the Division of Bank Opera
tions of the Board of Governors; and
7. Mr. Rounds, alternate member of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee; the Assist
ant Vice President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York working under the Manager
of the System Account; the Manager of the
Securities Department of the New York
Bank; the Manager of the Research Depart
ment of the New York Bank; and the con
fidential files of the New York Bank as
agent for tne Federal Open Market Com
mittee.
At this point Mr. Young withdrew from the meeting.

5/15/43 -4
Mr. Rouse also stated that it would be very helpful from an ac
counting and operating standpoint if the Federal Reserve Banks could be
instructed to hold in their own accounts all bills purchased under the
direction issued by the Federal Open Market Committee at the meeting on
March 2, 1943, rather than only bills which were purchased subject to a
right in the seller to repurchase before maturity of the bills.
Mr. McKee indicated that he would be opposed to such an extension
of the separate investment accounts of the individual Federal Reserve
Banks, but suggested that this problem could be met effectively by making
all bills purchased by the Federal Reserve Banks subject to the right of
repurchase in the seller whether he requested it or not.
This suggestion was discussed and, upon
motion duly made and seconded, it was agreed
unanimously that without changing the direc
tion issued at the meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee on March 2, 1943, with respect
to the purchase by the Federal Reserve Banks of
Treasury bills, it would be understood that the
Reserve Banks would treat all purchases pursu
ant to this direction as being subject to the
condition that, upon request of the seller be
fore the maturity of the bills, the Reserve
Bank would sell to him Treasury bills of like
amount and maturity at the discount rate of
3/8 per cent per annum and that no public an
nouncement of this understanding would be made
but that the seller would be informed when the
purchase was made by the Reserve Bank.
Mr. Rouse then referred to the increased use by some of the Federal
Reserve Banks of their participations in the System open market account as
collateral for Federal Reserve notes and stated that, in order to devise a
procedure which would avoid the burdensome accounting that was required
under the present arrangement, it was suggested that the matter be considered

5/15/43 -5
by a special committee composed of representatives of the staff of the
Board of Governors and the Federal Open Market Committee, with the under
standing that the recommendation of the special committee would be acted
upon by the executive committee with a full report to the Federal Open
Market Committee of the procedure adopted. He added that, in view of the
strong likelihood that there would be a greater use in the near future of
Government securities in the System account as collateral for Federal Re
serve notes and because of the present manpower shortage, it would be
helpful if a decision on this matter could be reached as promptly as
possible.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, it was agreed that Mr.
Szymczak, as a representative of the Board of
Governors, should discuss the matter with mem
bers of the staff of the Board and of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee, and that a recom
mendation as to the procedure to be followed
should be submitted to the Board of Governors,
the Presidents, and the Federal Open Market
Committee.
Mr. Goldenweiser, as chairman of the committee appointed in ac
cordance with the action taken at the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee on January 26, 1943, to make a study of the significant aspects
of the relationship of the Government security dealers to the Government
security market, stated that a revised report prepared under date of
Aoril 6. 1943, was available for distribution to the members of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee and for consideration at the pleasure of the
Committee.
There was unanimous agreement that copies
of the revised report should be sent to the
members of the Federal Open Market Committee,

5/15/43
the remaining Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks, ana the members of the staff of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee, and that the report
should be placed on the agenda for the next
meeting of the full Committee.
At this point Messrs. Peyton, Leedy, and Gilbert withdrew from
the meeting.
Chairman Eccles stated that the existing situation suggested the
desirability of another meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee dur
ing the latter part of June, and that the authority to be granted to the
executive committee to direct the execution of transactions for the Sys
tem open market account should be determined in the light of that sit
uation.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following direction was ap
proved by unanimous vote:
That the executive committee be directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for
such transactions for the System open market account, either
in the open market or directly with the Treasury (including
purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing securi
ties, and letting maturities run off without replacement), as
may be necessary in the practical administration of the ac
count, or for tne purpose of maintaining about the present
general level of prices and yields of Government securities,
or for the purpose of maintaining an adequate supply of funds
in the market; provided that the aggregate amount of securi
ties held in the account at the close of this date (other than
special short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased from
timet o time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury
and Treasury bills purchased pursuant to the directions of the
Federal Open Market Committee issued under dates of September
28, 1942, and March 2, 1943) shall not be increased or de
creased by more than $1,000,000,000.
That the executive committee be further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to

5/15/43
arrange for the purchase for the System open market account
direct from the Treasury of such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treas
ury; provided that the amount of such certificates held in
the account at any one time shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved.
Chairman.