A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Monday, October 18, 1943, at 10:20 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. D raper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Paddock
Mr. Young (alternate for Mr. Fleming)
Mr. McLarin
Mr. Day
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Messrs. John H. Williams, MacKenzie,
Bryan, and Wheeler, Associate
Economists
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Clayton, Assistant to the Chairman
of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Piser and Kennedy, Chief and As
sistant Chief, respectively, of the
Government Securities Section, Division
of Research and Statistics of the Board
of Governors
Mr. Berntson, Clerk in the Office of the
Secretary of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Leach, Davis, and Peyton, alternate
members of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee
Messrs. Alfred H. Williams, Leedy, and
Gilbert, Presidents of the Federal Re
serve Banks of Philadelphia, Kansas City,
and Dallas, respectively
Mr. Hays, First Vice President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland

10/18/43 -2
Messrs. Sienkiewicz, Edmiston, and Upgren,
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of Philadelphia, St. Louis, and
Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Langum, Assistant Vice President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
Messrs. Robb and Rice, Managers of the Re
search and Statistical Departments at
the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City
and Dallas, respectively
Mr. Kincaid, Consulting Economist at the
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
Mr. Dolley, Economic Adviser at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on June 28, 1943, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the minutes
of the meetings of the executive committee
held on June 28 and September 7, 1943, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
During the meeting there were distributed copies of a report
prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York of open market opera
tions conducted for the System account during the period June 28 to
October 14, 1943, inclusive, and Mr. Rouse discussed the principal fea
tures of the report. He also submitted a supplemental report covering
operations in the account on October 15 and 16, 1943, and copies of
both reports have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market

10/18/43 -3
Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System account during the period
June 28 to October 16, 1943, inclusive,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Prior to this meeting the members of the Federal Open Market
Committee and the other Presidents of the Reserve Banks had been fur
nished copies of a memorandum prepared by Mr. Rouse under date of
September 4, 1943, and entitled "The Relationship Between the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York and the Dealers in United States Government
Securities" and a memorandum prepared by Mr. Piser under date of
October 6, 1943, and entitled "Relationship of the Federal Reserve
System to Government Security Dealers". Chairman Eccles stated that
the executive committee had considered these memoranda at an informal
meeting in Washington on October 13, 1943, and that it had been agreed
to present the following report to the full Committee:
After thorough discussion the members of the execu
tive committee reached the conclusion that the existing
procedure and relationships established by the New York
Bank as described in Mr. Rouse's memorandum of September
4, 1943, should be approved, and that as to the future
there are three alternative courses of action that might
be taken:
1. The full Committee might give formal approval
to the continuation of the existing procedure and rela
tionships established by the New York Bank with the un
derstanding that any proposed change in substance will
be submitted to the Committee for approval;
2. The full Committee might take the position that
in the future the procedure and relationships should be
governed through formal rules and regulations to be adopted
by the Committee under its existing powers; or

10/18/43 -4
3. The full Committee might take the position that
the whole problem shoul be reported to Congress with the
recommendation that express statutory authority to regu
late the operations of dealers in the Government security
market be granted.
The executive committee recommends that the full Com
mittee adopt the second alternative.
If this recommendation be approved it is also recom
mended that the executive committee be instructed to pre
pare a draft of rules and regulations based upon the ex
isting procedure and relationships for submission to the
members of the full Committee for formal action thereon
as soon as practicable, with the understanding that, if
the executive committee should be of the opinion that any
substantial change in, or departure from, the existing
procedure or relationships should be embodied in such
rules and regulations, the full Committee will again con
sider the question whether action thereon should be taken
without submitting the matter to Congress. It was also
understood that the question of the advice to be given
the Treasury regarding the Committee's decision would
be considered.
Mr. Day inquired why it was believed to be necessary to for
malize the relationships with the Government security dealers rather
than to leave them on the present informal basis, and Chairman Eccles
outlined the principal reasons considered by the executive committee,
including (1) that the determination of the relationships with the
dealers was a responsibility of the full Committee and (2) that the
ooerations of the System were becoming so large and important in their
effect that the Committee should be prepared as a matter of record to
justify the procedures followed in the event of outside criticism. He
also said that the recommendations of the executive committee did not
contemplate any immediate change in the existing relationships or that
any publicity would be given to the matter, and that, if after study

10/18/43 -5
by the executive committee it was decided that substantial changes in
the existing procedure should be made, it would be determined at that
time whether these changes should be made by the Federal Open Market
Committee under its existing authority or whether the matter should be
presented to Congress with a request for authority to regulate the op
erations of the Government security dealers.
Mr. Ransom stated that, by approval of the transactions in the
System account at each meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee,
the Committee had tacitly approved the manner in which these operations
had been conducted and the relationships of the Bank with the Govern
ment security dealers, and that any action to formalize or to change
the existing relationships with the dealers would raise the question
whether reference to such action should be included in the policy
record kept by the Board of Governors pursuant to the last paragraph
of Section 10 of the Federal Reserve Act and published in the Board's
annual report.
In response to a question from Mr. Ransom, Mr. Dreibelbis ex
pressed the opinion that, if the action related only to the mechanics
under which the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Manager of the
System account executed transactions for the account, it would not be
necessary to include a reference to the action in the policy record,
but that if the action involved decisions on questions of general pol
icy such a reference would be necessary.

10/18/43 -6-
Mr. Day said that the Government security market was sensitive
and of increasing importance, that a formalization of the relation
ships of the System with the dealers might result in injury to the
Market, and that, therefore, he would be inclined to be very cautious
in making any change in the existing situation.
Following a discussion of possible
future cnaracteristics of the Government
security market and of the growing impor
tance of the System's operations in that
market, it was moved and seconded that the
recommendation of the executive committee
be approved.
This motion was put by the chair and
carried unanimously.
Mr. Sproul moved that the Federal
Open Market Committee approve the contin
uance of the existing procedure and rela
tionships as established by the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York in order that no
question might be raised as to the status
of the existing relationships with the Gov
ernment security dealers pending the further
action of the full Comittee, and that the
executive committee be instructed to prepare
a draft of rules and regulations for submis
sion to the full Committee for formal action
as soon as practicable.
This motion, having been duly seconded,
was put by the chair and carried unanimously.
Mr. Goldenweiser stated taat, in accordance with the procedure
followed at the last meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee with
respect to statements by economists for the Committee, he had arranged
for Mr. MacKenzie to make a statement to the Committee on the impact
othfe war on the industrial situation in the Fourth Federal Reserve

10/18/43 -7
District and for Mr. Wheeler to talk on the manpower problem on the
Pacific Coast, after which he (Mr. Goldenweiser) would discuss certain
aspects of the price problem and the situation with respect to rates
on short-term Government securities. Statements were made in that or
der, and transcripts thereof have been placed in the files of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee.
Chairman Eccles then called on John H. Williams for any com
ments he might wish to make. Mr. Williams concurred in a statement
made by Mr. Goldenweiser that some action should be taken in connection
with the rates on short-term Government securities. He also discussed
briefly the question that might be confronted following the war whether
a number of relatively unproductive projects should be undertaken for
the purpose of achieving full employment or whether we should continue
to use improved methods of production developed during the war period
notwithstanding the fact that they would not increase employment com
mensurately.
There was a discussion of some of the questions raised in the
statements made by Messrs. MacKenzie and Wheeler, and particular refer
ence was made to the point presented by Mr. Wheeler that postwar em
ployment could not be solved by action within a particular district but
would require coordinated consideration and action on a national scale.
Comments made in this connection emphasized the necessity for the ef
fective coordination of the regional research studies of the Federal

10/18/43 -8
Reserve Banks.
Thereupon the meeting recessed and reconvened at 2:25 p.m.
with the same attendance as at the morning session.
In connection with the discussion of the results of the Third
War Loan Drive, copies were distributed of a tabulation prepared in
the Board's Division of Research and Statistics under date of October
16, 1943, which indicated that as of the close of October 14, 1943, a
total of $18,644,000,000 of securities had been sold during the drive.
Mr. Goldenweiser said that the Division of Research and Statistics was
preparing a statement on the drive for the next issue of the Federal
Reserve Bulletin and that if copies of the statement were not ready for
distribution before the Presidents left Washington they would be mailed
to them as soon as available.
Reference was made to the extent to which loans had been made
during the drive for the purpose of purchasing and carrying Government
securities, and Mr. Piser stated that reports indicated that between
September 8 and October 6 loans to others than brokers and dealers for
purchasing or carrying securities increased by $774,000,000 and that
loans to brokers and dealers increased by $892,000,000. There was also
a discussion of the extent to which securities sold during the drive
had been purchased by banks.
Chairman Eccles expressed the opinion that, if the Treasury
were willing to do some additional bank financing between now and the
next drive, it would not be necessary to make the drive before April

10/18/43 -9
of next year.
Comments were made on changes which, on the basis of experi
ence during the Third War Loan Drive, it was believed would be desir
able in the succeeding drive, and it was indicated that all of the
Presidents and the members of the Board were agreeable to the members
of the executive committee making such suggestions to the Treasury De
partment at an appropriate time.
In this connection Mr. Davis read a telegram which he, as Chair
man of the Presidents' Conference Committee on Fiscal Agency Operations,
sent today to Under Secretary of the Treasury Bell who was attending a
conference of representatives of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve
Banks on fiscal agency matters in Chicago, Illinois. The telegram
transmitted a statement approved by the Presidents' Conference in which
it was agreed that the difficulty with allocations of securities which
was encountered in the last drive would be largely eliminated in the
next drive if State, county, and other local quotas were fixed only
for individual subscriptions with no quotas for corporate subscriptions
except for the nation as a whole, but that if corporate subscriptions
were to be included in State, county, and other local quotas certain
suggestions should be followed as outlined in the telegram.
Mr. Rouse suggested that the Treasury financing program might
be more effective if the next drive, possibly in January, were re
stricted to individual subscriptions, to be followed, in the order
named, by (1) a refunding operation, (2) an offering to savings banks

10/18/43 -10
and insurance companies, and (3) the opening of an outstanding issue
or issues for corporate subscription.
Chairman Eccles stated that during the course of the next four
or five weeks the members of the executive committee should give con
sideration to the whole problem of Treasury financing policy and pre
pare a memorandum for use as the basis for further discussions with
representatives of the Treasury.
Inquiry was made by Chairman Eccles whether it would be appro
priate for the Federal Open Market Committee to endorse the statement
of the Presidents' Conference referred to in the telegram sent to Mr.
Bell. Mr. Leedy suggested that for the Committee to act on this one
aspect of the financing program would emphasize the point out of all
relation to its importance. This opinion was unanimously concurred in
but it was understood that, in future discussions with representatives
of the Treasury, the members of the executive committee would be au-.
thorized to say that the statement expressed the views of the members
of the Federal Open Market Committee as well as the Presidents of all
of the Federal Reserve Banks.
Chairman Eccles then referred to the discussions which members
of the executive committee had had since the last meeting of the full
Committee with respect to the direct replacement of maturing bills held
in the System and option accounts and stated that it had been agreed at
the informal conference of the members of the executive committee held

10/18/43 -11
on October 13, 1943, that there should be presented at this meeting of
the full Committee (1) the substance of the memorandum read by Mr.
Sproul at the conference in which he made the suggestions, among others,
that the rate on Treasury bills should be increased to 1/2 per cent
and that in the existing circumstances the System should be in a posi
tion to place bids with the Treasury each week for bills in amounts up
to the amount of maturing bills held in the System and option accounts
and (2) the suggestion previously made to the Treasury, and renewed by
Chairman Eccles for consideration at this meeting, that the Treasury
issue a 3/4 per cent 9-month bill instead of continuing the issuance
of the existing bills and certificates.
Mr. Sproul stated that the substance of his memorandum was
given to the Presidents at the Presidents' Conference in New York on
October 15 and 16, 1943. Thereupon Chairman Eccles read the memorandum
which had been prepared under date of October 16, 1943, at his request
in which were set forth the reasons why, in his opinion, the issuance
of 3/4 per cent 9-month bills appeared to be the best solution of the
existing situation in the short-term Government security market.
Mr. Sproul stated that he had also proposed to the Presidents
a third alternative suggestion that the Treasury issue a 5/8 per cent
4-month bill to replace existing bills. He said that, while he agreed
completely that something should be done to increase the rates in the
short-term market, he questioned whether the 3/4 per cent bill was the
way to do it, since a rate change which appeared to be so substantial

10/18/43 -12
might have the effect of disturbing the rates on longer-term securi
ties and since the elimination of the present bill and certificate
might look like tampering with machinery which, on the whole, is work
ing successfully, and since these two reactions might result in im
pairing the confidence of the public to the extent of interfering with
the financing program.
Mr. Sproul's statement was followed by a discussion of the
relative merits of the three alternative courses of action that had
been proposed for making the desired adjustment in short-term rates
and there was unanimous agreement that some action to correct the ex
isting situation was necessary. A canvass of the views of the Presi
dents indicated that, while they were in agreement that the alternative
suggestions of a 5/8 per cent 4-month bill (to take the place of ex
isting 3-month bills) or a 3/4 per cent 9-month bill (to take the place
of existing bills and certificates of indebtedness) should be presented
to the Treasury for decision, there was a majority preference for the
issuance of a 5/8 per cent 4-month bill.
At Chairman Eccles' request, copies were distributed of a mem
orandum addressed to him under date of October 16, 1943 by Messrs.
Dreibelbis and Piser which read as follows:
"In view of the fact that the previously outlined
program for the replacement of Treasury bill maturities
would, in opinion of counsel, involve the necessity of
charging all such purchases against the 5 billion dollar
authority for purchasing direct from the Treasury, it
appears that the System is faced with two alternatives

10/18/43
"in meeting this problem. First, the Treasury could give
the System the privilege of exchanging its weekly maturing
bills for an exactly equivalent amount of new bills at 3/8
of one per cent. In this event, the Treasury would reduce
the public offering each week by the amount of the System's
maturities. If the System's maturities, for example, were
400 million dollars, the public offering would be 600 mil
lion. Second, the System could place tenders at 3/8 of
one per cent in an amount not exceeding the amount of its
weekly maturities. The System would receive the same per
centage allotment as would other bidders at the same rate,
but the Treasury would give the System the privilege of
exchanging maturing bills for whatever amount of the new
bills were allotted to it. The attached draft of a press
statement contains the reasons for the new procedure; al
though it is written on the assumption that the second al
ternative will be followed, it could easily be revised to
substitute the first alternative."
Mr. Dreibelbis stated that he had discussed the procedures re
ferred to in the memorandum with counsel for the Treasury and that there
was agreement that legally the Treasury had the necessary authority to
give the System the privilege of exchanging maturing bills for new bills
as would be contemplated if either of the procedures should be adopted.
There was unanimous agreement that the second procedure would be the
more desirable one.
Mr. Sproul inquired whether the Manager of the System account
should undertake to replace maturing bills held in the option accounts
with the understanding that bills taken in replacement would be held in
the System account, or whether, in the light of counsel's opinion, it
would be necessary for the replacements of option bills to be issued to
the individual Banks as owners. Mr. Piser stated that this question
could be met by the transfer of maturing bills held in the option ac
counts to the System account with the understanding that a bid for

10/18/43 -14
replacement bills would be made for the System account.
There was a discussion of the necessity for a press statement
in the event arrangements were made for direct replacement of bill ma
turities, and it appeared to be the general consensus that a complete
statement on the matter should be made, pointing out, however, that the
operation involved merely the replacement of maturing securities held
by the System.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
upon motion duly made and seconded and by
unanimous vote, the executive committee was
directed to work out with the Treasury and
put into effect an arrangement under which
a tender would be made each week for new
bills in an amount not exceeding the total
amount of maturing bills in the System and
option accounts.
This action was taken with the under
standing that when the arrangement went in
to effect the executive committee was au
thorized to issue a statement to the press
in such form as in its judgment the circum
stances required.
Consideration was then given to the direction to be issued to
the executive committee to effect transactions in the System account
pending another meeting of the full Committee which it was felt would
not be necessary before sometime in January of next year. Messrs.
Sproul and Rouse expressed the opinion that the renewal of the exist
ing authority would be adequate to meet any situation that might be
expected to arise in that period, inasmuch as a substantial amount of
bills would continue to be purchased in the option accounts of the

10/18/43 -15-
Federal Reserve Banks.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded and by unanimous vote, the follow
ing direction was approved:
That the executive committee be directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to ar
range for such transactions for the System open market ac
count, either in the open market or directly with the
Treasury (including purchases, sales, exchanges, replace
ment of maturing securities, and letting maturities run
off without replacement), as may be necessary in the
practical administration of the account, or for the pur
pose of maintaining about the present general level of
prices and yields of Government securities, or for the
purpose of maintaining an adequate supply of funds in
the market; provided that the aggregate amount of securi
ties held in the account at the close of this date (other
than special short-term certificates of indebtedness pur
chased from time to time for the temporary accommodation
of the Treasury) shall not be increased or decreased by
more than $1,500,000,000.
That the executive committee be further directed,
until otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Com
mittee, to arrange for the purchase for the System open
market account direct from the Treasury of such amounts
of special short-term certificates of indebtedness as
may be necessary from time to time for the temporary ac
commodation of the Treasury; provided that the amount of
such certificates held in the account at any one time
shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
This action was taken with the un
derstanding (1) that the limitations con
tained in the direction were understood
to include commitments for purchases or
sales of securities for the System account
and (2) that, in the event the arrangement
worked out for the direct replacement of
maturing bills provided for the transfer
of such bills held in the option accounts
to the System account and the holding of
the bills taken in replacement in the Sys
tem account, the limitations contained in
the direction would not apply to such trans
fers or replacements.

10/18/43 -16
Reference was made to the informal discussions, which had
taken place in connection with the possible issuance of a 3/4 per
cent Treasury bill, with respect to the question whether any change
should be made in the discount rates now in effect at the Federal Re
serve Banks on advances secured by Government obligations, and there
was unanimous agreement that no suggestion should be made by the Fed
eral Open Market Committee on this matter at this time.
Inquiry was made whether, in the event of a decision of the
Treasury to increase the rate on existing bills or to issue 5/8 per
cent or 3/4 per cent bills, any change should be made in the outstand
ing direction to the Federal Reserve Banks to purchase Treasury bills,
and it was suggested that, while no action need be taken on the matter
at this time, it would be necessary to issue a revised direction at
the time action was taken by the Treasury.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded and by unanimous vote, it was de
cided that, in the event action were taken
by the Treasury prior to the next meeting
of the Committee, the members of the Commit
tee would approve by wire the issuance of
a direction to the Federal Reserve Banks
to purchase all Treasury bills that might
be offered to such Banks on a discount ba
sis at the rate at which such bills were
issued by the Treasury, any such purchases
to be upon the condition that the Federal
Reserve Bank, upon the request of the sell
er before the maturity of the bills, would
sell to him Treasury bills of like amount
and maturity at the same rate of discount.

10/18/43 -17-
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.