A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, February 29, 1944, at 10:15 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Paddock
Mr. Fleming
Mr. McLarin
Mr. Peyton (alternate for Mr. Day)
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Messrs. John H. Williams, MacKenzie,
Bryan, and Wheeler, Associate
Economists
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Clayton, Assistant to the Chairman
of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Piser and Kennedy, Chief and
Assistant Chief, respectively, of the
Government Securities Section, Division
of Research and Statistics of the Board
of Governors
Mr. Berntson, Clerk in the Office of the
Secretary of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Leach, Young, and Davis, alternate
members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Alfred H. Williams, Leedy, and
Gilbert, Presidents of the Federal Re
serve Banks of Philadelphia, Kansas
City, and Dallas, respectively

2/29/44 -2-
Mr. Clerk, First Vice President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Messrs. Sienkiewicz, Edmiston, Upgren,
and Hardy, Vice Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
St. Louis, Minneapolis, and Kansas
City, respectively
Mr. Kincaid, Consulting Economist at the
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
Mr. Dolley, Economic Adviser at the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of Dallas
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on October 18, 1943, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
members of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee (1) on November 19, 1943, in author
izing an arrangement under which dealers
would offer bills to the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York at the posted rate without
a repurchase option and the Bank would pur
chase the bills for the System account, and
(2) on December 1, 1943, in excluding from
the limitation on the authority of the ex
ecutive committee to increase or decrease
the amount of securities held in the System
account bills purchased outright in the market
on a discount basis at the rate of 3/8 per
cent per annum, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the execu
tive committee of the Federal Open Market
Committee as set forth in the minutes of the
meeting of the executive committee held on
October 18, 1943, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.

2/29/44 -3
Distribution was made of copies of a report prepared at the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York of open market operations covering
the period October 19, 1943, to February 24, 1944, inclusive. Mr.
Rouse reviewed the more important matters covered by the report as
well as the transactions effected in the System account on February
25, 26, and 28, 1944. A copy of the report has been placed in the
files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System account during the period
October 18, 1943, to February 28, 1944,
inclusive, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
In connection with Mr. Rouse's report, there was a brief dis
cussion of the Fourth War Loan Drive, the probable further growth in
bank deposits and currency in circulation, Government receipts and ex
penditures, and the probable amounts of securities that the System
might have to acquire during the coming year in order to supply the
market with needed reserves and to maintain about the present general
level of Government security prices.
In a discussion of the prices at which certificates had been
purchased for the System account in the recent past and the prices at
which future purchases should be made, Chairman Eccles suggested that
it was desirable that these issues be purchased at prices which would
discourage as much as possible the temptation to sell the issues, par
ticularly during war loan drives, in order to purchase new issues of

2/29/44 -4
certificates, and that for that purpose it would be desirable that
purchases for the System account be as near the offering price as
possible without regard to maturity in order to avoid paying a
premium on the shorter maturities.
Reference was made to the extent to which funds were borrowed
during the Fourth War Loan Drive for speculative purchases of securi
ties, and Mr. Rouse stated that it appeared from reports from New
York sources and from reports received by dealers from the field that
such purchases were in greatly reduced volume as compared with the
Third War Loan Drive.
Under date of January 28, 1944, the Examiner in Charge for
the Board of Governors submitted to Mr. Morrill, as Secretary of the
Federal Open Market Committee, a copy of a report of the examination
of the System open market account as of November 13, 1943, made as a
part of the regular examination of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York. Copies of the report were sent to the members of the Federal
Open Market Committee under date of February 1, 1944.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the report, which
contained no criticisms or recommendations,
was received and ordered filed.
Chairman Eccles stated that in a meeting just before this
meeting the executive committee approved a recommendation to the full
Committee with respect to the terms upon which the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York would transact business with dealers in United

2/29/44 -5
States Government securities for the System open market account, and
that this action had been taken by the executive committee with the
understanding that the full Committee would be requested, in the event
of the adoption of the suggested terms, to authorize the executive
committee (1) to make such changes in the form of the statement of
terms as appeared to be desirable following the discussion of the
matter at this meeting, (2) to make the terms effective at such time
as in the judgment of the executive committee appeared to be desirable,
and (3) to issue such instructions to the New York Bank in connection
therewith as might be required, including possibly the requirement
that, if a dealer were removed from the approved list of dealers for
violating the terms, he should not be restored to the list without
the approval of the executive committee.
The recommendation of the executive committee was read, and
in the ensuing discussion Mr. McKee inquired whether the language of
the proposed terms was broad enough to cover field representatives of
dealers. There was general concurrence in the opinion that the sug
gested terms would be applicable to all representatives and agents of
a qualified dealer and that it would be his responsibility to acquaint
his personnel with the meaning of the proposed terms and the extent
of his commitment in subscribing to them.
Chairman Eccles stated other ways that had been discussed
of meeting the problem of the relationship with the dealers included

2/29/44 -6
(1) the establishment at the Federal Reserve Banks and their branches
of an organization to handle purchases and sales of Government securi
ties now handled by the dealers, (2) the adoption of a policy requir
ing that transactions handled by the dealers for the System open market
account be on a brokerage basis only, and (3) the inclusion in the
Board's annual report to Congress of a statement of the problem created
by the present situation in which there is no express statutory basis
upon which dealers in Government securities can be subjected to ade
quate regulation. He also said that the executive committee felt that
the procedure recommended by it was the most satisfactory, at least
for the present, that it might be necessary at a later date to consider
modification of the procedure or adoption of one of the other avail
able alternatives, but that it was felt that if the dealers cooperated
in the proposed arrangement, as the executive committee felt confident
they would, the procedure should work satisfactorily.
There was a discussion of a second question raised by Mr.
McKee whether, in the event of large shifts of deposits following the
war which would necessitate substantial sales of securities by the
banks losing the deposits, the existing dealer organization, operating
under the terms proposed by the executive committee, would be able to
furnish a satisfactory market for such sales, particularly by the
smaller banks, and whether the Federal Reserve Banks should not be
prepared to handle that business.

2/29/44 -7-
In that connection Mr. Davis stated that there had been some
comment in the Eighth Federal Reserve District about the inability of
holders of 2-1/2 per cent bonds, which are ineligible for bank invest
ment, to find a ready market for small lots of such securities.
Messrs. Sproul and Rouse stated that there was no question
about the willingness of the System account to take the 2-1/2 per
cent bonds of restricted marketability, particularly in small lots,
that a substantial amount of these issues had been purchased, but
that it had been the custom of the New York Bank not to facilitate
the sale of larger blocks of $250,000 and up merely to enable the
seller to purchase similar new bonds as part of the war loan drive,
and that in such cases it had been suggested that the dealer take
an order for the sale and try to find a customer in the market.
Mr. McLarin inquired whether dealer banks in other cities,
such as New Orleans or Dallas, could qualify under the proposed
terms. Mr. Rouse replied in the affirmative, stating that it was
not expected that many of such banks would be interested in qualify
ing.
Mr. Davis inquired whether it was the intention under the
recommendation of the executive committee to qualify all who met the
requirements proposed in the recommendation or only the dealers pres
ently having relationships with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Mr. Rouse said that the former was intended, and it was agreed that
the final draft of statement should make this point entirely clear.

2/29/44 -8-
Mr. Leedy inquired whether the proposed procedure would have
any effect on the present practice of the Federal Reserve Banks of pur
chasing and selling Government securities as agents for their member
banks, and it was agreed that it would not.
In a discussion of the steps to be taken to put the suggested
procedure into effect, there was unanimous approval of the suggestion
by Mr. Sproul that the Treasury should be informed of what the com
mittee proposed to do so that any objections that the Treasury might
have could be considered before the arrangement was made effective.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
upon motion duly made and seconded and by
unanimous vote, the proposed terms were ap
proved in substance with the understanding
(1) that the executive committee was au
thorized to make such changes in the form
of the statement of terms as appeared to
be desirable, (2) that the procedure would
be put into effect at such time as in the
judgment of the executive committee such
action appeared to be desirable after hav
ing informed the Treasury of the proposed
arrangement, and (3) that the executive
committee was authorized to issue such in
structions to the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York as agent for the System account
in connection with the proposed procedure
as appeared to the executive committee to
be desirable, including the manner in which
advice of the arrangement was to be sent
to dealers who might qualify thereunder.
Chairman Eccles read a review which had been prepared of dis
cussions with the Treasury since the last meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee with respect to the direct replacement of maturing

2/29/44 -9
bills held in the System open market account. A copy of the review
has been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Chairman Eccles then stated that it had been the experience
of the members of the Board and the Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks who had served as members of the executive committee from time
to time that the present informal relationship with the Treasury in
connection with discussions of Treasury financing policy and procedures
had not been at all satisfactory, that it would be very helpful if a
more definite understanding with respect to this relationship could
be reached, and that he had had prepared a statement for this purpose
for consideration by the Federal Open Market Committee at this meet
ing. The statement was read and it was agreed that further considera
tion should be given to the matter at the meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee to be held tomorrow.
Thereupon the meeting recessed and reconvened at 2:10 p.m.
with the same attendance as in the morning session except that Mr.
Thurston, Special Assistant to the Chairman of the Board of Governors,
and Mr. Parry, Director of the Division of Security Loans of the Board
of Governors, were in attendance.
Mr. Goldenweiser stated that in accordance with the arrange
ment which had been agreed upon for having statements from the econo
mists for the Open Market Committee, statements would be made by Messrs.
Edmiston and Upgren. Mr. Edmiston talked on the agricultural situation

2/29/44 -10
in the South and Mr. Upgren discussed some of the longer-range prob
lems of banking. Mr. Goldenweiser presented a picture of the possible
relationships between the volume of postwar employment and production,
after which Mr. John H. Williams discussed some of the monetary prob
lems of the war and postwar periods. Transcripts of these statements
have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
In the discussion which followed, Chairman Eccles stated that
the economists had presented some far-reaching questions for which
answers would have to be found if serious difficulties were to be
avoided in the postwar period, that the Federal Reserve System was
as well qualified as any organization to supply some of the answers
to these questions, and that he hoped the economists of the System
would direct their studies to this end.
Subsequently and pursuant to author
ity granted at this meeting, the statement
of terms upon which the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York will transact business
with brokers and dealers in United States
Government securities for the System ac
count was approved by the members of the
executive committee in the form set forth
below:
"TERMS ON WHICH FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF NE YORK WILL
TRANSACT BUSINESS WITH BROKERS AND DEALERS IN UNITED STATES
GOVERNMENT SECURITIES FOR THE SYSTEM OPEN MARKET ACCOUNT
"The Federal Open Market Committee has directed the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of New York (hereinafter referred to as the
Bank) to transact business in United States Government securi
ties for the System open market account with reputable brokers
and dealers in such securities who meet the qualifications and

2/29/44 -11-
"agree in writing to comply with the terms and conditions
set forth below.
"1. In determining whether a person (indi
vidual, partnership or corporation, including a
bank) is a qualified broker or dealer with whom
the Bank will transact business, and the extent
to which business will be transacted with such
person, the following factors will be taken into
consideration:
(a) Integrity, knowledge, and capacity and
experience of management;
(b) Observance of high standards of commercial
honor and just and equitable principles
of trade;
(c) Willingness (in the case of a dealer) to
make markets under all ordinary conditions;
(d) The volume and scope of business and the
contacts such business provides;
(e) Financial condition and capital at risk
of business; and
(f) The reliance that can be placed on such
person to cooperate with the Bank and the
Federal Open Market Committee in maintain
ing an orderly market for Government se
curities; to refrain from making any recom
mendations or statements or engaging in
any activity which would encourage or stim
ulate undue activity in the market for
Government securities; and to refrain from
disclosing any confidential information
which he obtains from the Bank or through
his transactions with the Bank.
"2. The Bank will obtain from such person an agree
ment in writing to comply with the following terms and
conditions:
(a) He will furnish the Bank with a statement
for the confidential information of the Bank
and the Open Market Committee showing as of
the close of business each business day:
(1) The total amount of money borrowed
(directly and indirectly);
(2) The par value of all Government se
curities borrowed;
(3) His position, both long and short,
in Government securities, classified
by classes of securities and maturity
groups (or by issues, if so requested
by the Bank);

2/29/44 -12-
"(4) The volume of transactions during the
day in Government securities, classi
fied by classes of securities and ma
turity groups (or by issues, if so re
quested by the Bank); and
(5) Such other statistical data as in the
opinion of the Bank will aid in the
execution of transactions for the Sys
tem open market account.
(b) At or before the completion of each transac
tion with the Bank, he will furnish the Bank
with a written notification disclosing whether
he is acting as a broker for the Bank, as a
dealer for his own account, as a broker for
some other person, or as a broker for both
the Bank and some other person. In the ab
sence of a special agreement to the contrary
with the Bank with respect to a particular
transaction, he will not act as broker for
any other person in connection with any
transaction with the Bank, and he will re
ceive no compensation or profit of any kind
in connection with the transaction other
than the specified commission paid him by
the Bank.
(c) In the absence of special arrangements with
the Bank, delivery of securities will be made
at the office of the Bank before 2:15 p.m. on
the next full business day following the day
of the contract and all payments by the broker
or dealer will be in immediately available
funds.
(d) He will furnish the Bank not less frequently
than once during each calendar year with a
report of his financial condition as of a
date not more than 45 days prior to the de
livery of the report to the Bank in form ac
ceptable to the Bank and prepared or cer
tified by a public accountant acceptable to
the Bank; and, upon the request of the Bank,
he will furnish it with a statement of condi
tion as shown by his books as of a date
specified by the Bank.
(e) Unless the Bank shall have informed him of
its desire to purchase or sell a particular
issue of Government securities, he will not
solicit from any other person offerings of

2/29/44 -13-
"or bids for any issue of Government securi
ties for the purpose of placing himself in
a position to offer to sell to or buy from
the Bank securities of such issue.
"The Federal Open Market Committee has further directed
that the Bank decline to transact any further business with
a broker or dealer in any case in which the Bank has con
cluded that the broker or dealer no longer meets the qualifi
cations set forth above or has willfully violated or failed
to perform any of the terms and conditions set forth in the
agreement.
"To the Federal Reserve Bank of New York:
"The undersigned hereby agrees to meet the qualifications
and to comply with the terms and conditions set forth above.
"Dated:
(Signature)"
Thereupon the meeting adjourned with the understanding that a
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee would be held tomorrow,
March 1, 1944, at 10:00 a.m.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.