A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Thursday, May 4, 1944, at 10:45 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Leach
Mr. Young
Mr. Davis
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Messrs. Williams, Kincaid, and Edmiston,
Associate Economists
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Piser and Kennedy, Chief and
Assistant Chief, respectively, of
the Government Securities Section,
Division of Research and Statistics
of the Board of Governors
Mr. Berntson, Clerk in the Office of
the Secretary of the Board of Governors
Mr. Day, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco
Chairman Eccles stated that, in accordance with the request
made of him and Mr. Sproul at the last joint meeting of the Board of
Governors and the Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, a letter
with respect to attendance at meetings of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee and joint sessions of the Board of Governors and the Presidents

5/4/44 -2-
had been prepared and sent to the Presidents of all the Federal Reserve
Banks in the following form under date of April 25, 1944, and that in
accordance with the procedure set forth in the letter the first item
on the agenda for this meeting would be statements by Messrs. Golden
weiser and Williams followed by such questions and discussion by the
other economists as they might wish to offer and then by questions from
the members of the Committee:
"When the Board met with the Presidents on March
1, 1944, there was a discussion of the question of attend
ance at meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee and
at joint sessions of the Presidents and the Board of Gov
ernors. At that time it was agreed that Mr. Sproul and I
should work out, in the light of the views expressed, a
plan for future meetings. We have discussed the subject
and feel that the following will tend in the direction of
more orderly procedure:
"Federal Open Market Committee
"Attendance at meetings will be as follows:
1. Members of the Committee;
2. Officers of the Committee;
3. Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks who are
not regular members of the Committee, when they have occa
sion to be in Washington at the time of the meeting;
4. Messrs. Piser, Kennedy and Thurston;
5. If there should be need for the attendance of
other members of the staffs of the Board and the Reserve
Banks they will be called at the direction of the Chairman
or the Vice Chairman for attendance during the time when
their participation is desired.
"The established procedure for the Open Market Commit
tee meetings, as you know, provides for reports from the
economists. We believe that they could be more effectively
presented and discussed if, instead of taking them up at
the place on the program heretofore assigned to them, they
were given first place in the order of business of the full
Committee, with an adequate time allowance, preceding other
items on the agenda. The plan which has been suggested to
be followed for the present and which it is expected will

5/4/44 -3-
"be tried out at the next meeting of the Open Market Com
mittee contemplates that the Committee's economists will
agree upon a subject germane to the consideration of open
market policy, of which the members of the Committee will
be advised in advance, and which will be presented in the
first instance by the economist for the Committee and the
associate economist from the New York Bank, followed by
such contributions to the discussion as the other associate
economists may wish to make, and by questions by them and
by members of the Committee. This will enable the members
of the Committee to get the benefit of the thoughts of the
group of economists prior to the Committee's consideration
of open-market policy.
"Executive Committee
of the Federal Open Market Committee
"Attendance at meetings of the Executive Committee of
the Federal Open Market Committee will be as follows:
1. Members of the Executive Committee;
2. Officers of the Executive Committee;
3. Messrs. Piser and Kennedy;
4. If there should be need for attendance of other
members of the staffs of the Board and the Reserve Banks,
they will be called at the direction of the Chairman or the
Vice Chairman for attendance during the time when their par
ticipation is desired.
"Joint Meetings of the Board of Governors
and the Presidents
"The attendance at these meetings will be as follows:
1. Members of the Board of Governors;
2. Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks;
3. The Secretary of the Board of Governors and
the Secretary of the Presidents' Conference;
4. If there should be need for the attendance of
other members of the staffs of the Board and the Reserve
Banks, they will be called at the direction of the Chairman
of the Board or the Chairman of the Presidents' Conference
for attendance during the time when their participation is
desired.
"Whenever there is to be a meeting of the Presidents'
Conference preceding a joint session of the Presidents with
the Board of Governors, it is understood that the Board will
be furnished copies of the agenda of the Presidents' Con
ference in advance and that when the Conference has con
cluded its deliberations the Board will be advised promptly
as to the conclusions reached, with the expectation that

5/4/44 -4
"sufficient time will be allowed between the receipt of
this information and the joint session to eanble the Board
to prepare for such discussion as may be desired."
In his statement Mr. Goldenweiser outlined a tentative program
of postwar economic policy which he suggested might be a basis for dis
cussion and for a more systematic preparation of a plan which might in
turn be considered as a basis for the development of a System program.
Mr. Williams addressed his comments primarily to the nature of the
problem with which this country would be faced after the war and com
mented briefly upon some of the points in Mr. Goldenweiser's statement.
Following the two statements, transcripts of which have been placed in
the files of the Federal Open Market Committee, the other Associate
Economists present raised questions concerning, and commented upon, the
statements of Messrs. Goldenweiser and Williams, and there was a dis
cussion by the members of the Committee.
Mr. Goldenweiser inquired whether the members of the Committee
were in general agreement with the suggestion that the research depart
ments of the Board and the Reserve Banks undertake to develop their views
of an economic program for the postwar period, the use to be made of such
studies to be decided when they had been completed. In the discussion of
his inquiry, Mr. Goldenweiser made it clear that he was not seeking au
thority from the Committee for the study, as that was a matter for de
cision by the Board of Governors and the Federal Reserve Banks, but
that he would like to know whether the members of the Committee felt

5/4/44 -5
that the preparation of such a program should be undertaken and whether
they were willing to "give their blessing" to the project.
The Members of the Committee indicated unanimous agreement that
the matter was one of direct interest to the Federal Open Market Commit
tee, as the study might serve as a basis for many of the policy decisions
that the Committee might be called upon to make, and that therefore in
their opinion the preparation of the program should be undertaken as
promptly as possible.
Mr. Williams suggested that in the first instance the economists
should present their independent analyses rather than try to agree upon
a single report which might involve undesirable compromising of view
points and emphasis. At a later stage the separate reports could be
drawn together into a combined program. There was general agreement
with this opinion.
The meeting recessed at 1:15 p.m. for luncheon and to afford
the executive committee an opportunity to meet, and reconvened at 3:00
p.m. with the same attendance as at the morning session except that
Messrs. Edmiston, Dreibelbis, and Berntson were not present.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meetings of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on February 29 and March 1, 1944,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open

5/4/44 -6
Market Committee as set forth in the min
utes of the meetings of the executive com
mittee held on February 29, March 1, and
March 28-29, 1944, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
Mr. Rouse distributed copies of a report prepared at the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of New York of open market operations covering the
period March 1 to April 29, 1944, inclusive. He discussed the important
points of the report and supplemented it with a statement covering
transactions handled for the System account on May 1, 2, and 3, 1944.
In connection with his report, Mr. Rouse also said that earlier
in the week Under Secretary of the Treasury Bell called on the tele
phone and expressed concern about what appeared to him to be the weak
tone in the market, particularly in view of the decline in excess re
serves of member banks to between 600 and 700 million dollars. Mr.
Rouse stated that he emphasized that the decline in reserves was a
normal development, that there was no cause for concern because of it
or because of the market situation, that the volume of dealings was
very moderate, and that the price changes were small and well within
the range of the agreed pattern for the securities with which the
System was concerned.
Chairman Eccles said that Mr. Bell had also talked to him, and
that his reply was that in view of the buying rate on bills the amount
of excess reserves was no longer as important as it had been and that
unless the Treasury wished to peg the market (which, of course, Mr. Bell

5/4/44 -7
did not want to do) some fluctuations and price declines were inevitable.
Mr. Rouse added that following his conversation with Mr. Bell
he made a number of inquiries throughout the country and found that banks
felt comfortable about the way in which the market was being handled,
and that in a subsequent conversation with Mr. Bell he seemed to be en
tirely satisfied.
There was a discussion of the possible future market trend of
partially tax-exempt Treasury securities, especially in the light of
the current discussions of the possibility and that the normal income
tax rate for corporations might be reduced and the surtax increased.
Mr. Rouse said that he had suggested to the Treasury that it should
make a study of the tax situation of the commercial banks, a large
number of which are entering the excess profits tax class this year,
in order to determine whether this event would make it advisable to
change the types of securities offered or to recommend changes in tax
legislation.
Chairman Eccles was of the opinion that the responsibility of
the System for an orderly market and the pattern of rates did not relate
to the tax-exempt issues for the reason that the amount of these issues
outstanding in relation to the total was not large and was getting
smaller and the successful financing of the war and the stability of
the market did not depend on the market for these issues except to a
minor degree.

5/4/44
Mr. McKee asked what the responsibility of the Committee would
be if the tax exemption were removed entirely, and Messrs. Eccles and
Sproul suggested that there would be no reason for trying to maintain
tax-exempt securities at their current prices and that possibly the
only thing the System should do would be to cushion the decline to the
extent required in the interest of general stability in the market.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System account during the period
February 29 to May 3, 1944, inclusive,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Chairman Eccles reported that he had received a letter under
date of April 5, 1944, from Mr. Bell reading as follows:
"The Secretary has asked me to acknowledge receipt
of your letter of March 25, 1944, outlining a procedure
to improve the presentation of Federal Reserve recommenda
tions to the Treasury in regard to important matters of
Government financing.
"We have no objection to the formalization of the
presentation of the recommendations of the Federal Open
Market Committee. We believe, however, that it would be
well to keep many of our conferences on an informal basis.
I am sure it was not intended to in any way interfere
with the authority of the Secretary to require the Pres
idents of the Federal Reserve Banks, acting as fiscal
agents of the United States, to submit their comments on
particular situations in their respective districts and
comments on views expressed by bankers in those districts.
"I feel that it would be much better to follow the
informal procedure we have had in the past, but if the
full Committee has decided that it wants it formalized,
the Treasury will be glad to give it a trial."
The Chairman also reported that, with the approval of Mr. Sproul, he had
sent the following reply to Mr. Bell on April 25, 1944:

5/4/44 -9-
"I have your letter of April 5 in response to my
letter to the Secretary, dated March 25, in regard to
Federal Reserve recommendations to the Treasury concern
ing important matters of Government financing. It seemed
to us that the conference which Mr. Sproul and I, as
Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Federal Open Market
Committee, had with the Secretary and you, which followed
the receipt of my letter regarding the suggested procedure,
was more satisfactory than previous meetings and yet was
free from unnecessary formality. Our earlier letter did
not, in fact, emphasize formality, as such, but rather
the placing of our discussions on a more clearly defined
basis, and we outlined a procedure which it seemed to
us would accomplish this objective. Consistent with
that procedure, we presented to the Secretary a written
memorandum of the views of the Executive Committee of the
Federal Open Market Committee on prospective Treasury
financing, and we noted with pleasure the Secretary's
comment that the memorandum was an excellent one.
"In my letter of March 25 I said that Mr. Sproul and
I would be glad to discuss this procedure with the Secre
tary if he so desired and at his convenience. I might
add here, by way of further explanation, that the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 1, at which
the new procedure was considered, was attended by all the
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks (except San Fran
cisco, which was represented by First Vice President Clerk
in the absence of President Day). There was unanimous
agreement on the plan which was approved by the Committee,
on which, in addition to the members of the Board of Gov
ernors, all the Presidents of the Reserve Banks serve as
members from time to time. It was the feeling of the
Presidents, as well as of the members of the Board of
Governors, that the designated representatives of the
Committee were the appropriate channel through which Fed
eral Reserve recommendations should be submitted, because
the statutory responsibility of the Federal Reserve Sys
tem with respect to open market policies is vested in the
Federal Open Market Committee, and because only the members
of the Committee, and particularly its Executive Committee,
can be expected to be informed of the various considera
tions currently affecting Treasury financing and credit
policy, and the relation of one to the other. In recog
nition of its responsibility, and in the light of its
understanding, the Committee, as you know, has undertaken

5/4/44 -10-
"to exercise its influence toward maintaining conditions
in the United States Government security market that will
be satisfactory from the standpoint of the Government's
war financing requirements. It is necessary, therefore,
that recommendations of the Federal Reserve to the Treas
ury, with respect to the Treasury financing program,
should be carefully coordinated with its responsibilities.
Under the procedure we have suggested, it was thought
that this would be accomplished, and that the confusion
and misunderstandings which sometimes arise from a less
clearly defined procedure, which does not permit or pro
vide for consideration of all of the material and opin
ions bearing on the problem, and an exchange of views
based thereon, would be largely obviated. This, it
seemed to us, could not help but be beneficial to the
Treasury as well as to the Federal Reserve.
"It was understood, of course, that the individual
Reserve Banks would gladly continue to obtain and furnish
to the Treasury any market information desired from the
respective districts, including the views and recommenda
tions of bankers and others interested, whenever requested
by the Treasury.
We feel confident that, in the light of further ex
perience with this procedure, you will be satisfied with
the results."
The two letters were read, and Mr. Peyton inquired why it was
thought that a reply to Mr. Bell's letter was required. Chairman Eccles
stated that it was not clear from the letter that the Treasury under
stood that the procedure contemplated that the Chairman and Vice Chair
man of the Federal Open Market Committee would be speaking on behalf
of the Presidents as well as the members of the Board of Governors
and that the Treasury would be expected to obtain directly from the
Presidents only such information as the Treasury desired with respect
to the views and recommendations of bankers and others in the respec
tive Federal Reserve districts. He also pointed out that the Federal

5/4/44 -11
Reserve Banks, not the Presidents, were the fiscal agents of the Treas
ury, and that all the Presidents from time to time served as members
of the Committee.
Mr. Sproul reported for the information of the full Committee
the discussions with representatives of the Treasury of plans for
the Fifth War Loan Drive. His review covered the substance of the
points mentioned in the minutes of the meeting of the executive com
mittee on March 29, 1944. In that connection, he suggested that the
Federal Reserve Banks should exercise their influence in the direction
of discouraging speculative purchases of securities in the next drive,
but stated that it appeared that the Treasury sales organization was
moving in the opposite direction.
Mr. Davis expressed the opinion that, in the absence of a
strong position on the matter by the Treasury, the Treasury sales or
ganization would not discourage speculative purchases, and he ques
tioned whether, in the absence of such a position being taken by the
Treasury, the Federal Reserve Banks should discourage such purchases,
as that would only result in unfairness to the banks and others that
complied with the policy. This matter was discussed, and there was
agreement that unless a strong stand were taken by the Treasury there
would be a large amount of speculative buying in the next drive.
Reference was made to methods used by banks to obtain bonds
of restricted marketability, and Mr. Young stated that some insurance

5/4/44 -12
companies had purchased these issues and banks had taken them over
under repurchase agreement, holding them as if they had a note sup
ported by the repurchase agreement. He also said that the Treasury
had been asked for a ruling on the practice but that an answer had not
yet been received. Other methods referred to were the purchase of re
stricted securities by bank officers and directors or by wholly-owned
subsidiaries of banks, and there was agreement that the Treasury should
rule on all such cases so that they could be handled in a uniform man
ner.
Mr. Sproul proposed that the System's stand on speculative
purchases of securities during the drive be brought to the attention
of the Treasury again and that particular reference be made to the
fact that the policy of the Treasury would have to be effectively
carried out by the Treasury sales organization or otherwise the Fed
eral Reserve Banks would be faced with a policing job that it would
be impossible for them to perform.
Chairman Eccles suggested that a letter be sent to the Treas
ury in accordance with Mr. Sproul's suggestion and that in the letter
mention also be made of the methods referred to above for the purchase
by banks of restricted-marketability securities and the purchase of
marketable securities during the drives for resale to the banks.
Following reference by Mr. Davis to
the action of the last Conference of Pres
idents on this matter, which was concurred

5/4/44 -13
in by the Federal Open Market Committee
at its meeting on March 1, 1944, Mr. McKee
moved that the suggestions made by Messrs.
Sproul and Eccles be referred to them to
handle with the Treasury through the medium
of a letter or an informal discussion, which
ever in their opinion would be the more ef
fective.
This motion was put by the chair and
carried unanimously.
Mr. McKee referred to the probable decline in the reserve po
sition of the Federal Reserve Banks over the next year and suggested
that, in order that the System might be prepared to meet any situation
that might develop in the reserve position of the individual Banks,
consideration be given to changing the basis upon which securities in
the System account are allocated among the 12 Federal Reserve Banks.
Mr. Rouse stated that he and Mr. Smead, Director of the Divi
sion of Bank Operations of the Board of Governors, had been working
on the matter of allocation and had prepared a memorandum which dis
cussed various aspects of the problem. Copies of the memorandum,
which was dated May 4, 1944, were distributed, and Mr. Rouse made
the further comment that the memorandum contained no recommendations
but that it was hoped that the full Committee would indicate its
preference as to its approach to the matter so that a definite plan
could be prepared for approval by the Committee.
In the discussion which ensued, Mr. Peyton suggested that as
a means of meeting a possible reduction below a satisfactory level in

5/4/44 -14
the reserve position of individual Federal Reserve Banks all bills
purchased by the Banks be transferred to the System account so that
they could be allocated as a part of that account in such manner as
to prevent the reserve ratio of a Reserve Bank from falling below a
stated figure.
Mr. Sproul proposed (1) that, with respect to the long-range
problem of reserve ratios, the executive committee be requested to
study and report on the action to be taken, its timing, and the public
preparation necessary for its successful execution, so that the full
Committee at its next meeting would be in a position to approve a
program which would meet the anticipated decline over the next year
or two in Federal Reserve Bank reserves, and (2) that, with respect
to the short-range problem, the members of the full Committee read
the memorandum prepared by Messrs. Smead and Rouse and send in any
suggestions that they might wish to make with respect to the method
to be used to meet reductions in the reserve ratios of the individual
Reserve Banks and to the method used in allocating the System open
market account, with the understanding that the executive committee
would be authorized to work out a procedure for handling this problem
which would be recommended to the Banks and, if accepted by them, put
into effect.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, Mr. Sproul's pro
posal was approved, it being generally
agreed that for the time being the reserve

5/4/44 -15-
ratio of a Federal Reserve Bank should not
be allowed to drop below 45.
Inquiry was made whether there might be
need for action before the procedure as out
lined above could be carried into effect, and
it was agreed that if action were called for
the situation could be met in the same way as
was done recently when bills were purchased
from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis by
the Chicago and San Francisco Banks.
There was unanimous agreement on the
part of the members of the Committee that
no change should be made at this time in
the direction issued to the Federal Reserve
Banks at the meeting of the Committee on
March 1, 1944, with respect to the purchase
by the Banks of Treasury bills at a discount
rate of 3/8 per cent with an option on the
part of the seller to repurchase.
In connection with this decision, upon
motion duly made and seconded, it was voted
unanimously that, in the event the procedure
worked out by the executive committee for
allocation of the securities held in the
System and option accounts should require
any change in that direction, the executive
committee would be authorized to make such
changes as might be found to be necessary.
All of the members of the Committee were of the opinion that
there was no occasion at the present time to change in any way the au
thority granted to the executive committee at the last meeting of the
full Committee to direct the execution of transactions for the System
account.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded and by unanimous vote, the follow
ing direction was approved with the under
standing that the limitations contained in

5/4/44 -16-
the direction would include commitments for
purchases or sales of securities for the
System account:
That the executive committee be directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to ar
range for such transactions for the System open market
account, either in the open market or directly with the
Treasury (including purchases, sales, exchanges, replace
ment of maturing securities, and letting maturities run
off without replacement), as may be necessary in the prac
tical administration of the account, or for the purpose
of maintaining about the present general level of prices
and yields of Government securities, or for the purpose
of maintaining an adequate supply of funds in the market;
provided that the aggregate amount of securities held in
the account at the close of this date [other than (1) bills
purchased outright in the market on a discount basis at
the rate of 3/8 per cent per annum and bills redeemed at
maturity and (2) special short-term certificates of in
debtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury] shall not be increased or
decreased by more than $1,500,000,000.
That the executive committee be further directed,
until otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Com
mittee, to arrange for the purchase for the System open
market account direct from the Treasury of such amounts
of special short-term certificates of indebtedness as may
be necessary from time to time for the temporary accommoda
tion of the Treasury; provided that the amount of such
certificates held in the account at any one time shall
not exceed $1,500,000,000.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary