A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Monday, December 11, 1944, at 10:10 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. E ccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Leach
Mr. Young
Mr. D avis
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Messrs. John H. Williams, Kincaid, and
Langum, Associate Economists
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Piser and Kennedy, Chief and
Assistant Chief, respectively, of
the Government Securities Section,
Division of Research and Statistics
of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Alfred H. Williams and Gilbert,
alternate members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Flanders, McLarin, and Day, Presi
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Boston, Atlanta, and San Francisco, re
spectively
Mr. Koppang, First Vice President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Effective September 15, 1944, Mr. M. J. Fleming resigned as

12/11/44 -2
an alternate member of the Committee and Mr. R. M. Gidney, President
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, was subsequently elected to
succeed Mr. Fleming as an alternate member of the Committee for the re
mainder of the year ending February 28, 1945. Mr. Morrill said that
Mr. Gidney had taken the required oath of office.
Before this meeting each member of the Committee received a
copy of a report submitted by the examiner in charge for the Board
of Governors, covering an examination of the System open market ac
count as of September 9, 1944, made as a part of the regular examina
tion of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The report contained
no criticisms or recommendations.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the report was re
ceived and ordered filed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee, held on September 21-22, 1944, were
approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee, as set forth in the min
utes of the meeting of the executive com
mittee on September 21, 1944, were approved,
ratified and confirmed.
Mr. Rouse distributed copies of a report prepared at the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York of open market operations during the period from
September 22 to December 6, 1944, inclusive. He also presented a supple
mentary report covering operations in the account on December 7, 8, and

12/11/44 -3
9, and reviewed briefly, for the information of the members of the
Committee, the highlights of the two reports. Copies of the reports
have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System account, during the period
September 21 to December 9, 1944, inclu
sive, were approved, ratified and con
firmed.
At Chairman Eccles' suggestion there was then read a memoran
dum prepared by Mr. Piser, under date of December 7, 1944, relating
to recommendations made by the executive committee to the Treasury
since the last meeting of the full Committee on Treasury bills and
the Sixth War Loan Drive and Treasury actions with respect to these
matters. The memorandum stated that, of the nine suggestions made,
the Treasury had adopted the three which proposed (1) that the Treas
ury provide a more specific yardstick for subscriptions from brokers
and dealers; (2) that the Treasury make no increase in outstanding
bills during the drive; and, (3) that the Treasury, in the announce
ment of the terms of the Sixth War Loan Drive, request the banks not
to make loans for the purpose of acquiring drive securities for their
own account and that a letter be sent to all commercial banks request
ing them to police subscriptions.
Mr. Kennedy made a report of the progress of the Sixth War
Loan Drive, stating that the drive already had exceeded the over-all
goal of $14,000,000,000 by approximately $500,000,000; that the total

12/11/44 -4
subscriptions for the drive probably would reach approximately
$19,000,000,000, exclusive of approximately $1,000,000,000 of subscrip
tions made by banks under the formula for the investment of time de
posits and $800,000,000 from Government agencies and trust funds; and
that the total subscriptions would be approximately $21,000,000,000
or almost as large as total subscriptions for the Fifth Drive when
the goal was $16,000,000,000. He also stated that sales to indi
viduals at the present time amounted to approximately $3,000,000,000,
and that it was thought that the quota for sales to individuals would
be reached, although the sales of E bonds were lagging. He went on to
say that "free riding" during the drive had not been as great as in
the Fifth Drive but that pressure for purchases for the purpose of
reaching quotas would be greater during the remainder of the Drive
and it was during this period that the test would come. Copies of a
more detailed report, prepared by Mr. Kennedy under date of December
9, 1944, were distributed during the meeting.
During a discussion of developments during the Sixth War Loan
Drive and steps that might be taken in future drives to curb "specu
lative" and indirect bank purchases of securities, there was agree
ment with the suggestion that experience during the current drive
should be studied carefully so that at the next meeting of the full
Committee recommendations with respect to the next drive could be
formulated for submission to the Treasury.

12/11/45 -5
There was then read a memorandum prepared at Chairman Eccles'
suggestion by Mr. Piser under date of December 8, 1944, relating to
the reserve position of banks since the close of the Fifth War Loan
Drive and what the estimated reserve needs of the banks would be during
the period between the close of the current drive and April of next
year. The memorandum pointed out that during the period July 12, to
November 15, 1944, when the reserve needs of member banks increased
$3,900,000,000, the banks sold to the Reserve Banks $2,900,000,000
of bills and $600,000,000 of certificates and notes, although they
purchased from the Federal Reserve Banks approximately $300,000,000
of Treasury notes and bonds. The memorandum also stated that it
was estimated that between December 20, 1944, and April 18, 1945,
the reserve needs of member banks would be between $2,400,000,000
and $3,000,000,000 and that the increase in the Federal Reserve hold
ings of Government securities for the purpose of supplying reserves
would increase between $1,600,000,000 and $2,200,000,000.
Chairman Eccles commented that the situation as outlined in
the memorandum presented the possibility of a significant development
between the Sixth and Seventh Drives in that the banks would be likely
to sell even larger amounts of certificates during the period for the
purpose of building their reserves, which would present the question
what the policy of the Committee would be with respect to future pur
chases of certificates. It was a question, he stated, whether the

12/11/44 -6
System would attempt to lower the yields on Treasury certificates and
permit the market to demand a larger premium or whether the yields on
certificates should be stabilized at 3/4 of 1 per cent and the yield
on 8-10 year bonds should decline to a point where the rate on the
latter would be 1-3/4 per cent. He also said that this involved a
matter which had been raised by Mr. Rouse as to the instructions to
be issued by the executive committee to the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York with respect to the purchase of certificates for the System
account and which would be considered in connection with the general
question of Treasury financing policy, the next subject on the agenda.
At Chairman Eccles' request, there was then read a memorandum
which had been prepared at his request and which he stated was in the
nature of a supplement to the memoranda presented by him at the last
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on the subjects of Treas
ury financing policies and earnings of commercial banks. The memo
randum stated that, after giving further consideration to the declin
ing demand for Treasury bills, the continuing difficulties with main
taining a structure of yields on certificates, and the increasing
earnings of commercial banks, the following proposals were made, with
the suggestion that the Treasury announce the first, third, and fourth
proposals shortly after the first of the year:
(1) That the maturity of Treasury bills be extended
to four, five, or six months and the rate increased to 1/2
per cent;

12/11/44 -7
(2) That such part of Federal Reserve holdings of
bills as will not be needed for future sale in the market
be refunded by the Treasury into special issues yielding
1/4 per cent;
(3) That the coupon rate on future issues of cer
tificates be 3/4 instead of 7/8 per cent; and,
(4) That the Treasury issue no additional 2 per
cent bonds available for purchase by commercial banks.
Chairman Eccles stated that, while he would not recommend
the adoption of these proposals without further study, he did feel
that some adjustment in short-term rates was necessary to bring these
rates in closer relationship to the existing short-term market situa
tion, and that such a program would be one means of meeting the problem
of bank earnings which was a question that was certain to come before
Congress sooner or later. He also said that if such a program were
adopted the System would be in a much better position to go before
Congress, as it would have to do some time next year, to ask for a
reduction in the reserves required to be maintained by the Federal
Reserve Banks against Federal Reserve notes and deposits and for an
extension of the authority to pledge Government securities as collateral
for Federal Reserve notes, and that it would also make it unnecessary
to raise the question of a revival of the franchise tax on Federal
Reserve Bank earnings and the questions that might be associated there
with. He added that the attorneys for the Committee had studied the
suggestion that bills in the System account might be refunded by the
Treasury through special issues of bills yielding 1/4 per cent and

12/11/44. -8
were of the opinion that such a transaction would be an exchange and,
therefore, not subject to the $5,000,000,000 limitation on direct pur
chases of Government securities from the Treasury.
In connection with this point, Chairman Eccles referred to
his recent conversation with Under Secretary of the Treasury Bell,
relating to the question whether, in connection with the renewal of
the Second War Powers Act, an amendment should be suggested that
would remove the limitation on the authority of the Federal Reserve
Banks to purchase Government securities directly from the Treasury
and stated, that although it was felt that the limitation should be
removed, it was decided that an amendment should not be suggested at
this time as it might endanger the desired extension of the Act as a
whole at this session of Congress.
During a discussion of alternative courses that might be pur
sued, Mr. Sproul stated that the proposals outlined in Chairman Eccles'
memorandum raised a number of important questions which should be given
more study than had been possible in the short time that the memorandum
had been available, and that while he did not have any final opinion
on the proposals at this time he did see some possible objections to
them. He felt that, while the reduction in rates might moderate the
problem of maintaining the pattern of rates, it would not go any con
siderable distance in eliminating it as it would continue to exist
as long as there was any substantial spread between short and long-term

12/11/44 -9
rates and the System continued to maintain the pattern. He questioned
whether the change would reestablish Treasury bills as a market in
strument, as in his opinion the time for accomplishing that had passed
and the banks were using certificates and even long-term issues or
were borrowing from the Federal Reserve Banks to adjust their reserve
positions. He was not convinced that it would be wise to change the
pattern of wartime financing in the absence of urgent reasons or reason
able certainty of improvement, because we have been successful in fi
nancing a war of unprecedented cost at relatively low and stable rates
of interest, and because the System should be very careful to do noth
ing which might destroy the confidence of the people in our wartime
financing methods. To do so, he said, could result in such concern
about our currency and bank deposits as to create the inflationary
conditions that the country had been able to avoid thus far. He felt
that if the System and the Treasury could agree that the area between
the 3/8 per cent bill and the 7/8 per cent certificate is outside
the agreed pattern of rates, there would be a better basis for main
taining the existing pattern. Furthermore, he stated, if there could
be an announcement at the beginning of each war loan drive of an of
fering of securities to the banks at the end of the drive and if non
bank quotas could be based on what actually could be sold to and held
by nonbank investors, the pressure would be taken off nonbank holders
of securities to sell in order to buy new issues in each succeeding
drive, and this in turn would take some of the buying pressure out of

12/11/44 -10
the market. In so far as earnings of the Federal Reserve Banks are
concerned, he thought the System might be in a better position if it
made some contribution to the Treasury through a restoration of the
franchise tax, rather than to become a sort of pensioner of the Treas
ury through taking securities at less than the market rate. The re
lated matter of private bank earnings, he agreed, showed indications
of becoming a serious problem but he preferred, for the immediate
present, to permit the banks to see what could be done with their
greater earnings for labor, the consumer, and the stockholder, rather
than to try to devise a means of taking away the earnings. In other
words, he suggested that the banks should consider increasing salaries
of employees; increasing the rates of interest paid on time deposits
and reducing interest rates on loans; and adding to capital funds from
earnings or paying increased dividends, thus enabling the banks to
sell additional stock, so that if an opportunity for increased bank
lending should develop the banks would be in a position to take the
additional risks involved in such loans.
Chairman Eccles stated that the Treasury was considering the
problems raised in his memorandum and, therefore, he would like to
submit to the Treasury fairly soon a statement which, if an agreement
could not be reached by the members of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee as to a recommendation, would be accompanied by the views of
the individual members of the Committee.

12/11/44 -11
Mr. Sproul suggested that before a formal statement of Com
mittee views was sent to the Treasury it would be better to have an
informal discussion with Treasury representatives, after which rec
ommendations could be made in the light of that discussion.
Thereupon the meeting recessed and reconvened at 2:35 p.m.,
with the same attendance as during the morning session, except that
Mr. Gidney, an alternate member of the Federal Open Market Committee,
was in attendance and Mr. Ransom was not present.
For the purpose of furnishing a market background for the mat
ter under consideration Mr. Rouse stated that at the present time the
supply of certificates in the market was quite large and yields were
higher than anything the Committee had had in mind in relation to the
pattern of rates; that it had been necessary to purchase an additional
$65,000,000 of certificates up to this point today and that it would
be some time before the situation was relieved, even if large purchases
for System account were continued. He also said that the pressing de
mand for the 2 per cent bonds declined just before the last meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee and that there was no problem
in that area and there would not be from all that could be seen over
the next several months. He added that when Treasury certificates
were first issued in 1942 they had an initial yield of .83-.81 per
cent, and that the adoption of a procedure such as that suggested in
the memorandum which he sent to Mr. Sproul under date of December 1,

12/11/44 -12
1944, which would provide a yield ranging from .50 per cent on three
months' certificates to .78 per cent on twelve months' certificates
would involve a premium during the nine months' period of not to ex
ceed 3/32s so that the profit to be realized by holders from sales
of certificates would be negligible in amount.
Chairman Eccles said that until some decision was made by the
Federal Open Market Committee on the larger problems involved it should
give the executive committee instructions as to further purchases of
Treasury certificates, and in that connection he repeated the substance
of the statement which he had made at the meeting of the executive com
mittee this morning with respect to the telephone conversation which
he had had with Mr. Bell regarding the present basis on which certifi
cates were being purchased for the System account.
Mr. McKee suggested that there was no reason why the System
should guarantee a profit on issues of Government securities with ma
turities of less than one year and that, as long as the System saw to
it that these issues did not fall below par, the Treasury should be
satisfied, particularly since they could be used as collateral for
borrowing from the Federal Reserve Banks at a rate of 1/2 per cent.
Mr. Sproul stated that there had been a misunderstanding at
the Treasury from the very beginning with respect to the extent to
which the agreed pattern of rates applied to the short-term market.
He also said that the System's commitment was to maintain about the

12/11/44 -13-
present general level of prices and yields and that the Treasury had
applied that to a pattern beginning at 3/8 per cent for Treasury bills
but that the Federal Open Market Committee had never agreed to that
interpretation of its commitment. He felt that, in order to avoid the
charge of the Committee failing to live up to its commitment, the mat
ter should be taken up with the Treasury so that it would know what the
decision of the Committee was in connection with it.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, it was decided to make no
change in the policy which had been fol
lowed in the recent past with respect to
purchases of Treasury certificates.
In taking this action it was under
stood that the executive committee would
advise the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York of the Committee's decision and that
Chairman Eccles would advise Under Secre
tary of the Treasury Bell of the decision
and the reasons therefor.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the executive com
mittee was requested to meet after the
first of the year for the purpose of con
sidering the proposals contained in the
memorandum presented by Chairman Eccles
and the comments made at this meeting in
connection with them, and, if the executive
committee could agree upon a recommenda
tion, to submit it to the Treasury for con
sideration.
Following a review of the general open
market policies now in effect there was
unanimous agreement that there was nothing
in the existing situation that called for
any change in these policies at this time

12/11/44 -14-
and that, therefore, no change should be
made in the direction issued to the Fed
eral Reserve Banks at the meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee on March 1,
1944, with respect to the purchase of Treas
ury bills at a discount rate of 3/8 per
cent per annum.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the following di
rection to the executive committee was ap
proved, with the understanding that the
limitations contained in the direction
would include commitments for purchases
and sales of securities for the System
account.
That the executive committee be directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to ar
range for such transactions for the System open market ac
count, either in the open market or directly with the Treas
ury (including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of
maturing securities, and letting maturities run off with
out replacement), as may be necessary in the practical ad
ministration of the account, or for the purpose of main
taining about the present general level of prices and
yields of Government securities, or for the purpose of
maintaining an adequate supply of funds in the market;
provided that the aggregate amount of securities held in
the account at the close of this date [other that (1) bills
purchased outright in the market on a discount basis at
the rate of 3/8 per cent per annum and bills redeemed at
maturity and (2) special short-term certificates of in
debtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury] shall not be increased or
decreased by more than $1,500,000,000.
That the executive committee be further directed, un
til otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee,
to arrange for the purchase for the System open market ac
count direct from the Treasury of such amounts of special
short-term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the
Treasury; provided that the amount of such certificates
held in the account at any one time shall not exceed
$1,500,000,000.

12/11/44 -15
At this point Mr. Rouse reported that he had just had a fur
ther telephone conversation with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
and had learned that it had been necessary to purchase a total of
$90,000,000 of Treasury certificates so far today. He also said that
he had given instructions to continue to purchase freely any certif
icates that were pressing for sale at present prices. There was a
brief discussion of Mr. Rouse's report and it was agreed that his in
structions were in line with the present policy of preventing a fur
ther rise in certificate yields.
Reference was then made to the agreement reached at the last
meeting of the Committee in connection with the adoption of the re
vised formula for the allocation of securities in the System account,
that pending further action by the Federal Open Market Committee,
Treasury bills should not be allocated to any Federal Reserve Bank
in an amount that would reduce its reserve ratio below 45 per cent
on statement and reallocation dates. It was stated that the present
combined ratio of the Federal Reserve Banks was between 49 per cent
and 50 per cent, that it would decline further before the next meet
ing of the Committee, and that it might be desirable at this time to
provide for some further leeway for the allocation of bills in the
System account.
Mr. Rouse stated that the allocation procedure was working
smoothly and would not become a problem before the next meeting.

12/11/44 -16
Mr. Sproul suggested that the matter be referred to the execu
tive committee with the understanding that the present basis of alloca
tion would be continued until it appeared to the executive committee
desirable to make a change, when the executive committee would advise
the Federal Reserve Banks that, pending further action, bills would
not be allocated to any Federal Reserve Bank in accordance with the
existing formula in an amount which would reduce its reserve ratio
below 43 per cent.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, Mr. Sproul's sug
gestion was approved.
Following a discussion of possible dates for the next meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee, there was unanimous agreement
that the next meeting should be held on February 28, 1945, followed
by a meeting on March 1, 1945, in accordance with the procedure fol
lowed last year.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.