A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Thursday, September 21, 1944, at 10:15 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Leach
Mr. Young
Mr. Davis
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Messrs. John H. Williams, Kincaid, Langum,
Edmiston, and Upgren, Associate Econo
mists
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Dreibelbis, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Special Assistant to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Piser and Kennedy, Chief and
Assistant Chief, respectively, of
the Government Securities Section,
Division of Research and Statistics
of the Board of Governors
Messrs. L. R. Rounds, Alfred H. Williams,
H. G. Leedy, and R. R. Gilbert, alter
nate members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Gidney, McLarin, and Day, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland,
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively
Chairman Eccles stated that he had been informed by Mr. Bell,
Under Secretary of the Treasury, that Secretary Morgenthau, who was

9/21/44 -2
out of the city, would like to have further discussions with respect
to the plans for the next war loan drive and the desirability of in
creasing the weekly offering of Treasury bills. Chairman Eccles also
said he had told Mr. Bell that he and Mr. Sproul were leaving for the
West on the evening of September 22 and that Mr. Bell had replied that
he would try to arrange a meeting tomorrow.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
held on May 4, 1944, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the min
utes of the meetings of the executive com
mittee held on May 4 and July 28, 1944,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
At the beginning of the meeting there were distributed copies
of a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York of open
market operations for the System account during the period from May 5
to September 16, 1944, inclusive. Mr. Rouse called attention to the
important items in the report as well as in a supplementary report pre
pared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York covering transactions
for the System account on September 18, 19, and 20, 1944.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
for the System open market account during
the period from May 4 to September 20, 1944,
inclusive, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.

9/21/44 -3
Chairman Eccles stated that considerable thought had been
given, both in and out of the Federal Reserve System, to the declin
ing reserve ratio of the Federal Reserve Banks, and that at the meet
ing of the executive committee on July 28 it had been agreed that a
decision as to the action to be taken to meet the situation did not
have to be made at this time but could be deferred until the prospects
were somewhat clarified, that waiting had the advantage that with an
early termination of the war the problem might never actively arise,
and that in any event it would not become acute until the middle of
next year. In these circumstances, Chairman Eccles said, the execu
tive committee voted unanimously to recommend to the full Committee
that no action with respect to this matter be taken until after the
first of next year, that if action should become necessary at a later
date the position be taken that it should be in the form of a reduction
by Congress in existing Reserve Bank reserve requirements, and that
the executive committee be authorized to make or to join in any public
statement or statements that might appear to it to be necessary to
counteract any unfavorable comment that might be made on the continu
ing decline in the reserve ratio. He went on to say that it was the
thought of the executive committee in making this recommendation that
the System would not discuss the problem unless the matter became one
of public discussion and it appeared necessary or desirable to counter
act unfavorable comment. He felt that constructive statements had

9/21/44 -4
been made in the press and that, as long as these were effective in
preventing misunderstanding or concern with respect to the present trend,
there was no necessity for the System to comment on the matter.
With respect to the suggestion that should action become neces
sary it should be in the form of a reduction in existing Federal Re
serve Bank reserve requirements, Chairman Eccles said that this proposal
had not been discussed with the Treasury and he did not know what the
Treasury's reaction to it would be. He also said that, while it might
be more logical to meet the problem when action became necessary by
issuing Federal Reserve Bank notes under existing authority, such a
course might meet greater opposition from the outside and be more dif
ficult to explain.
Mr. Ransom stated that he understood that a subcommittee of
the Colmer Committee contemplated asking for an informal discussion
of the Federal Reserve Bank reserve ratio problem probably after the
national election, and that the meeting of the subcommittee would not
be a hearing but an informal discussion of the same type that had taken
place with respect to other matters in which persons who were not con
nected with the Government would be invited to participate. Following
the discussion of the desirability of this problem coming before the
subcommittee instead of the Banking and Currency Committees, which
would have to pass on any legislation in connection with it, there was
agreement that, if the subcommittee should ask for information on the

9/21/44 -5
matter, it should be furnished.
Mr. McKee stated that it would be necessary for the Board to
ask Congress for an extension of the authority to pledge Government
securities as collateral for Federal Reserve notes, which expires on
June 30, 1945 , and that, in view of the position previously taken by
the Board that it would have no objection to the repeal of the author
ity to issue Federal Reserve Bank notes, it perhaps would be easier to
get a reduction in Federal Reserve Bank reserve requirements at the
same time the authority to pledge Government securities as collateral
for Federal Reserve notes was renewed. He also pointed out that if
Federal Reserve Bank notes were to be issued to meet the situation it
would take some time to have them printed. He went on to say that,
while he and the Presidents' Conference Committee on Currency Hoarding
were at a meeting at the Treasury on September 19, Mr. Bell said that
before any action was taken by the Board in connection with the reserve
question it would be well to discuss the matter with the Chairmen of
the Banking and Currency Committees, probably sometime after the first
of the year.
Mr. Sproul called attention to the fact that the material
given by the Treasury to him and Chairman Eccles and to the members
of the committee of bankers who were in Washington this week to dis
cuss Treasury financing contained a chapter on the Federal Reserve
ratio and money market management through March 31, 1945, which

9/21/44 -6
stated that the decline in the reserve ratio should not interfere with
full System support to the Government security market, that whatever
action might be necessary to meet the decline should be taken well in
advance of the immediate necessity for action, but that there would
be no need for action until after the first of the year.
Mr. Goldenweiser inquired whether the approval of the recom
mendation submitted by the executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee would mean that there should be no articles on the
reserve ratio published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin or the bulle
tins of the Federal Reserve Banks.
Mr. Peyton suggested that the question of publicity be left to
the Federal Reserve Banks for decision for the reason that the Banks
should be free to discuss the matter with anyone in their respective
districts who wanted to talk about it. During the discussion of this
suggestion, Mr. Goldenweiser, in response to an inquiry why he had
raised the question, stated that the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland
had prepared an article for publication in its monthly bulletin but
before doing so submitted it to the Board's Division of Research and
Statistics and was informed that the discussions had indicated the
feeling that articles on this subject should not be published. Subse
quently, he said, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York published an
article on the reserve ratios of foreign central banks and a question
arose whether the policy was being uniformly applied. He also said

9/21/44 -7
that the Division of Research and Statistics had taken the position
that the New York article dealt with foreign central bank conditions
which emphasized the favorable monetary position of this country and
therefore had a favorable reaction. He added that in view of what had
occurred he thought there should be consideration of the extent to
which the Board and the Federal Reserve Banks should go in publishing
articles dealing with the reserve ratio, recognizing, of course, that
under the existing procedure the decision with respect to Bank articles
was one for the individual Federal Reserve Banks.
In connection with an inquiry by Mr. Ransom, there was a dis
cussion of whether the executive committee of the Federal Open Market
Committee was the proper body to take a position on this subject, which
he believed to be a responsibility of the Board of Governors as such.
It was stated that the recommendation of the executive committee did
not necessarily contemplate that a statement would be made only by it
or by the Federal Open Market Committee, but that the Board of Gover
nors could make any statement on the matter that it might wish or could
act with the Open Market Committee or the executive committee in issu
ing a joint statement.
During the course of the discussion,
it was moved and seconded that the recom
mendation of the executive committee be
approved, and at the end of the discussion
this motion was put by the chair and carried,
Mr. Ransom voting "no" for the reason that
he did not think the executive committee

9/21/44 -8
was the proper body to make public statements
on this subject.
In a further reference to the question of publicity, Mr. Sproul
suggested that the point involved was whether the Federal Reserve Banks
should initiate publicity, and in the ensuing discussion there appeared
to be general agreement that the Federal Reserve Banks would not initiate
any publicity on the subject but would be at liberty to answer or dis
cuss any inquiries or requests that might arise in their respective
districts in order to guide the discussion of the problem in the way
that it should go.
At this point Mr. Smead, Director of the Division of Bank Oper
ations of the Board of Governors, joined the meeting.
Chairman Eccles informed the Federal Open Market Committee of
the discussion at the meeting of the executive committee just before
this meeting with respect to the proposed discontinuance of the option
accounts at the Federal Reserve Banks and the adoption of a new procedure
for the allocation of securities in the System account. He stated that
the executive committee had decided to recommend to the full Committee
that the option accounts be retained and that the allocation formula
submitted on this basis by Messrs. Smead and Rouse at the meeting of
the executive committee on July 28, 1944, be adopted.
Mr. Rouse referred to the fact that the allocation procedure
mentioned by Chairman Eccles contained a provision that the "portion of

9/21/44 -9
Treasury bills that any Bank or Banks are unable to take, owing to a
low reserve ratio, will be allocated to the Bank or Banks having the
highest reserve ratio". This statement, he said, meant that these al
locations would be made in such amounts as approximately to equalize
the reserve ratios of the Banks to which the bills were allocated, and
that a footnote would be added to the text of the procedure to that
effect.
Mr. Leedy referred to the provision in the proposed procedure
which contemplated that any Bank which did not have its pro rata share
of Treasury bills in the System account, based on the calculations in
the most recent allocation, might restore its participation on any
Wednesday whenever its reserve ratio permitted, by contacting the
Manager of the System Open Market Account. He stated that in the
past all allocations of securities in the System account had been
made automatically in accordance with the established formula and that
it was his feeling that that arrangement should be continued.
This point was discussed, and it was
agreed that the applicable sentence in the
statement of procedure should be changed to
read as follows: "Whenever a Bank does not
have its pro rata share of the Treasury bills
in the System account, its participation will
be restored on the succeeding Wednesday or
month end to the extent that its reserve
ratio permits".
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, it was voted unanimously to adopt
the following procedure for the allocation

9/21/44 -10
of securities in the System account, with
the understanding that the revised procedure
would be put into operation as of October 1,
1944, the next allocation date provided in
the procedure:
,ALLOCATION OF SECURITIES HELD IN SYSTEM AND OPTION ACCOUNTS
Reallocations Quarterly in Each Year Until October 1, and
Monthly for the Remainder of the Year, and Adjustments
of Participations in Treasury Bills in System Account
and Option Accounts Weekly or More Often When
Necessary to Adjust Reserve Ratios
"1. Interest-Bearing Securities
(a) Allocate a sufficient amount of interest-bearing
securities held in System account to each Fed
eral Reserve Bank to cover expenses not already
covered by accrued earnings from interest-bear
ing securities and by estimated earnings from
other sources, excluding all Treasury bills.
(b) Allocate a sufficient amount of additional in
terest-bearing securities to each Federal Re
serve Bank to cover dividend requirements.
(c) Allocate any remaining interest-bearing securi
ties to each Federal Reserve Bank on the basis
of average daily holdings of interest-bearing
securities in System account for the five years
ending on the last day of the preceding month.
"2. Treasury Bills
(a) Allocate Treasury bills held in the System account
in a manner which will give to each Bank its pro
rata share (based on the percentages used for
the allocation of interest-bearing securities in
Paragraph 1. sub-caption (c)) of estimated earn
ings on holdings of Treasury bills in both the
System account and Option accounts provided
that, if the earnings on interest-bearing se
curities are not sufficient to cover expenses
and dividends, the allocation of Treasury bills
will first be made in accordance with the
formula in Paragraph 1. sub-captions (a) and
(b). Treasury bills will not be allocated to
any Bank in an amount that would reduce its
reserve ratio below the percentage agreed
upon from time to time by the Federal Open

9/21/44 -11-
"Market Committee and the Banks. The por
tion of Treasury bills that any Bank or Banks
are unable to take, owing to a low reserve
ratio, will be allocated to the Bank or Banks
having the highest reserve ratio*.
(b) Adjustments when necessary to restore any Bank's
reserve ratio to the agreed upon percentage
will be made in participations in Treasury
bills each Wednesday and on the last day of
each month, unless such day is a reallocation
date, based on closing figures of the previous
day, with allowance for any repurchases. In
between the weekly and month-end adjustments
any bank desiring to restore its reserve ratio
to a level above 40 per cent will sell to a
Bank or Banks having the highest reserve ratio
or ratios, a participation or participations
in Treasury bills held in its Option account
for a period of days to expire on the follow
ing Wednesday or month end, whichever is earlier,
except that such adjustments will be made in
the System account in the event that a Bank
does not hold sufficient bills in its Option
account. Banks will utilize Treasury bills
for adjusting reserve positions before selling
a participation in interest-bearing securities
held in the System account. All adjustments
in participations will be handled through the
Manager of the System Open Market Account and
Banks will advise him promptly of any partici
pations in Treasury bills held in Option ac
counts they repurchase on days other than
Wednesdays and month ends. Whenever a Bank
does not have its pro rata share of the Treas
ury bills in the System account, its participa
tion will be restored on the succeeding Wednesday
or month end to the extent that its reserve
ratio permits.
"3. Profits and Losses on Sales of Securities
Allocate profits and losses on sales of securi
ties to each Federal Reserve Bank on the basis
"*Allocations to be made in such amounts as approximately
to equalize the reserve ratios of the Banks to which bills
are thus allocated."

9/21/44 -12-
"of average daily holdings of interest-bear
ing securities in System account for the five
years ending on the last day of the preceding
month."
In accordance with paragraph 2(a) of
the procedure, it was agreed unanimously
that, pending further action by the Federal
Open Market Committee, Treasury bills
should not be allocated to any Federal Re
serve Bank in an amount that would reduce
its reserve ratio below 45 per cent.
Mr. Smead left the meeting at this point.
Chairman Eccles made substantially the following statement:
During the last few days Mr. Sproul and I have had
several discussions with respect to Treasury financing
with representatives of the Treasury and the committee of
bankers which was called to Washington by the Treasury
for discussions this week. We pointed out to the bankers'
committee that if there were further additions to the
weekly offering of Treasury bills there would be a further
increase in reserves of member banks that did not need
reserves, which would make for further speculation in the
next drive and banks would not have to sell as many of
the securities that were purchased following the last
drive, with the result that the prices of these securities
would advance further, with an accompanying decline in
the long-term rate and a growing difficulty in maintaining
the pattern of rates. These points were also presented
in our discussions with representatives of the Treasury.
On September 19, 1944, Mr. Fleming, President of the
Riggs National Bank of Washington and a member of the bankers'
committee told me that the committee was thinking of recom
mending a public offering on October 15 of between $3 bil
lion and $5 billion of 1-1/4 per cent Treasury notes, and
he asked whether there was any question in our minds whether
such an offering would be successful. I told him there was
none and that we would favor that action as an alternative
to the issuance of additional bills, but that we thought
the Treasury would be satisfied with an issue of $3 bil
lion. I learned later that the bankers' committee had

9/21/44 -13-
recommended $2 billion of 1-1/4 per cent notes and an in
crease of $100 million in the weekly offering of bills
for a period of eight weeks.
The position which Mr. Sproul and I took at the
Treasury was that there should be no new securities issued
before the drive, that the Treasury did not need any addi
tional funds as it could issue bills at any time or bor
row directly from the Federal Reserve Banks in the event
of an emergency, and that if additional bills were issued
they would have to be taken by the Federal Reserve Banks
through the dealers, which was at least indirect financ
ing by the Federal Reserve Banks. We also said that if
the Treasury insisted on additional funds we would recom
mend the issuance of not more than $3 billion, and prefer
ably $2 billion, of 1-1/4 per cent notes. We do not know
what the decision of the Treasury will be.
I have had prepared a memorandum on the subject of
Treasury financing policies which discusses the situation
that confronts the Treasury and the System at the present
time and the problems that probably will be presented over
a longer period in connection with refunding the war debt,
high earnings of member banks, and the difficulty of main
taining the pattern of rates. Three other memoranda have
also been prepared with respect to (1) estimates of member
bank earnings through 1945, (2) bank capital and deposit
protection, and (3) criticisms in Congress of bank earnings
on the Government debt.
Copies of the four memoranda referred to by Chairman Eccles
were distributed and copies have been placed in the files of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee.
Following the reading of the memorandum on Treasury financing
policies, Chairman Eccles stated that the memorandum did not call for
any action at that time but did attempt to point out the problems with
which the Treasury and the System would be faced in the future and
which would be much more difficult than the problem of financing the

9/21/44 -14
war. He requested that the Presidents have the memoranda studied
at their respective Banks and that they come to the next meeting of
the Federal Open Market Committee prepared to discuss the whole prob
lem with a view to the System being prepared to make some long-range
suggestions to the Treasury before some of the problems became press
ing next year.
Chairman Eccles also raised the question whether it would be
desirable to send the four memoranda to the Treasury for consideration.
There was general agreement that there would be no objection to his
sending the memoranda as preliminary statements which had been prepared
to point up some of the problems that would have to be met, but which
did not necessarily express the views of any individual.
Mr. McKee stated that any discussion of bank earnings would
call attention to the large earnings of the Federal Reserve Banks, and
in a brief discussion of this point Mr. Sproul suggested that consider
ation might again be given to proposing to Congress the restoration of
the franchise tax.
Reference was then made by Chairman Eccles to the memorandum
relating to criticisms in Congress of bank earnings on the Government
debt. He expressed the feeling that, if the earnings of the commercial
banks on Government securities rose to the level that it appeared they
would reach, there would be pressure in Congress during the postwar
period, when interest on the Government debt would be a large item in

9/21/44 -15
the Federal budget, to reduce the rate of return on securities held
by the Banks as representing money created by the banks, without cost
to them, for the purpose of financing the war. He felt that the banks
should not be permitted to get into that position and that the System
should do what it could to prevent the condition from developing.
At Chairman Eccles' request, the memorandum last referred to
was read, after which the meeting recessed and reconvened at 2:15 p.m.,
with the same attendance as at the morning session and in addition Mr.
Flanders, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
Chairman Eccles called attention to a further memorandum,
copies of which were distributed to those present, which he stated
was a summary and an analysis of the material sent by the Treasury
to the members of the committee of bankers who were in Washington
this week and to him and Mr. Sproul.
He then stated that since the submission to the Treasury of
the memorandum of August 11, 1944, neither the Board of Governors nor
the executive committee of the Federal Open Market Committee had dis
cussed further the sixth war loan drive and the steps that might be
taken to curb speculative purchases and indirect purchases by banks
during the drive, and that the question before the meeting today was
whether the memorandum should be supplemented in any way.
Mr. Day expressed strong dissatisfaction with the situation
that existed in his district during the last drive when the banks in

9/21/44 -16
some areas complied fully with the rules laid down by the Treasury,
while in other areas the violation of Treasury rules was openly urged
by members of the War Loan Committees in order to meet their quotas.
If that condition continued in the next drive, he said, he proposed
to transmit to the member banks in his district the instructions re
ceived from the Treasury and, if any question should arise as to what
a bank would be permitted to do, he would say that that was a matter
for decision by the Treasury Department.
Chairman Eccles stated that it was his understanding that
it was the present intention of the Treasury not to announce the pro
gram for the next drive until sometime between the 10th and middle of
October and that, therefore, any attempt to make specific recommenda
tions at this time as to the securities that should be offered in the
drive would be rather difficult.
Mr. McKee inquired whether the Presidents had any suggestions
as to how indirect purchases by banks could be avoided in the drive,
and Mr. Young expressed the opinion that most of the indirect bank
buying could be eliminated by an announcement at the beginning of the
drive of an offering of bonds to be sold directly to banks after the
drive closed. Chairman Eccles added that if there were also an offer
ing of notes about the middle of October the two issues would go a
long way toward eliminating indirect bank buying of securities.
In response to a suggestion by Mr. Davis that Mr. Sproul

9/21/44 -17
summarize the discussion which was had of this matter at the Presi
dents' Conference on September 18-19, 1944, the latter stated that
the consensus was that the problem of preventing speculation and in
direct purchases of securities was a real one and that the situation
would get out of hand in the next drive unless effective preventive
action were taken. He also said that it had been suggested that the
Treasury enforce the rules that it had laid down, that there be a di
rect bank offering to be announced at the beginning of the drive, and
that a cash down payment of 25 per cent be required on all subscriptions
involving bank loans. It was also felt, he said, that if these things
were done there would be considerable leeway in the issues that could
be included in the basket, but that if they were not put into effect
the only alternative means of preventing large speculative and indirect
bank purchases would be the undesirable one of excluding from the basket
all issues eligible for bank purchase other than Treasury certificates.
There was a discussion of the extent to which corporate funds
would be available for investment in the next drive and what the goal
for the drive should be if the securities offered consisted largely of
restricted issues.
The opinion was expressed by some of the Presidents that it was
impossible for the Federal Reserve Banks to police subscriptions made
during the drive by anyone other than brokers and dealers and that the
Federal Reserve Banks should not be expected to do so unless specific

9/21/44 -18
steps were taken by the Treasury which would make it possible to pre
vent indirect purchases by banks. In this connection, Mr. Leach said
that some of the banks in his district which had been offenders in
the last drive would welcome a definite policy that would require ad
herence by all banks to the Treasury rules.
Mr. Sproul stated that with the material given by the Treasury
to the members of the bankers' committee and to him and Chairman Eccles
was a list of questions which it was understood would be asked when he
and Chairman Eccles went to the Treasury for further discussions, and
he suggested that these be considered. This was done and there was
concurrence in the following conclusions:
1. The goal of the drive should be $12 billion with an
offering, to be announced in advance, of $3 billion
directly to the banks at the end of the drive.
2. The drive should begin as soon as possible in November.
3. The securities to be included in the basket would de
pend on steps taken to prevent speculation and indirect
bank purchases and whether there was a direct bank of
fering at the conclusion of the drive.
4. Provision should be made for deferred payments on sub
scriptions by insurance companies and savings banks.
5. The prevention of "free riding" was believed to be ab
solutely essential for the reasons previously stated
at this meeting.
6. Provision should be made for a 25 per cent down payment
on all subscriptions involving bank loans.
7. The withdrawal of demand deposits for the purchase of
Government securities should be encouraged, but an at
tempt to prescribe a formula as to the proportion of a

9/21/44 -19-
deposit that should be used for this purpose would
be undesirable for the reason that it might result in
further hoarding of currency.
8. Permission for banks to purchase restricted securi
ties in an amount not exceeding a stated portion of
their savings deposits should be continued as in the
last two drives, for the reason that it would permit
the smaller banks which have the lowest earnings to
increase their investments in the higher yield securi
ties.
9. In order to place dealer banks on the same basis as
other dealers in Government securities, such banks
should be permitted to deal in restricted issues, pro
vided that they did not hold at any one time an amount
of securities in excess of the amount that they would
be authorized to subscribe for in relation to their
savings deposits.
10. For the reasons previously stated, there should be no
increase in the weekly offering of Treasury bills.
During the discussion of the above matters, there was a ques
tion on the part of some of the Presidents as to the desirability of
the suggestion contained in the memorandum of August 11, 1944, that
the use of war loan deposits above a minimum percentage be denied to
all depositaries which ignore the Treasury's request concerning specu
lative loans.
At the conclusion of the discussion
of the Treasury questions, attention was
turned to the consideration of open market
policy, and there was unanimous agreement
that, inasmuch as the decision had been
reached to continue the option accounts,
no change should be made at this time in
the direction issued to the Federal Reserve
Banks at the meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee on March 1, 1944, with

9/21/44 -20-
respect to the purchase of Treasury bills at
a discount rate of 3/8 per cent per annum.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the following direc
tion to the executive committee was approved,
with the understanding that the limitations
contained in the direction would include
commitments for purchases and sales of se
curities for the System account.
"That the executive committee be directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to ar
range for such transactions for the System open market ac
count, either in the open market or directly with the Treasury
(including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of ma
turing securities, and letting maturities run off without
replacement), as may be necessary in the practical adminis
tration of the account, or for the purpose of maintaining
about the present general level of prices and yields of
Government securities, or for the purpose of maintaining
an adequate supply of funds in the market; provided that
the aggregate amount of securities held in the account at
the close of this date [other than (1) bills purchased
outright in the market on a discount basis at the rate of
3/8 per cent per annum and bills redeemed at maturity and
(2) special short-term certificates of indebtedness pur
chased from time to time for the temporary accommodation
of the Treasury] shall not be increased or decreased by
more than $1,500,000,000.
"That the executive committee be further directed,
until otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Com
mittee, to arrange for the purchase for the System open
market account direct from the Treasury of such amounts
of special short-term certificates of indebtedness as may
be necessary from time to time for the temporary accommoda
tion of the Treasury; provided that the amount of such cer
tificates held in the account at any one time shall not ex
ceed $1,500,000,000."
Chairman Eccles questioned whether the System account should
continue to purchase certificates at a premium. He pointed out that
to a considerable extent these securities had taken the place of bills

9/21/44 -21
as the instrument used by banks to adjust their reserves, and that
corporations, which purchased certificates during the drives for the
purpose of enabling their communities to meet their quotas and sold
them again so that they could purchase additional certificates in the
succeeding drive, were not greatly concerned with the rate of return
on the securities. In these circumstances he thought there was little,
if any, justification for the System account paying a premium for the
certificates purchased by it.
Mr. Rouse stated that the amount of money involved in the
premiums paid by the System account was so small that it was not im
portant, and that if Chairman Eccles' suggestion were adopted interest
in the certificate market would decline materially with possibly serious
effects on the whole method of financing.
Mr. Sproul expressed the opinion that there was a large volume
of certificates outstanding which had been purchased on the assumption
that the pattern of rates would be maintained and that, if certificates
were allowed to decline to par, the market would "play the pattern of
rates" in the longer-term issues where the possibility of profits was
greater.
During the discussion of the above matter, Chairman Eccles
received word from the Treasury that Secretary Morgenthau would not
return to Washington before he (Chairman Eccles) and Mr. Sproul left
for the West. In these circumstances, there was agreement that the

9/21/44 -22
executive committee would be free to supplement the memoranda pre
viously sent to the Treasury to such extent as the committee thought
desirable in the light of the discussions at this meeting.
In connection with the discussion of the date for the next
meeting of the full Committee, there was a tentative decision that
the next meeting should be held on Monday, December 11, 1944.
The meeting then recessed and reconvened on the morning of
Friday, September 22, 1944, at 9:30 a.m., with the same attendance as
during the morning session on September 21, except that Mr. Davis and
Mr. Upgren were not present.
At this session informal statements were made by Messrs.
Goldenweiser and John H. Williams, which were supplemented by brief
comments by Messrs. Langum, Kincaid, and Edmiston, on the problems
which would be faced during and following the reconversion period in
the employment, production, and monetary fields.
At the conclusion of a discussion of the questions presented
in the economists' statements the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.