A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Wednesday, March 1, 1944, at 10:10 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymezak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Leach
Mr. Young
Mr. Davis
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary,
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Messrs. MacKenzie, Bryan, and Wheeler,
Associate Economists
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Messrs. Piser and Kennedy, Chief and
Assistant Chief, respectively, of
the Government Securities Section,
Division of Research and Statistics
of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Alfred H. Williams, Fleming, Leedy,
and Gilbert, alternate members of the
Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Paddock and McLarin, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and
Atlanta, respectively
Mr. Clerk, First Vice President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Messrs. Sienkiewicz, Langum, Edmiston,
Upgren, and Hardy, Vice Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Philadelphia, Chicago, St. Louis,
Minneapolis, and Kansas City, re
spectively

3/1/44 -2
Mr. Kincaid, Consulting Economist at the
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
Mr. Dolley, Economic Adviser at the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of Dallas
Mr. Morrill stated that advices of the election for a period
of one year commencing March 1, 1944, of members and alternate members
of the Federal Open Market Committee representing the Federal Reserve
Banks had been received, that each newly elected member and alternate
member had executed the required oath of office, and that it was the
opinion of the Committee's Counsel on the basis of the advices received
that the following members and alternate members were legally qualified
to serve:
Allan Sproul, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, with L. R. Rounds, First Vice President of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate member;
Hugh Leach, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Richmond, with Alfred H. Williams, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, as alternate mem
ber;
C. S. Young, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago, with M. J. Fleming, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate member;
Chester C. Davis, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis, with R. R. Gilbert, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, as alternate member; and
John N. Peyton, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis, with H. G. Leedy, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, as alternate member.
Upon motions duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous votes, the following of
ficers of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee were elected to serve until the elec
tion of their successors at the first
meeting of the Committee after March 1,
1945:

3/1/44
Marriner S. Eccles, Chairman
Allan Sproul, Vice Chairman
S. R. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
E. A. Goldenweiser, Economist
Messrs. John H. Williams, Kincaid,
Langum, Edmiston, and Upgren,
Associate Economists
Walter Wyatt, General Counsel
J. P. Dreibelbis, Assistant General
Counsel
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York was selected to execute
transactions for the System open market
account until the adjournment of the first
meeting of the Committee after March 1,
1945.
Mr. Sproul stated that the board of directors of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York had selected Mr. Rouse as Manager of the Sys
tem open market account, subject to the selection of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York by the Federal Open Market Committee as the Bank to
execute transactions for the System open market account and to his ap
proval by the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the selection of
Mr. Rouse as Manager of the System open
market account was approved.
Upon motions duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous votes, the following were
selected to serve with the Chairman of the
Federal Open Market Committee (who, under
the provisions of the bylaws, is also chair
man of the executive committee) as members
and alternate members of the executive com
mittee until the selection of their suc
cessors at the first meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee after March 1, 1945:

3/1/44 -4-
Members Alternate Members
John K. McKee M. S. Szymczak
Ernest G. Draper R. M. Evans
Allan Sproul Ronald Ransom
Hugh Leach (To serve in the order
named as alternates for
Messrs. Eccles, McKee,
and Draper, except that
in the absence of Chair
man Eccles Mr. Ransom
will serve as the first
alternate)
C. S. Young
Chester C. Davis
(To serve in the order
named as alternates for
Messrs. Sproul and Leach)
All of the members of the Committee were in agreement that
there was no reason at this time for a change in the direction issued
to the Federal Reserve Banks on June 28, 1943, with respect to the
purchase of Treasury bills but that it would be desirable for the Com
mittee to renew the direction.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following direction was ap
proved by unanimous vote, with the under
standing that resales of Treasury bills
held by the Reserve Banks under option
would be for immediate delivery when so
requested by the option holder:
Until otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market
Committee, the 12 Federal Reserve Banks are directed to
purchase all Treasury bills that may be offered to such
Banks on a discount basis at the rate of 3/8 per cent
per annum, any such purchases to be upon the condition
that the Federal Reserve Bank, upon the request of the
seller before the maturity of the bills, will sell to
him Treasury bills of like amount and maturity at the

3/1/44 -5-
same rate of discount. All bills purchased under this
direction are to be held by the purchasing Federal Re
serve Bank in its own account and prompt reports of all
such purchases are to be made to the Manager of the Sys
tem open market account.
In taking this action, the Committee
reaffirmed the position previously taken
in discussions with representatives of the
Treasury that the short-term rate on Gov
ernment securities should be increased by
the adoption of one of the alternative
courses proposed by the System representa
tives in such discussions, and the execu
tive committee was authorized whenever an
opportunity afforded in future discussions
with the Treasury to urge appropriate steps
to increase the short-term rate to a point
more in line with the existing rates on
longer-term issues of Government securi
ties.
Consideration was then given to the form of the direction to
be issued to the executive committee with respect to transactions in
the System account pending another meeting of the full Committee. It
was agreed that it would be desirable to continue to exempt from the
limitations of the direction bills purchased from dealers and that, in
asmuch as the maturities of such bills were now approximately equal to
the weekly purchases of bills for the account, the direction should also
exempt from its limitations the redemption of maturing bills.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the fol
lowing direction was approved with the un
derstanding that the limitations contained
in the direction would include commitments
for purchases or sales of securities for
the System account:

3/1/44 -6-
That the executive committee be directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee,
to arrange for such transactions for the System open
market account, either in the open market or directly
with the Treasury (including purchases, sales, exchanges,
replacement of maturing securities, and letting maturi
ties run off without replacement), as may be necessary
in the practical administration of the account, or for
the purpose of maintaining about the present general
level of prices and yields of Government securities,
or for the purpose of maintaining an adequate supply
of funds in the market; provided that the aggregate
amount of securities held in the account at the close
of this date (other than (1) bills purchased outright
in the market on a discount basis at the rate of 3/8
per cent per annum and bills redeemed at maturity and
(2) special short-term certificates of indebtedness pur
chased from time to time for the temporary accommodation
of the Treasury) shall not be increased or decreased by
more than $1,500,000,000.
That the executive committee be further directed,
until otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Com
mittee, to arrange for the purchase for the System open
market account direct from the Treasury of such amounts
of special short-term certificates of indebtedness as
may be necessary from time to time for the temporary ac
commodation of the Treasury; provided that the amount
of such certificates held in the account at any one
time shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
Mr. Sproul stated that question had been raised by the Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco whether, in the event the Federal Open
Market Committee should establish a higher posted rate on Treasury
bills, the existing rate of 3/8 per cent per annum would continue to
apply on bills outstanding at the time of the change in rate until
the maturity of such bills. It was his suggestion that, inasmuch as
it was understood in discussions with representatives of the Treasury
that in case the posted rate were raised the present rate would con
tinue to apply to existing bills until they were redeemed, the Committee

3/1/44
take that position as a matter of record so that whenever inquiries
were made at the Federal Reserve Banks the officers of the Banks
would be at liberty to answer the inquiries accordingly.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
Mr. Sproul's suggestion was approved by
unanimous vote with the understanding
that, since the action was merely a
statement for the record of an existing
policy, no publicity would be given to
it.
The statement relating to the relationships of the executive
committee with the Treasury, which was read at the meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee yesterday, was read again as follows:
"It has been customary for a number of years for
members of the executive committee, at the request of
the Secretary or the Under Secretary of the Treasury,
to confer informally with the Secretary and with mem
bers of the Treasury's staff on matters relating to
Treasury financing policies and procedures. In these
conferences the members of the executive committee from
time to time have presented views and recommendations
on behalf of the full Committee and at other times have
presented their own views, either collectively or as in
dividuals, but with the understanding in all cases that
they were not meeting with the Treasury formally in their
capacity of an executive committee. At times, however,
the Secretary of the Treasury has referred to these con
ferences as conferences with the Federal Open Market
Committee or with the executive committee, rather than
as conferences with members of the executive committee
in their individual capacities.
"The Federal Open Market Committee believes that
it is desirable that a more definite understanding be
reached as to the procedure to be followed in the future
in such conferences. It would be preferable if the views
and recommendations of the Open Market Committee and its
executive committee, the Board of Governors, and the Fed
eral Reserve Banks on important matters of financing policy

3/1/44 -8
"were presented only in conferences with the Secretary
and the Under Secretary of the Treasury by the Chairman
and Vice Chairman of the executive committee. Such rec
ommendations should be made in writing whenever practicable.
It would also be preferable if such conferences could take
place after consultations between staff members and by the
Treasury with bankers and others.
"Therefore, the Federal Open Market Committee author
izes the executive committee to follow this procedure in
the future in so far as it is practicable for it to do so."
Chairman Eccles stated that he would like to suggest that
Mr. Morrill be requested to expand the statement into a form that
could be presented to the Treasury as a statement of the instructions
of the full Committee to be followed by the executive committee in its
relations with the Treasury and that, after the statement was approved
by the executive committee, he (Chairman Eccles) and Mr. Sproul be au
thorized to send or deliver it to Secretary Morgenthau.
Mr. Leach asked whether the adoption of the statement would
preclude conversations with, and recommendations to, the Secretary or
Under Secretary of the Treasury by the individual Presidents. Chairman
Eccles replied that it would not be expected that the Presidents or
the members of the Board of Governors would express opinions or make
recommendations on matters of financing policy on which the Open Market
Committee or its executive committee would be expected to make recom
mendations, but that the Presidents would be expected to continue to
furnish the Treasury with information, whenever requested, as to the
attitude of bankers and others in the respective Federal Reserve dis
tricts with respect to any matters having to do with Treasury financing.

-9-
Messrs. Peyton and Davis expressed the opinion that it would
be embarrassing if the Presidents were put in a position in which they
would not be at liberty to answer inquiries received from the Secretary
of the Treasury, but in the ensuing discussion there was general con
currence in the comment that, if the statement proposed by Chairman
Eccles were adopted and the procedure outlined therein were under
stood and carried out by the Treasury, the Presidents and members of
the Board of Governors would not be likely to receive inquiries from
the Treasury on matters of policy on which the Federal Open Market
Committee or the executive committee would be expected to speak for
the System, and that, therefore, occasions in which the Presidents
would not be free to answer inquiries received from the Treasury
should not arise. It was agreed that there could be no objection to
the Presidents ascertaining at the Treasury's request, the views of
bankers and others in their respective districts on any questions re
lating to the financing program of the Treasury.
Mr. Davis stated that it would be most helpful to the Presi
dents who were not members of the executive committee if the committee
would see to it that the Presidents were kept informed of discussions
with the Treasury and of the conclusions reached by the executive com
mittee with respect to Treasury financing and related matters.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
upon motion duly made and seconded and by
unanimous vote, the statement set forth

3/1/44 -10
above was approved in principle and the
executive committee was requested to pro
ceed in accordance with Chairman Eccles'
suggestion.
Mr. Sproul stated that during its meeting on February 26-28,
1944, the Presidents' Conference discussed the use by the Treasury of
the present formula for subscriptions by commercial banks holding sav
ings deposits and that it was agreed that the formula used during the
Fourth War Loan Drive was generally satisfactory and should be con
tinued in subsequent drives, but that, in addition to savings deposits,
the formula should include the amount of outstanding certificates of
deposit issued to individuals inasmuch as in some districts smaller
banks carried savings of their customers in the form of these cer
tificates. Mr. Sproul also said that it was understood by the Pres
idents that this matter would be presented for consideration at this
meeting and that he was referring to it at this time for that purpose.
Following a discussion of some of the
practical problems that might be faced in
carrying the Presidents' suggestion into
operation, unanimous approval was given to
a motion, duly made and seconded, that the
Committee express general approval of the
recommendation of the Presidents and re
quest the executive committee of the Open
Market Committee to undertake to work out
and present to the Treasury a procedure by
which the recommendation could be made ef
fective before the next war loan drive.
Mr. Sproul said that it was noted by the Presidents at their
conference that the situation with respect to evasive practices in
volving loans to facilitate speculative purchases of Government

3/1/44 -11
securities and indirect purchases of such securities by banks had
improved considerably during the Fourth War Loan Drive, but that cer
tain undesirable practices were still apparent such as the purchase
of securities, particularly Treasury certificates, by banks through
special arrangements with bank officers and directors and the ac
quisition of securities through subsidiary corporations and the mak
ing of loans on securities beyond the six-month period suggested by
the supervisory authorities. It was the view of the Presidents, he
said, that such practices were not desirable and that the procedure
needed further clarification by the Treasury so that the Presidents
might follow a uniform and consistent policy in dealing with member
banks during subsequent drives. He also stated that for this reason
the subject was referred by the Presidents' Conference to the Com
mittee on Fiscal Agency Operations for review with Under Secretary
of the Treasury Bell and report to the Conference.
Chairman Eccles stated that, in view of the fact that the Fed
eral Open Market Committee had some responsibility in connection with
Treasury financing through the banks and that the practice referred to
above resulted in padding subscriptions, the Open Market Committee
might concur in the view expressed by the Presidents and request the
executive committee to inform the Treasury accordingly.
This suggestion was approved unani
mously and, upon motion duly made and
seconded and by unanimous vote, the ex
ecutive committee was requested to pro
ceed accordingly.

3/1/44 -12-
In response to an inquiry from Mr. Gilbert, Chairman Eccles
stated that the above action would not affect in any way the proposed
discussions of this matter with representatives of the Treasury by the
Presidents' Conference Committee on Fiscal Agency Operations.
Mr. Sproul then read the following statement of the consider
ation given by the Presidents in their conference to the redemption of
war savings bonds by commercial banks and said that it was being brought
to the attention of the Federal Open Market Committee for its informa
tion only as it did not call for action by that Committee:
"Consideration was given to the desirability of
putting into effect as soon as possible a plan provid
ing for redemption of war savings bonds by commercial
banks in anticipation of the time when increased redemp
tions will make such decentralized redemption necessary
for the public convenience, and to avoid undue expansion
and contraction of the redemption facilities of the Fed
eral Reserve Banks. The question of compensation to banks
for this service was raised but it was thought best to
consider the matter of expense in the light of subsequent
developments.
"Without taking formal action, this subject was re
ferred to the Committee on Fiscal Agency Operations with
the understanding that the committee would discuss the
matter with the Treasury, suggesting that the plan be put
into operation as soon as practicable."
Subsequently and in accordance with
action taken at this meeting, the statement
of procedure for presenting Federal Reserve
recommendations to the Treasury in regard
to important matters of Government financing
was approved by the members of the executive
committee in the form of a letter to the
Secretary of the Treasury as follows:
"In order to improve the procedure for presenting Fed
eral Reserve recommendations to the Treasury in regard to

3/1/44 -13-
"important matters of Government financing, the members
of the Federal Open Market Committee have agreed unani
mously that such recommendations should be presented to
you through the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Com
mittee.
"It was felt that this procedure would be helpful
from the standpoint of the Secretary of the Treasury as
well as that of the Federal Reserve, and that the Sys
tem's responsibilities under the law in connection with
open-market policy could best be met if, before reaching
final decisions on financing matters, the Secretary of
the Treasury were to give the Federal Open Market Com
mittee, or its Executive Committee, an opportunity to
consider the recommendations obtained from staff and
outside sources before presentation of Federal Reserve
views. It was agreed that, whenever practicable, Fed
eral Reserve recommendations should be submitted in or
following conferences between the Secretary and the Under
Secretary of the Treasury and the Chairman and Vice Chair
man of the Federal Open Market Committee, which should
be held after staff meetings and after meetings with
private bankers and others.
"The considerations underlying the recommendation
of this procedure may be summarized as follows:
"The Federal Open Market Committee is a statutory
body created by Congress and empowered to direct and
regulate the open market operations of the Federal Re
serve Banks. Under the law, the time, character and
volume of these open market operations must be governed
with a view to accommodating commerce and business and
with regard to their bearing upon the general credit
situation of the country. No Federal Reserve Bank may
carry on open market operations except in accordance
with the directions of the Committee.
"Under existing conditions, the objectives of open
market policy must be and are to provide the reserve
funds required for the orderly functioning of our money
and banking system and to maintain a general credit situa
tion which will facilitate Treasury borrowing necessary
to finance the war. The System has undertaken to main
tain conditions in the Government security market which
will be conducive to the continued success of Treasury
financing on the present general basis of yields. The
means of accomplishing these objectives are ordinarily
the purchase and sale of Government securities in the

3/1/44
"open market.
"The Federal Open Market Committee, in discharging
its responsibilities, is, therefore, of necessity a par
ticipant with the Treasury in the maintenance of the
market for Government securities and in the problems of
war financing. Its responsibility is that of a public
body which has a greater concern than any group or per
sons outside of the Treasury in the timing of Treasury
offerings, the types of securities offered, and their
terms and conditions because of the importance of relat
ing current financing to credit and monetary policies.
"It has been customary for the Secretary and Under
Secretary of the Treasury to request the members of the
Executive Committee of the Federal Open Market Committee
to confer with them, or with members of the Treasury
staff, on matters of financing policy and procedure.
These have invariably been informal meetings with the
individual members of the Executive Committee rather
than formal meetings with the Executive Committee as
such. In these conferences the members of the Executive
Committee at times have given their individual views and
recommendations, at times they have spoken for the Ex
ecutive Committee, and at other times for the Federal
Open Market Committee. In addition the Treasury at times
has requested the individual views of Federal Reserve
Bank presidents.
"In view of the System's statutory responsibility
and the importance of the matters involved, the Committee
felt that the discussions with the Treasury should be
on a more clearly defined basis, and that this would be
accomplished by having the Chairman and Vice Chairman
of the Federal Open Market Committee recognized as the
appropriate representatives through whom to present all
Federal Reserve recommendations, written or oral, to the
Treasury on important matters of financing policy. It
was felt also that better results would be obtained by
presenting such recommendations in conferences with the
Secretary and Under Secretary of the Treasury alone, after
whatever conferences are held by the Treasury with others
at the staff or technical level, and after whatever meet
ings are held by the Secretary and Under Secretary with
advisers or consultants, such as private bankers and Gov
ernment security dealers, who are without direct public
responsibility. In making their recommendations, the

3/1/44 -15-
"Federal Reserve representatives would thus be able to
take account of information obtained from these sources.
"The Federal Open Market Committee authorized its
Executive Committee, through its Chairman and Vice Chair
man, in so far as it is practicable, to follow the pro
cedure outlined above. If you so desire, Mr. Sproul and
I will be glad to discuss this procedure with you at your
convenience."
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
.Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.