A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Wednesday, February 28, 1945, at 10:15 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Leach
Mr. Young
Mr. Davis
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Messrs. John H. Williams, Kincaid, and
Edmiston, Associate Economists
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Messrs. Piser and Kennedy, Chief and As
sistant Chief, respectively, of the
Government Securities Section, Divi
sion of Research and Statistics of
the Board of Governors
Messrs. Alfred H. Williams, Gidney, Gilbert,
and Leedy, alternate members of the Federal
Open Market Committee
Messrs. Flanders and McLarin, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and
Atlanta, respectively
Mr. Clerk, First Vice President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Mr. Dolley, Director of Research and Statistics,
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the

2/28/45 -2
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on December 11, 1944, were ap
proved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the minutes
of the meeting of the executive committee
on December 11, 1944, were approved, rati
fied, and confirmed.
Mr. Rouse distributed copies of a report prepared at the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of New York covering open market operations during
the period from December 11, 1944, to February 23, 1945, inclusive.
He also presented a supplemental report covering operations in the ac
count on February 24-27, 1945, and discussed the important points
covered by the two reports. Copies of the reports have been placed
in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
The reports stated among other things that, since the previous
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, the New York Bank had
sold from the System account a total of $111 million of taxable bonds.
Upon inquiry as to the effect of these sales on the market, Mr. Rouse
repeated the statement contained in the report first referred to that
these sales had had little influence on the upward trend other than to
maintain orderly conditions in the market.
Chairman Eccles raised the question whether, in view of the
large sales that might have to be made from the System account follow
ing the war to offset gold imports and the return of currency from

2/28/45 -3
circulation and the possible effects of such sales on the earnings
of the Federal Reserve Banks, it was desirable for the System to con
tinue to sell its longer-term securities.
At the conclusion of a brief discus
sion of the point raised by Chairman Eccles,
upon motion duly made and seconded and by
unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account during the period from De
cember 11, 1944, to February 27, 1945, in
clusive, were approved, ratified, and con
firmed.
Chairman Eccles then referred to the letter received by him,
as Chairman of the Federal Open Market Committee, under date of De
cember 22, 1944, from Secretary of the Treasury Morgenthau requesting
that the Federal Open Market Committee take appropriate steps, over a
suitable period of time, to bring the yields of Treasury certificates
of indebtedness back to approximately their September 1, 1944, levels.
He also referred to the interim reply to Secretary Morgenthau's letter
which was made by Mr. Sproul on December 27, 1944, and to the subse
quent discussion of the matter with the Secretary and others at the
Treasury on January 10, 1945, at which time the position was taken by
him (Chairman Eccles) and Mr. Sproul that the situation in the certifi
cate market was secondary in importance to a review of the entire-program
of Treasury financing. No conclusions were reached during the discussion
with the Secretary, Chairman Eccles said, but it was understood that
members of the staff of the Board of Governors and the Treasury would
confer with a view to preparing a draft of a suggested financing program

2/28/45 -4
that might be agreed upon and that another meeting with Under Secretary
of the Treasury Bell and other Treasury representatives should be held
on January 16, 1945.
Messrs. Eccles and Sproul reviewed the important matters dis
cussed at the January 16 meeting as well as at a subsequent meeting on
February 9.
Mr. Sproul outlined briefly the important matters relating to
Treasury financing which were discussed with Under Secretary of the
Treasury Bell when he met with the Presidents on February 26, and with
Secretary of the Treasury Morgenthau when he met with the Presidents
yesterday afternoon for the purpose of discussing steps to be taken in
connection with the policing of subscriptions to Government securities
during war loan drives.
Attention was then turned to the recommendations that might be
made by the Federal Open Market Committee to the Treasury in connection
with the program for the Seventh War Loan Drive. While this discussion
was in progress the meeting recessed and reconvened at 2:15 p.m. with
the same attendance as at the morning session except that Mr. Golden
weiser was not present.
At the conclusion of the discussion it was understood that
Messrs. Rouse, Piser, and Kennedy would prepare a draft of memorandum
setting forth the conclusions reached at this meeting, that the memo
randum would be presented for discussion and approval at the meeting

2/28/45 -5
of the Federal Open Market Committee to be held tomorrow, and that
when Messrs. Eccles and Sproul met with Secretary Morgenthau tomorrow
afternoon at 3:00 p.m. the memorandum would be presented as the recom
mendation of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.