A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Wednesday, October 17, 1945, at 10:15 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Alfred H. Williams
Mr. Gidney
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Gilbert
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Goldenweiser, Economist
Messrs. Hardy, Hostetler, Irons, Sienkiewicz,
Thomas, and John H. Williams, Associate
Economists
Mr. Wyatt, General Counsel
Mr. Vest, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open Market
Account
Messrs. Piser and Kennedy, Chief and Assist
ant Chief, respectively, of the Government
Securities Section, Division of Research
and Statistics of the Board of Governors
Mr. Connell, General Assistant, Office of the
Secretary of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Flanders, Young, McLarin, and Day, alter
nate members of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee
Messrs. Leach and Peyton, Presidents of the Fed
eral Reserve Banks of Richmond and Minneapolis,
respectively
Chairman Eccles stated that it would be necessary for him to leave
the meeting at 10:50 a.m. to attend a meeting of the Finance Subcommittee

10/17/45 -2
of the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial
Problems which had under consideration important aspects of the financial
assistance to be given by this country to Great Britain. At his request,
it was understood that a discussion of Treasury financing and open market
policies would be deferred until the afternoon session of this meeting.
On July 5, 1945, in view of the appointment of Mr. Morrill,
formerly Secretary of the Board of Governors, as Special Adviser to the
Board, the members of the Federal Open Market Committee agreed that, not
withstanding the applicable provisions of the by-laws of the Federal Open
Market Committee, Mr. Morrill should be continued as Secretary of the
Committee pending the next meeting when the necessary formal action could
be taken.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, it
was voted unanimously (1) to approve, ratify,
and confirm the informal action of the members
of the Federal Open Market Committee on July 5,
1945, with respect to the Secretary of the
Committee, and (2) to continue Mr. Morrill as
Secretary until the first meeting of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee after February 28,
1946, notwithstanding the first sentence of
section 2 of article II of the by-laws of the
Federal Open Market Committee which provides
that the Secretary of the Board of Governors
shall be Secretary of the Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
June 20, 1945, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the execu
tive committee of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee as set forth in the minutes of the
meeting of the executive committee on June 20,
1945, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.

10/17/45 -3-
Mr. Rouse discussed the important points in a report of open mar
ket operations prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York covering
the period from June 21, 1945, to October 11, 1945, inclusive. During
the meeting copies of the report were distributed. Mr. Rouse also re
viewed briefly a supplementary report prepared by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York covering operations during the period October 12-16,
1945, inclusive. Copies of both reports have been placed in the files of
the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account during the period from June
20, 1945, to October 16, 1945, inclusive,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. McKee referred to the outstanding permissions granted by the
Board of Governors to certain member banks to accept drafts and bills of
exchange up to 100 per cent of their unimpaired capital and surplus, and
inquired whether it would be advisable at this time, when few if any banks
had acceptances outstanding in an amount in excess of 50 per cent of their
unimpaired capital and surplus, to revoke the outstanding permission and
require new applications for authority to accept up to 100 per cent of
capital and surplus, which would be considered by the Board on the basis
of the surrounding circumstances in each individual case.
Mr. Rouse said that the Committee on Bankers' Acceptances of the
Presidents' Conference had been studying the question what should be done
with respect to bankers' acceptances and the acceptance market and that a
report would be submitted to the Presidents' Conference which could also
be sent to the Board of Governors.

10/17/45 -4
All of the members of the Federal Open Market Committee and the
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks were in agreement that the pres
ent was an appropriate time to review the whole situation and determine
what, if any, action should be taken.
In August 1945 Mr. Rouse received a telephone request from Mr.
Bell, Under Secretary of the Treasury, that the name of Fiscal Assistant
Secretary of the Treasury Bartelt be added to the list receiving the
weekly report of open market operations and money market conditions pre
pared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Since the Federal Open
Market Committee at its meeting on May 15, 1943, decided that the report
should be sent only to a restricted list, the request was cleared with
Mr. Ransom in the absence of Messrs. Eccles and Sproul, and the name of
Mr. Bartelt was added to the list.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the addition of Mr. Bartelt
to the list receiving the weekly report was
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Chairman Eccles then called for the reports of the Economists and
Mr. Goldenweiser stated that, inasmuch as he had been out of the country
for approximately three months and was somewhat out of touch with the ex
isting situation, he had asked Mr. Thomas to make the principal statement.
Mr. Thomas presented a statement on Federal Reserve policies in
the transition period and his statement was followed by comments by Messrs.
Goldenweiser, John H. Williams, Hardy, and Sienkiewicz. Copies of all of
the statements have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market
Committee.

10/17/45 -5
During the course of Mr. Thomas' statement Chairman Eccles left
the meeting.
Following a general discussion of questions raised by the Econo
mists' statements, the meeting recessed and reconvened at 2:15 p.m. with
the same attendance as at the beginning of the morning session and, in
addition, Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Chairman of the Board of Gov
ernors.
Chairman Eccles reviewed the discussions which members of the
executive committee had had with representatives of the Treasury since the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on June 20, 1945, including
the discussions which preceded the submission of the memorandum on
Treasury financing which was sent to Secretary Morgenthau on July 9,
1945, and the suggestions that were made to the Secretary of the Treasury
by Messrs. Eccles and Sproul on August 22, 1945, with respect to arrange
ments to be made and the securities to be offered in connection with the
Victory Drive.
Chairman Eccles stated that at the meeting of the executive com
mittee this morning all of the members of the committee felt that no
change could be made in Treasury financing policies or System monetary
and credit policies until after the Victory Drive, but that it should be
understood that after the Drive the executive committee would continue
its discussions with the Treasury on the question of policies which should
be adopted for the reconversion and postwar periods. Chairman Eccles also
said that he was satisfied that sometime after the Victory Drive was over

10/17/45 -6
members or committees of Congress would want to look into the effects of
war financing on the credit and monetary situation of this country and
particularly on the earning position of banks, and that the Federal Open
Market Committee should continue the studies which were being made so
that it would be in a position to suggest a practicable solution to the
difficult problems which will lie ahead because of the large volume of
Government securities outstanding.
There was unanimous agreement on the part of the members of the
Committee that the course suggested by the executive committee should be
followed.
Mr. Sproul inquired whether there was anything that could be
learned from the experiences of foreign central banking and governmental
authorities that would be helpful in the solution of the problems facing
the Treasury and the System. Mr. Goldenweiser said that steps taken by
certain European countries had been effective but that they were much
more drastic than could be undertaken here.
In response to an inquiry from Mr. McKee as to the steps to be
taken by the Federal Reserve Banks to prevent speculative purchases of
securities during the Victory Drive, Mr. Sproul stated that the Presi
dents had discussed this matter with Mr. Bell at the meeting of the Presi
dents' Conference yesterday, that at that time Mr. Bell was asked whether
he could give the Presidents any definite instructions with respect to
the kind of policing job the Treasury wanted the Federal Reserve Banks to
undertake, but that Mr. Bell was not in a position to make a definite

10/17/45 -7
reply. Mr. Sproul also said that it appeared that the Federal Reserve
Banks were in about the same position as in the Seventh War Loan. Drive
and were faced with a policing problem which, because of reliance on a
certain amount of roll-over purchases and indirect bank buying in order
to make the Drive a success, was an impossible task.
Inasmuch as it was felt that no change
should be made in Treasury financing or Sys
tem open market policies until after the
Victory Drive was over, there was unanimous
agreement that no action should be taken at
this time to change the direction issued to
the Federal Reserve Banks at the meeting of
the Federal Open Market Committee on March 1,
1945, with respect to the purchase of Treas
ury bills at a discount rate of 3/8 per cent
per annum.
In connection with the authority to be granted to the executive
committee to execute transactions for the System open market account, Mr.
Rouse stated that it was expected that it would be necessary between now
and the end of the Victory Drive for the System to purchase $1,500,000,000
or more of securities for the purpose of providing necessary bank reserves
and that if the existing authority to the executive committee were re
newed it was believed that that would be all that would be required to
meet the situation until the next meeting of the Committee even if the
meeting were not held until the end of February of next year.
There was no disagreement with Mr.
Rouse's suggestion and upon motion duly
made and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the following direction to the executive
committee was approved with the understand
ing that the limitations contained in the
direction would include commitments for
purchases and sales of securities for the
System account:

10/17/45
That the executive committee be directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for
such transactions for the System open market account, either in
the open market or directly with the Treasury (including
purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing securities,
and letting maturities run off without replacement), as may be
necessary in the practical administration of the account, or
for the purpose of maintaining about the present general level
of prices and yields of Government securities, or for the pur
pose of maintaining an adequate supply of funds in the market;
provided that the aggregate amount of securities held in the
account at the close of this date [other than (1) bills pur
chased outright in the market on a discount basis at the rate of
3/8 per cent per annum and bills redeemed at maturity and (2)
special short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury]
shall not be increased or decreased by more than $2,000,000,000.
That the executive committee be further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to
arrange for the purchase for the System open market account di
rect from the Treasury of such amounts of special short-term
certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to
time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided
that the amount of such certificates held in the account at any
one time shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
Reference was made to the fact that the amendment to Section 14(b)
of the Federal Reserve Act which was contained in the Second War Powers
Act and which authorized the Federal Reserve Banks to purchase directly
from the Treasury up to $5 billion of Government securities, would expire
at the end of this year, and inquiry was made as to what steps were being
taken to have the authority renewed.
Mr. Morrill stated that it was understood that Mr. Snyder, Direc
tor of War Mobilization and Reconversion, would go before the Judiciary
Committee of the House of Representatives in the very near future and re
quest a renewal of certain of the provisions of the Second War Powers Act
including the provision above referred to and that while it might not be

10/17/45 -9
possible to get the authority extended for an entire year it was likely
that something less than that would be acceptable.
Chairman Eccles stated that if necessary he would also discuss the
matter with Secretary of the Treasury Vinson.
It was agreed unanimously by the members of the Committee that in
the absence of unforeseen developments it was not likely that another
meeting of the full Committee would be necessary before February 28 and
March 1 of next year, that it should be understood that the executive com
mittee would continue its discussions with the Treasury as agreed upon
earlier during this meeting, and that, if at any time the executive com
mittee felt that a meeting of the full Committee should be held, such a
meeting would be called.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.