A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Friday, March 1, 1946, at 10:10 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. McKee
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Leach
Mr. McLarin
Mr. Young
Mr. Clerk
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Thomas and Mr. John H. Williams, Associate
Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open Market
Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Chairman of the
Board of Governors
Messrs. Piser and Kennedy, Chief and Assistant
Chief, respectively, of the Government
Securities Section, Division of Research
and Statistics of the Board of Governors
Mr. Connell, General Assistant, Office of the
Secretary of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Whittemore, Gidney, Davis, and Peyton,
alternate members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Alfred H. Williams, Leedy and Gilbert,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Philadelphia, Kansas City, and Dallas, re
spectively.
The Secretary reported that advices of the election for a period
of one year commencing March 1, 1946, of members and alternate me bers
m

3/1/46 -2
of the Federal Open Market Committee representing the Federal Reserve
Banks had been received, that each newly elected member and alternate
member had executed the required oath of office, and that it was the
opinion of the Committee's counsel on the basis of the advices received
that the following members and alternate members were legally qualified
to serve:
Allan Sproul, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, with L. R. Rounds, First Vice President
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alter
nate member;
Hugh Leach, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond, with Laurence F. Whittemore, President
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, as alternate
member;
C. S. Young, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, with Ray M. Gidney, President of the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate member;
W. S. McLarin, Jr., President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta, with Chester C. Davis, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, as alternate mem
ber; and
Ira Clerk, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco, with J. N. Peyton, President of the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, as alternate mem
ber.
Upon motions duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous votes, the following officers of
the Federal Open Market Committee were elected
to serve until the election of their successors
at the first meeting of the Committee after
February 28, 1947, with the understanding that
in the event of discontinuance of their official
connection with the Board or a Federal Reserve
Bank, as the case might be, they would cease to
have any official connection with the Federal
Open Market Committee. In connection with the
election of Mr. Morrill it was agreed unani
mously that the by-laws of the Federal Open
Market Committee, which provide that the

3/1/46 -3
Secretary of the Board of Governors shall
be Secretary of the Committee, should not
be changed, but that Mr. Morrill should con
tinue to serve as Secretary notwithstanding
the applicable provision of the by-laws:
Marriner S. Eccles, Chairman
Allan Sproul, Vice Chairman
Chester Morrill, Secretary
S. R. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Woodlief Thomas, Economist
E. A. Kincaid, John K. Langum, Earle L.
Rauber, 0. P. Wheeler, and John H.
Williams, Associate Economists
George B. Vest, General Counsel
J. Leonard Townsend, Assistant General
Counsel
Mr. Vest entered the meeting at this point.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York was selected to execute trans
actions for the System open market account
until the adjournment of the first meeting
of the Committee after February 28, 1947.
Mr. Sproul stated that the board of directors of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York had selected Mr. Rouse as Manager of the System
Open Market Account, subject to the selection of the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York by the Federal Open Market Committee as the Bank to execute
transactions for the System account and his approval by the Federal Open
Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the selection of Mr. Rouse
as Manager of the System Open Market Account
was approved.

3/1/46 -4
Upon motions duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous votes, the following were selected
to serve with the Chairman of the Federal Open
Market Committee (who, under the provisions of
the by-laws, is also Chairman of the executive
committee) as members and alternate members of
the executive committee until the selection of
their successors at the first meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee after February
28, 1947, except that Mr. McKee was selected to
serve as an alternate only during the period in
which he continued to serve as a member of the
Board of Governors; and his successor, effective
as of the date he qualifies as a member of the
Board, was appointed to serve in the position
of alternate in the place of Mr. McKee:
Members Alternate Members
Ernest G. Draper M. S. Szymczak
R. M. Evans John K. McKee
Ronald Ransom
(To serve in the order named
as alternates for Messrs.
Eccles, Draper, and Evans, ex
cept that, in the absence of
Chairman Eccles, Mr. Ransom
would serve as the first alter
nate.)
Allan Sproul C. S. Young and W. S. McLarin, Jr.
Hugh Leach (To serve in the order named as
alternates for Messrs. Sproul
and Leach.)
Mr. Flanders, Consultant to the Board of Directors of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston, Mr. Hardy, Vice President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, Mr. Hostetler, Manager, Research Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Mr. Sienkiewicz, Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia, Mr. Irons, Director of Research, Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas, Mr. Morse, Assistant Director, Division of Research and

3/1/46 -5
Statistics, Board of Governors, and Mr. Townsend, Assistant General
Counsel, joined the meeting at this point.
Chairman Eccles then called for the reports of the economists
and, at Mr. Thomas' request, Mr. Hardy summarized the observations in
his paper "Prospects for Inflation in the Transition Period" which is
to be included in the postwar economic studies being published by the
Board of Governors. His statement was followed by comments by Messrs.
Thomas and John H. Williams. Summaries of these two statements are at
tached and copies have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee.
Following a brief discussion of some of the problems presented
by the economists, particularly with respect to production, prices, and
wages, their effect on the economy, and the policies that should be
adopted with respect to them, the meeting recessed and reconvened at
2:10 p.m., with the same attendance as at the beginning of the morning
session except that Messrs. Davis and Peyton were not present and Messrs.
Vest and Townsend were in attendance.
Reference was made to the resolution adopted by the Federal Open
Market Committee on November 20, 1936, authorizing the Federal Reserve
Banks, subject to the provisions of Section 14 of the Federal Reserve
Act, as amended, and the regulations, conditions, and limitations of the
Board of Governors prescribed thereunder, but without further direction
or authorization from the Federal Open Market Committee, to purchase and

3/1/46 -6
sell at home or abroad cable transfers, and bills of exchange and bankers'
acceptances payable in foreign currencies, to the extent that such pur
chases and sales might be deemed to be necessary or advisable in connec
tion with the establishment, maintenance, operation, increase, reduction,
or discontinuance of accounts of Federal Reserve Banks in foreign coun
tries. As stated at the meeting of the Committee on March 1, 1945, when
this resolution was last considered, the purpose of this action was to
simplify the procedure in connection with the handling of accounts with
foreign central banks which were subject to special supervision by the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under Section 14 of
the Federal Reserve Act.
Mr. Sproul stated that this authority permitted purchases and
sales necessary to the maintenance of four accounts which the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York had with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England,
the Bank of France, and the Bank for International Settlements, that the
amounts in these accounts were relatively very small, that the need for
the continuation of the authority still existed, and that if it were dis
continued it would be necessary to obtain specific approval of the Federal
Open Market Committee of small transactions executed in the management of
the accounts.
There was unanimous agreement that no
action should be taken with respect to the
resolution at this time.
Reference was also made to the decision reachedat the meeting of

3/1/46 -7
the Committee on November 30, 1937, that, since securities acquired by
Federal Reserve Banks in settlement of claims account closed banks would
be so small as to be unimportant from the standpoint of credit control,
the Committee would interpose no objection to Federal Reserve Banks hold
ing such securities or to the sale of such securities whenever deemed
to be advisable by the holding bank.
At the meeting of the Committee on March 1, 1945, considera
tion was given to the termintion of the authority inasmuch as it had not
been used for a considerable period. At that time Mr. Gidney expressed
the opinion that the authority should be continued as none of the Federal
Reserve Banks could foresee when they might be called upon to use it in
connection with securities held as collateral for advances to a member
bank which had become insolvent.
At this meeting Mr. Gidney said that he continued to be of the
same opinion.
It was agreed unanimously that no action
should be taken at this time to terminate or
amend the authority.
Turning to a discussion of credit policy and the policies of the
Treasury with respect to the Government debt, Chairman Eccles stated that
it would be difficult to distinguish between the nature of the discus
sions that had already been had with representatives of the Treasury with
respect to future policy and the discussions which might be held in the
near future. He felt, however, that, having in mind the program that had

3/1/46 -8
been proposed in connection with the retirement of the public debt over
the next few months, consideration might be given to what should be done
iith respect to the preferential discount rate of 1/2 per cent now in ef
fect at the Federal Reserve Banks and the rate of 3/8 per cent at which
the Federal Reserve Banks buy Treasury bills. It was his view that it
would be preferable to withhold action on these matters until a decision
was made by the Treasury on the amount of certificates maturing in April
that were to be retired, as the possible effects of the elimination of
the two rates at this time were not as important as the continuation of
the program of retirement of the Government debt under which from one to
two billion dollars of April certificates would be paid off.
It was the general consensus that informal consideration should
be given by the Presidents and the Board of Governors, as such, to the
action that should be taken on the preferential discount rate and the
meeting recessed for that purpose.
Following the informal discussion of the Presidents and the mem
bers of the Board the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee re
convened for the purpose of considering the action to be taken with re
spect to the rate of 3/8 per cent on Treasury bills.
A memorandum of the informal discussion of the Presidents and
the Board has been placed in the files of the Board of Governors.
It being understood that no immediate action
had been decided upon with respect to the elimination
of the preferential discount rate, there was unanimous
agreement that no action should be taken at this time

3/1/46 -9
to change the direction issued to the Federal Reserve
Banks at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee on March 1, 1945, relating to the purchase by
the Banks of Treasury bills.
It was also agreed that, as was understood at
the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
on October 17, 1945, the executive committee would
continue to have such discussions with represent
atives of the Treasury as conditions might require
on questions as to policies that should be adopted
for the future.
In connection with the authority to be granted to the execu
tive committee to execute transactions for the System open market account,
Chairman Eccles suggested that, in view of the large transactions that
would take place in the account arising from the needs for reserve funds
in connection with the program for retirement of the public debt and the
redemption of securities in the System account, the limitation on the
authority to the executive committee to increase or decrease the total
amount of securities in the System account should be fixed at $3 billion
instead of $2 billion.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the following
direction to the executive committee was ap
proved, with the understanding that the limita
tions contained in the direction would include
commitments for purchases and sales of securi
ties for the System account:
The executive committee be directed, until otherwise di
rected by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for
such transactions for the System open market account, either
in the open market or directly with the Treasury (including
purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing securi
ties, and letting maturities run off without replacement), as
may be necessary in the practical administration of the ac
count, or for the purpose of maintaining about the present

3/1/46 -10-
general level of prices and yields of Government securities,
or for the purpose of maintaining an adequate supply of funds
in the market; provided that the aggregate amount of securi
ties held in the account at the close of this date [other than
(1) bills purchased outright in the market on a discount basis
at the rate of 3/8 per cent per annum and bills redeemed at
maturity and (2) special short-term certificates of indebtedness
purchased from time to time for the temporary accommodation of
the Treasury] shall not be increased or decreased by more than
$3,000,000,000.
That the executive committee be further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to
arrange for the purchase for the System open market account
direct from the Treasury of such amounts of special short-term
certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to
time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; pro
vided that the amount of such certificates held in the account
at any one time shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
Mr. McLarin stated that he still felt that, for the reasons
which he gave at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on
March 1, 1945, the Reserve Banks should have authority to maintain a
small portfolio of Government securities to enable the Banks to pur
chase securities directly from, and sell securities directly to, the
smaller member banks, and that at the proper time he would like to
bring the matter up for further discussion by the Committee.
It was tentatively agreed that the next meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee would be held during the week beginning
June 3, 1946.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.