A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held In
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Thursday, October 3, 1946, at 10:45 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. E ccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Ransom
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Leach
Mr. McLarin
Mr. Y oung
Mr. Peyton (alternate for Mr. Clerk who
died on September 28)
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Townsend, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Kincaid, Rauber, Wheeler, and
John H. Williams, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant, and Mr. Kennedy,
Special Assistant, to the Chairman of
the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary of the
Board of Governors
Mr. Musgrave, Chief of the Government Finance
Section of the Division of Research and
Statistics of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Whittemore, Gidney, and Davis, alternate
members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Alfred H. Williams, Leedy, and Gilbert,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Philadelphia, Kansas City, and Dallas,
respectively

10/3/46 -2
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on June 10, 1946, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the min
utes of the meeting of the executive com
mittee on June 10, 1946, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Rouse, as Manager of the System Open Market Account,
reviewed the report prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
of open market operations in the System open market account covering
the period from June 11, 1946, to September 30, 1946, inclusive, and
a supplementary report prepared by the New York Bank covering commit
ments executed on October 1 and 2, 1946. During the course of Mr.
Rouse's statement copies of the report first mentioned were distri
buted to those present and copies of both reports have been placed
in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
After a brief discussion, upon motion
duly made and seconded, and by unanimous
vote, the transactions in the System account
for the period from June 10, 1946, to
October 2, 1946, inclusive, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Following the passage of the Administrative Procedure Act
on June 11, 1946, counsel for the Committee prepared drafts of Fed
eral Open Market Committee rules on organization and information
and rules on procedure to be issued by the Committee in compliance

10/3/46 -3
with the provision of section 3 of that Act. Copies of these drafts
were sent to the members of the Committee and other Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks for their comments, following which the rules
were revised in the light of the comments and suggestions received.
Thereafter, the revised rules were sent to the members of the Com
mittee and, after approval by the members who were in Washington and
the five Presidents who were members of the Committee, to become ef
fective September 11, 1946, the rules were published in the Federal
Register and copies were sent to the Presidents of all of the Federal
Reserve Banks.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the action of the
members of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee in approving the rules, to become
effective September 11, 1946, was approved,
ratified, and confirmed. The rules as
approved by the Committee were in the
following form:
"RULES ON ORGANIZATION AND INFORMATION
"Sec. 1. Basis and Scope. - These rules are issued
by the Federal Open Market Committee (hereinafter sometimes
called the Committee) pursuant to the Administrative Pro
cedure Act and the Federal Reserve Act. Included therein
are the rules specified by sections 3(a)(1), 3(b), and
3(c) of the Administrative Procedure Act.
"COMPOSITION AND MEETINGS OF COMMITTEE
"Sec. 2(a) Members. The Federal Open Market Comittee
consists of the members of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System and five representatives of the Fed
eral Reserve Banks who are Presidents or First Vice Presi
dents of such banks. The representatives of the Federal

10/3/46
"Reserve Banks, and an alternate for each representative,
are elected in accordance with section 12A of the Federal
Reserve Act for terms of one year commencing on March 1
of each year.
"(b) Chairman and Vice Chairman. - At its first meet
ing on or after March 1 of each year, the Committee selects
a Chairman and a Vice Chairman from among its membership.
"(c) Meetings. - The Committee meets at Washington,
D. C., on call by the Chairman of the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System or at the request of three
members of the Committee, at least four times each year
and oftener if deemed necessary.
"EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
"Sec. 3(a) Members. - At its first meeting on or
after March 1 of each year, the Federal Open Market Com
mittee selects from among its membership an Executive
Committee consisting of three members of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System and two of the
representatives of the Federal Reserve Banks. Alter
nates to serve in the absence of members of each group
represented on the Executive Committee are likewise
selected. The Chairman of the Federal Open Market
Committee is one of the members of the Executive Com
mittee and serves as its Chairman.
"(b) Meetings. - The Executive Committee meets
periodically, on call of the Chairman or at the re
quest of two members, as necessary in the performance
of the duties assigned to it.
"(c) Duties. - The duties of the Executive Committee
are:
"(1) To direct the execution of transactions in the
open market in accordance with open-market policies adopted
by the Federal Open Market Committee;
"(2) To allocate the Government securities and other
obligations held in the System Open Market Account among
the several Federal Reserve Banks in accordance with the
principles determined by the Federal Open Market Committee;
"(3) To keep the members of the Federal Open Market
Committee informed of all transactions executed under the
direction of the Federal Open Market Committee and of all
allocations and reallocations of Government securities
and other obligations held in the System Open Market
Account; and

10/3/46 -5-
"( 4 ) To perform such other functions and duties in
connection with open-market operations as may be assigned
to it from time to time by the Federal Open Market Committee.
"OTHER PERSONNEL
"Sec. 4(a) Official Staff. - The official staff of
the Federal Open Market Committee includes its Secretary,
ssistant Secretary, General Counsel, Assistant General
Counsel, Economist, and Associate Economists, who perform
the duties indicated by their titles. These staff members
are selected from among the officers and employees of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the
Federal Reserve Banks.
"(b) System Open Market Account. - One of the Federal
Reserve Banks is selected by the Committee to execute
transactions for the System Open Market Account. Such
bank selects a Manager of the System Open Market Account,
satisfactory to the Committee.
"(c) Others. - The services of other officers and
employees of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System and Federal Reserve Banks are made available and
are utilized by the Committee as required.
"SUBMITTALS, PETITIONS AND REQUESTS
,
"Sec. 5(a) Place. - The mailing address of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee is: Federal Reserve Building,
20th Street and Constitution Avenue, Washington 25, D. C.
The Committee custonarily meets at the offices of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System at that
address.
"(b) Method. - All submittals, petitions, and requests,
including requests for access to information, shall be made
in writing and mailed to the Committee at the address stated
in section 5(a) of these rules. Any petition or request
shall be signed by the person making it, or his duly author
ized agent, and shall, in so far as practicable, clearly,
completely and concisely state his full name and address,
the facts involved (including the purposes for which any
unpublished information requested will be used if made
available), the action desired, the person's interest in
the matter, and the reasons why the petition or request
should be granted.

10/3/46
"AVAILBILITY OF INFORMATION
"Sec. 6(a) Federal Register. - Rules describing the
Committee's organization and procedure and any substantive
rules or statement of policy which are formulated and
adopted by the Committee for the guidance of the public
will be published in the Federal Register.
"(b) Policy Record. - A complete record of the actions
taken by the Committee during the preceding year upon all
matters of policy relating to open market operations, show
ing the votes taken and the reasons underlying the actions,
is included in each annual report made to Congress by the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in accord
ance with Section 10 of the Federal Reserve Act.
"(c) Unpublished Information. - Except as may be
specifically authorized by the Committee or its Executive
Committee, or as may be required in the performance of
duties for, or pursuant to the direction of, the Committee,
no person shall disclose, or permit the disclosure of, any
unpublished information of the Committee to anyone, whether
by giving out or furnishing such information or copy thereof,
by allowing any person to inspect, examine or copy such in
formation or copy thereof, or by any other means. Unpub
lished information of the Committee shall include all in
formation concerning the proceedings, deliberations, dis
cussions, and actions of the Committee and all information
or advice coming to the Committee or to any member of the
Committee or any officer, employee or agent of the Commit
tee, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
or any Federal Reserve Bank, in the performance of duties
for, or pursuant to the direction of, the Committee,
whether contained in files, memoranda, documents, reports,
books, accounts, records, or papers or otherwise acquired
and whether located at the offices of the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Reserve Banks,
or elsewhere: Provided, That it shall not include infor
mation which has been published in accordance with sections
6(a) and 6(b) of these rules or information which is avail
able to the public through other sources.
"(d) Reasons for Non-disclosure. - The non-disclosure
of unpublished information of the Committee generally is
required in the public interest for one or more of the fol
lowing reasons:
"(1) Disclosure of unpublished information concerning
policies with respect to future open market operations

10/3/46
"which are under consideration or have been adopted by
the Committee, and of unpublished information which might
aid in anticipating action by the Committee, would:
"(i) Interfere with the accomplishment of the object
ives of the Committee's actions taken with a view to ac
commodating commerce and business and with regard to their
bearing upon the general credit situation of the country;
"(ii) Permit speculators and others to reap unfair
profits or other unfair advantages by speculative trading
in securities and otherwise;
"(iii) Interfere with the orderly execution of pol
icies adopted by the Committee;
"(iv) Result in unnecessary and unwarranted disturb
ances in the securities markets;
"(v) Make open market operations more costly to the
Federal Reserve Banks;
"(vi) Interfere with the orderly execution and ac
complishment of the objectives of policies adopted by
other Government agencies concerned with economic and
fiscal matters; and
"(vii) Cause misinterpretations and misunderstand
ings, with possible resultant impairment of public con
fidence in the nation's financial structure.
"(2) The Committee's unpublished information includes
much that is furnished to it on a secret or confidential
basis and its disclosure would:
"(i) Have the effects described in section 6(d)(1)
of these rules;
"(ii) Impede the necessary collection of information
and advice, much of which cannot be obtained except on a
confidential and voluntary basis; and
"(iii) Unreasonably and unnecessarily disturb and
interfere with individual privacy and confidential busi
ness relationships.
"(e) Requests for Unpublished Information. - Re
quests for access to unpublished information will be
granted only if it clearly appears that disclosure of
the information will not be contrary to the public in
terest for any of the reasons set forth in section 6(d)
of these rules.
"SUBPOENAS
"Sec. 7(a) Advice by Person Served. - If any person,
whether or not an officer or employee of the Committee,

10/3/46
"of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
or of a Federal Reserve Bank, has unpublished information
of the Committee and in connection therewith is served
with a subpoena, order, or other process requiring his
personal attendance as a witness or the production of
documents or information upon any proceeding, he shall
promptly advise the Committee of such service and of all
relevant facts, including the documents and information
requested and any facts which may be of assistance in
determining whether such documents or information should
be made available; and he shall take action at the ap
propriate time to advise the court or tribunal which
issued the process, and the attorney for the party at
whose instance the process was issued, if known, of
the substance of these rules.
"(b) Appenrance by Person Served. - Except as
disclosure of the relevant information has been author
ized pursuant to these rules, any such person who has
unpublished information of the Committee and is re
quired to respond to a subpoena or other legal pro
cess shall attend at the time and place therein men
tioned and respectfully decline to produce any docu
ments or disclose any information or give any testi
mony with respect thereto, basing his refusal upon
these rules. If, notwithstanding, the court or other
body orders the production of any documents, dis
closure of any information, or giving of any testi
mony, the person having such unpublished information
of the Committee shall promptly report the facts to
the Committee."
"RULES ON PROCEDURE
"Sec. 1. Basis and Scope. - These rules are issued
by the Federal Open Market Committee (hereinafter some
times called the Committee) pursuant to the Administra
tive Procedure Act and the Federal Reserve Act. They
include the rules specified by section 3(a)(2) of the
Administrative Procedure Act.
"Sec. 2. Committee Action. - The function of the
Committee is the direction and regulation of open market
operations which are conducted by the Federal Reserve
Banks. This involves the determination of the policies
which are to be pursued with respect to the purchase
and sale of securities by the Federal Reserve Banks

10/3/46
"with a view to accommodating commerce and business
and with regard to their bearing upon the general
credit situation of the country, together with con
sideration and action upon incidental matters relating
to the manner in which such operations are to be con
ducted. The discharge of the Committee's responsibil
ities requires the continuous gathering of information
and study of changing financial, economic, and credit
conditions and other pertinent considerations by the
members of the Committee and its personnel. These
activities are closely interrelated with other activ
ities of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System and the Federal Reserve Banks and all relevant
information and views developed by these organizations
are available to the Committee. With this background,
action is taken by the Committee upon its own initi
ative at periodic meetings held at least four times
each year and oftener if deemed necessary. Attendance
at Committee meetings is restricted to members of the
Committee and its official staff, the Manager of the
System Open Market Account, the Presidents of Federal
Reserve Banks who are not at the time members of the
Committee, and such other advisers as the Committee
may invite from time to time. The Committee acts
through the adoption and transmittal of directives
and regulations to its Executive Committee or to the
Federal Reserve Banks. Operations in the System Open
Market Account are conducted under the direction of
the Executive Committee pursuant to directives issued
by the Committee.
"Sec. 3. Notice and Public Procedure. - There
ordinarily will be no published notice of proposed
action by the Committee or public procedure thereon,
as described in section 4 of the Administrative Pro
cedure Act, because such notice and procedure is
impracticable, unnecessary, or contrary to the public
interest for one or both of the following reasons:
"(a) Non-disclosure of information is required
in the public interest for reasons stated in section
6(d) of the Committee's Rules on Organization and
Information; and
"(b) Expeditious and timely action, without the
delay incident to such notice and procedure, is re
cuired in the public interest.

10/3/46 -10
"Sec. 4. Effective Date. - Committee action ordi
narily will be made effective on the date the action is
taken because the nature of the subject matter and the
action taken is such that the public interest and the
proper discharge of the Committee's responsibilities so
require.
"Sec. 5. Submittals, Petitions, and Requests.
- Submittals, petitions, and requests may be made to the
Committee at any time in the manner stated in section 5
of the Committee's Rules on Organization and Information,
They will be considered by members of the Committee's
official staff and, where appropriate, will be brought
to the attention of the members of the Committee or its
Executive Committee for consideration and any necessary
action."
In accordance with the request made by the Federal Open
Market Committee at its meeting on June 21, 1939, an examination
of the System open market account was made by the examiners for
the Board of Governors as of June 28, 1946, at the time of the
examination of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. A report of
the examination of the System account was submitted to the Secretary
of the Committee under date of August 22, 1946, and copies of the
report were brought to the attention of all of the members of the
Committee. The report stated that the accounting procedures,
records, and system of internal control maintained and the degree
of care exercised by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in con
nection with the System account were reviewed and that the examiner
continued to regard them as adequate to the efficient administration
of the account, and no exception was taken to the manner in which
the function was handled in the period reviewed.

10/3/46 -11
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the report was
received end ordered filed.
At this point Messrs. Ralph Young and Chandler Morse,
Assistant Directors of the Division of Research and Statistics of
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, joined the
meeting.
The reports of the economists were then called for. Mr.
Thomas made a statement regarding the economic prospects over the
next several months and Mr. Williams commented on some of the con
ditions which gave rise to doubts as to the course of future devel
opments that made it difficult to forecast what might happen. Copies
of the two statements have been placed in the files of the Federal
Open Market Committee and are attached hereto.
Mr. Williams' statement was followed by a discussion of
(1) the suggestion in his remarks that another effort be made by
management and labor, with the assistance of Government, to reach
an agreement as to what their respective policies should be, and
(2) the policies of management with respect to prices and profits
in the event of increased productivity.
The meeting then recessed and reconvened at 2:40 p.m. with
the same attendance as at the end of the morning session except
that Messrs. A. H. Williams, Gidney, Gilbert, Ralph Young, and
Chandler Morse were not present.

10/3/46 -12
In response to a question as to whether it would be worth
while to make another effort to get an agreement between management
and labor, Mr. Williams thought that because of changed conditions
since the first effort was made there was a possibility that an
agreement might be reached in a Conference that dealt with funda
mentals of the economic situation, and that the suggestion might
be made that management and labor ask for a conference and invite
representatives of Government to sit in. It was suggested that if
such a conference was to succeed it should at least have Government
support. There was a discussion of how such support might be brought
about.
Mr. McLarin inquired whether there would be any objection
to the Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks giving copies of the
statements made by Messrs. Thomas and Williams to the members of their
respective boards of directors. This point was discussed and it was
concluded that the substance of the statements could be given to the
boards of directors by the Presidents or by the Banks' economists
without distributing copies of the statements. The reason for this
position was that theeconomists for the Committee should be in a
position to speak freely at the meetings of the Committee, with the
understanding that their estimates or projections would not be dis
tributed on the outside in view of the possibilities of misunder
standing of the figures as being official forecasts of the Committee,
of the Board of Governors, or of the Federal Reserve Banks.

10/3/46 -13
In connection with a review of the progress of the Treasury
program for retirement of Government debt since the last meeting of
the Committee, Chairman Eccles stated that the program had been more
satisfactory in its effects than had been anticipated, that he had
not expected that it would result so quickly in stiffening the long
term rate, and that it would be fortunate if the program could be
continued into 1947.
At the request of the Committee, Mr. Kennedy read the fol
lowing memorandum prepared by him and Mr. Musgrave under date of
September 30, 1946, on the subject of debt retirement:
"The Treasury cash balance, after allowing for the
announced cash retirement of 2 billion dollars of certif
icates on October 1, is estimated at somewhat below 7
billion dollars as of the end of October, A further
issue of certificates totaling 3.8 billion is maturing
on November 1, and it is recommended that 2 billion dol
lars of this issue be redeemed for cash, which will leave
the Treasury balance at the end of November at about 5
billion.
Maturing during December are 3.8 billion dollars of
certificates on December 1, and 3.3 billion dollars of
1-1/2 per cent notes on December 15. On the assumption
that the balance should not be reduced below 2 billion,
it will be possible to retire approximately 3.5 billion
of these issues for cash. Cash retirements should be
concentrated as much as possible upon the note issue,
since it is held largely by the banking system, whereas
the maturing certificate issue, which was sold in the
Victory Loan, is held largely by nonbank investors.
An exchange offer, therefore, for the entire amount of
the maturing certificate issue should be made, and the
December 15 notes should be redeemed for cash. If it
should develop that the cash balance is not large enough
to redeem the entire note issue which may be the case if
a substantial part of the certificate exchange offer is
not taken up, part of the note issue could be paid off
in cash and the balance refunded into the December 1
certificates.

10/3/46 -14
"Assuming Treasury balance of 2.5 billion dollars
at the close of the year, a substantial continuation of
the retirement program should be possible during the first
quarter of 1947, since the balance is estimated to increase
by approximately 4 billion dollars out of budget surplus
and the sale of nonmarketable issues. Maturities during
this quarter include 11.4 billion of certificates and 1.9
billion dollars of notes. Conditional upon the continua
tion of inflationary pressures, cash retirements should
approximately total 4 billion dollars."
Chairman Eccles stated that it was expected that within the
course of the next two or three days the Treasury would make the usual
informal request for the views of the executive committee on the
program for further debt retirement and that he would like to dis
cuss what the recommendations of the committee should be.
It was the consensus of the members of the full committee
that, if the Treasury would be willing to reduce its balances by the
required amount, it would be desirable to retire $2 billion of the
November 1 certificate issue, to accept voluntary cash redemptions
of the December 1 issue of certificates which might amount from $5
hundred million to $1 billion, and to pay off the entire $3.261
billion of notes maturing on December 15, 1946, but that if (be
cause of the possibility of substantial voluntary cash redemption
of December 1 certificates) the Treasury was unwilling to reduce
its balances by the amount necessary to carry out this program,
such amount only of the November 1 certificates should be retired
as would permit the retirement of the entire issue of the December
15 notes.

10/3/46 -15-
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, it was agreed that
the Treasury should be advised accordingly
and that the letter of advice would be
submitted to the members of the executive
committee for approval before it was sent
to the Secretary of the Treasury following
receipt from the Treasury of the usual
informal reouest for the views of the
executive committee.
Chairman Eccles stated that in accordance with the procedure
which had been followed by the American Bankers Association Committee
on Treasury financing, he had been invited to meet with the committee
when it was in Washington in August for a meeting with the Secretary
of the Treasury. He reviewed briefly his discussions with the commit
tee on Treasury financing and System credit policies.
There were then distributed copies of a statement of recom
mendations by representatives of commercial and savings banks, insur
ance companies, and investment banks during their recent meetings
with the Secretary of the Treasury with respect to Treasury financing
policy. This statement was in the following form:
"Mr. Bartelt asked that I pass on to you for the
confidential use of the Federal Open Market Committee,
the recommendations made by the various groups that met
at various times recently with the Secretary. Mr. Bartelt
said that the Secretary listened to the views and recom
mendations of the groups and gave no indication of what
he thought of the various proposals. He made it quite
clear that he was not contemplating any action for the
time being.
"The commercial banks with Burgess as their spokes
man, introduced their recommendations with an endorsement
of the Secretary's Press Club statement on the importance

10/3/46 -16
"of a balanced budget or budget surplus. They felt that the
Treasury should get in a position to meet uncertainties of the
future by refunding part of the large short-term debt into
longer-term debt and to get a broader distribution of the
debt outside of the banks. They did not show how a broader
distribution of the debt could be effected. The groups made
the following specific recommendations:
"Lon-term securities. All of the groups recommended a
new issue of long-term restricted marketable bonds. The com
mercial banks said that such an issue should be made at an
appropriate time. Savings banks favored the issue, but indi
cated that they did not have any large amount of funds for
investment at present. Insurance corpanies stated that they
have accumulated funds, but they did not reveal the amount.
They also argued that the Treasury should now refund some
debt into long-term bonds and take advantage of the present
favorable market, because they see an increasing volume of
private investments forthcoming to absorb investment funds.
"Change in E bonds. The commercial banks advocated a
new savings bond that would be eligible as collateral for
loans under some restricted provisions. This was on the
grounds that some holders are forced to sell savings bonds
at a sacrifice of income to meet temporary needs and that
the change would make savings bonds more attractive and
thus increase sales.
"Treasury bills. The commercial banks recommended
against the issuance to the Federal Reserve of a special
security bearing a low rate of interest, since such an
issue would raise the question of direct dealing between
the Federal Reserve and Treasury.
"Interest rates. None of the groups formally advocated
higher interest rates. Mostly they were silent on the point,
but when interest rates were mentioned it was in the tone
that nothing need be done at the present time."
In connection with a discussion of the above recommendations,
Chairman Eccles sugested that the Presidents read the statement on
Government fiscal policy made by the Secretary of the Treasury at the
Press Club on Au ust 22, 1946, and it was understood that copies of
the statement would be handed to the Presidents before they left
Washington.

10/3/46 -17-
Chairman Eccles also inquired what the views of the Committee
were with respect to what, if any, action should be taken at this time
with respect to the posted rate on Treasury bills, the suggestion that
savings bonds be made more attractive, and the suggestion that there
be an issue of long-term bonds. In response to this inquiry Mr. Sproul
read the following statement which he had presented at the meeting of
the Presidents' Conference yesterday:
"1. When we met last June the argument on credit
policy centered around whether we should follow the
modest approach, using the means at our disposal in
combatting inflationary trends, or whether we should
say that our weapons were no longer usable or effective
and that we needed substantial new powers from the Con
gress if we were to meet our responsibilities.
"2. The fact is that we had been and have been
using the modest approach - elimination of preferential
discount rate, retirement of Government debt out of
Treasury balances, increase in acceptance rates - and
that so far this approach has been measurably effective
in the economic situation in which it has been used.
Aggressive bank bidding for government bonds has ceased,
at least temporarily, the banks have been under inter
mittent pressure for reserves and short-term rates of
interest have risen somewhat.
"3. It is true that this is weak medicine in terms
of combatting inflation - it has done little to reduce
the volume of funds already created and in the hands of
the public and to increase the supply of goods and serv
ices viz-a-viz the supply of money -- but neither would
the Board's ambitious proposals have accomplished any
thing of this sort. It has been a holding operation,
while it was hoped that increased output per man-hour,
the only real answer to our cost-price problem or our
wae-price spiral, would come to our rescue.
"4. The next contemplated steps in the modest
approach were the elimination of the 3/8 per cent bill
buying and repurchase rate and the defrosting of the
presently frozen 7/8 per cent certificate rate. These

10/3/46 -18-
"are not now urgent steps -- in fact, the setback in the
securities markets in recent weeks and the signs of a
possible setback in business activity counsel sitting
tight for the present.
"5. We should, however, be preparing for these
next moves. The elimination of the 3/8 per cent bill
rate offers certain difficulties, not in a market sense,
but with respect to Federal Reserve earnings and the
cost of servicing the Federal debt. If the fixed buy
ing and selling rate for Treasury bills is removed, we
should probably continue to hold most of the bills but
the rate, if left to adjust to the market, would rise
perhaps to 3/4 per cent. To meet this problem one sug
gestion, which Chairman Eccles has promoted, is to ex
change our bills for a special Treasury demand obliga
tion bearing, say, 1/8 or 1/4 per cent interest. This
has the defect, to me the fatal defect, of unnecessarily
arousing public fears of direct Treasury financing by
the central banks and of placing the initiative as to
our holdings and the rate to be paid on them, almost
entirely with the Treasury. My own preference would
be to let the rate and our earnings increase, and to
restore the franchise tax on Federal Reserve Banks
which would mean that the Treasury would recover its
'losses'. An appropriate time and place for the res
toration of the tax would be as an amendment to the
F.D.I.C. bill for return of its capital to the Federal
Reserve Banks and the Treasury. It was in connection
with the provision of this capital that the franchise
tax was abolished. If it be argued that this is to
postpone and delay unduly adjustment of the situation,
a compromise might be possible. I don't like it par
ticularly, but it would be better than the special
demand obligation. At the appropriate time, we could
begin to bid for Treasury bills, say at 1/8 or 1/4 of
1 per cent, tendering our maturing bills in exchange
for those awarded to us. In this way we would avoid
a special certificate, keep our investments in market
obligations, reduce our earnings, and avoid increasing
the cost of servicing the public debt.
"6. Elimination of the 3/8 per cent bill rate is
a largely meaningless procedure, however, except as it
might temporarily create uncertainty and except to the
extent that it would get rid of the hocus-pocus we now
go through to replace our maturing bills. To have real

10/3/46 -19-
"meaning elimination of the 3/8 per cent bill rate should
be the prelude to abandonment of the fixed 7/8 per cent
certificate rate, and to our partial escape from the
straightjacket of the fixed pattern of rates. Admittedly
a rise in certificate rate to 1 or 1-1/4 per cent would
not halt inflation and we would still have to provide
market support, but it would create a new situation in
which uncertainty as to future rates would increase,
sales of old certificates to us would be made at a loss,
the spread between short and long-term yields would be
narrowed, and banks would, in my opinion, be more cautious
about making longterm investments, term loans, etc. And
on the side of cost to the Treasury there is really little
argument. The annual interest charge on the $70,000,000,000
of Governments maturing before December, 1950, excluding
bills, is about $1,000,000,000 or 1.43 per cent. If all
of these securities were refunded at 1-1/4 per cent the
annual service cost to the Treasury would be reduced
about $125,000,000.
"7. That you might say, however, would be the re
verse of funding some of the debt, which is what is being
widely recommended. In present circumstances, however,
the only funding of the debt which has real meaning is
the sale of securities to non-bank investors - it is
not merely lengthening maturities and raising coupons
no matter who buys the securities. Sales within the
banking system could well be made at lower rates and
with shorter maturities even than during the war.
"8. For the non-bank investor, I still think a
long-term 2-1/2 per cent obligation without roll-over
possibilities would be appropriate and desirable toward
the end of the year, and that sales of savings bonds to
small investors should be stepped up faster and further
- if necessary by reimbursing those who operate pay
roll reduction plans for out-of-pocket expenses and
by sweetening up the terms of the Series 'E' bond it
self.
"9. Finally, of course, the Treasury should con
tinue debt redemption out of balances, and next year
out of its cash surplus even though the budget is in
deficit. And there should be further strenuous efforts
to convert that deficit into surplus."

10/3/46 -20
There was a discussion of the proposals contained in Mr.
Sproul's statement and particularly of the type and timing of a
security that might be issued as a medium for investment of accu
mulated savings funds.
Chairman Eccles inquired whether there was any objection
to the sugestion that there be made available a special long-term
issue to absorb accumulated savings in cases where that demand was
not now met by the Series G savings bond, it being understood that
investors in the new security would have to demonstrate that they
had accumulated savings in the amount of the securities purchased
and were not selling marketable issues in order to acquire the new
issue. There was no objection to such a program.
In response to an inquiry as to whether Series E bonds
should be made eligible as collateral for bank loans, Mr. Young
answered in the affirmative and Mr. McLerin suggested that in order
to increase the inducement to hold series E bonds to maturity the
Treasury might offer a more attractive bond in exchange for maturing
series E bonds. This and other possibilities for making series E
bonds more attractive were discussed, such as some change which
would enable the owners of maturing series E bonds to reinvest
their funds at the 2.9 per cent rate. There was no objection on
the part of the members present to the adoption by the Treasury of
some suggestion of the latter kind, although it was pointed out

10/3/46 -21
that it might not be desirable to continue such a program into a
period of recession when the emphasis would be placed on spending
to maintain employment.
In connection with the discussion of the question whether
any action should be taken at the present time with respect to the
buying rate on Treasury bills, Chairman Eccles stated that while
the present retirement program continued there was no need for action
on the bill rate but that it should not be continued too long.
Mr. Sproul suggested that the present arrangement with
respect to bills was working without disturbance to the market and
that, as the amount of bills held by the Federal Reserve Banks in
creased, the posted rate and repurchase option became less important
and more within the control of the Federal Open Market Committee.
In the course of a discussion of the steps that might be
taken in connection with the elimination of the buying rate on
Treasury bills, there were distributed copies of (1) a memorandum
prepared by Mr. Kennedy discussing actions that might be taken
with respect to Treasury bills, and (2) a memorandum prepared at
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York submitting a plan for elimina
ting the buying rate on bills and issuing new bills under an arrange
ment which would permit the payment for new issues by the surrender
of maturing issues without preferential allotment on exchange tenders.

10/3/46 -22
Chairman Eccles raised a question as to the date for the
next meeting of the Committee and suggested that, inasmuch as it
might be desirable to take action on the posted rate on Treasury
bills before the end of the year, it might also be desirable for
the Committee to meet in December.
In the course of a discussion of actions that might be
available to the System in carrying out System credit policies,
Chairman Eccles stated that, if the debt retirement program were
carried into 1947, the buying rate on Treasury bills were eliminated,
and reserve requirements of member banks in central reserve cities
were increased to the maximum permitted under existing law, it might
be possible to exert such an influence in the money market during
the period of threatened inflation that further steps such as those
referred to in the Board's annual report for 1945 would not be nec
essary.
At the conclusion of a discussion,
upon motion duly made and seconded, it
was voted unanimously (1) that no action
should be taken at this time to change
the direction issued by the Committee
on March 1, 1945, with respect to the
purchase of Treasury bills by the Fed
eral Reserve Banks, and (2) to issue
the following direction to the execu
tive committee, with the understanding
that the limit.tions contained in the
direction would include commitments
for purchases and sales of securities
for the System open market account;

10/3/46 -23-
The executive committee be directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to
arrange for such transactions for the System open market
account, either in the open market or directly with the
Treasury (including purchases, sales, exchanges, replace
ment of maturing securities, and letting maturities run
off without replacement), as may be necessary in the
practical administration of the account or for the pur
pose of maintaining an orderly market in Treasury secu
rities and a general level of prices and yields of Gov
ernment securities which will support the Treasury is
suing rates of 7/8 per cent for one-year certificates
and 2-1/2 per cent for 27-year bonds restricted as to
ownership; provided that the aggregate amount of secu
rities held in the account at the close of this date
[other than (1) bills purchased outright in the market
on a discount bsis at the rate of 3/8 per cent per
annum and bills redeemed at maturity end (2) special
short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of
the Treasury] shall not be increased or decreased by
more than $2,000,000,000.
That the executive committee be further directed,
until otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market
Committee, to arrange for the purchase for the System
open market account direct from the Treasury of such
amounts of special short-term certificates of indebted
ness as may be necessary from time to time for the
temporary accomodation of the Treasury; provided
that the amount of such certificates held in the
account at any one time shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
Chairman Eccles reviewed for the information of the members
of the full committee the discussion at the meeting of the executive
committee this morning in connection with the questions presented in
the memorandum prepared by the staff group on foreign interests under
date of May 1, 1946, with respect to relationships of the Federal Re
serve System to the Bretton Woods institutions. It was stated that
the executive committee had voted to recommend to the full committee

10/3/46 1 -24
that it authorize direct transactions in Government securities for
the System open market account with the International Monetary Fund
and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, for the
purposes stated in the memorandum from the staff group, without fol
lowing the usual procedure of effecting transactions in the market,
and that the memorandum of the staff group be placed on the agenda
for consideration at the next meeting of the full committee.
After discussion, upon motion duly
made and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the recommendation of the executive com
mittee was approved.
There was a further reference to the time of the next meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee and the members of the Committee
concurred in a suggestion by Chairman Eccles that the date for the
meeting be set tentatively for the week of December 9, 1946, with
the understanding that if the executive committee, not later than
November 15, 1946, should feel that a meeting need not be held in
December, the members of the full Committee would be advised accord
ingly and the meeting would not be held until after the first of
next year.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Approved:
Secretary
Chairman.