A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Monday, June 10, 1946, at 11:05 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Leach
Mr. McLarin
Mr. Young
Mr. Clerk
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Kincaid, Langum, Rauber, Wheeler,
and John H. Williams, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open Market
Account
Mr. Kennedy, Special Assistant to the Chair
man of the Board of Governors
Mr. Musgrave, Chief of the Government Finance
Section of the Division of Research and
Statistics of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Whittemore, Gidney, and Peyton, alternate
members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Alfred H. Williams, Leedy, and Gilbert,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Philadelphia, Kansas City, and Dallas,
respectively
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meetings of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on February 28 and March 1,
1946, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the

6/10/46 -3
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the
minutes of the meetings of the executive
committee on February 28 and March 1, 1946,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Rouse distributed to all present copies of a report prepared
by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York of open market operations during
the period from March 2 to June 4, 1946, inclusive. He also presented a
supplemental report covering open market operations, including commit
ments, on June 5, 6, and 7, 1946. Mr. Rouse discussed the important
sections of the reports, calling particular attention to the statement
of reasons on page 1 of the principal report for the changes in the Sys
tem account since the last meeting, to the transactions by the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York in bankers' acceptances and the maintenance of
a minimum buying rate at 1/2 per cent for such transactions, and to the
comments on page 3 of the report with respect to the elimination of the
dealer practice of limiting daily price changes in the over-the-counter
market to 1/4 of a point.
In connection with the report of acceptance transactions, Chair
man Eccles inquired why the Federal Reserve Bank of New York should
continue a buying rate of 1/2 per cent on bankers' acceptances when the
preferential rate on advances secured by short-term Government obliga
tions had been eliminated as a means of discouraging the use of Federal
Reserve Bank credit. While he realized that the amount of acceptances
available was small, he felt that there was a question of principle in
volved and questioned whether the System should be in the position of

6/10/46 -3
encouraging the use of Federal Reserve Bank credit through the continua
tion of a 1/2 per cent buying rate on acceptances when by the elimina
tion of the preferential rate it had acted to discourage the use of
Federal Reserve Bank credit in the form of advances on short-term Gov
ernment securities.
Mr. Sproul stated that the Bank wanted to watch developments in
the market following the elimination of the preferential rate, feeling
that if market rates adjusted to the new situation and if the accept
ances in the market could be sold without recourse to the Federal Re
serve Bank the continuation of the buying rate on bankers' acceptances
would not be important, but that, if an increased volume of acceptances
were sold to the Federal Reserve Bank, consideration should be given to
increasing the buying rate. In this connection he referred to the
special efforts which had been made by the Federal Reserve System years
ago to encourage the use of acceptances, and stated that if the Bank's
buying rate were increased to 1 per cent it would result in an over-all
cost of acceptances sold to the System which would adversely affect
such credits in relation to other forms of credit, and that the Federal
Reserve Bank did not want to take that action until it was determined
whether the market would absorb the existing volume of acceptances
without recourse to the Federal Reserve Bank in important amounts. He
also said that since the Bank could buy bills at rates above the fixed
minimum buying rate, it was in a position quickly to adjust to a change
in market conditions.

6/10/46 -4
There followed a brief discussion of the question whether it
was any longer necessary or desirable to encourage the creation of
acceptance credits as compared with other forms of commercial credit.
Mr. Sproul referred to the action of the dealers in discon
tinuing the limit of 1/4 of a point on daily price changes in the over
the-counter market and elaborated briefly on the comments contained in
the report referred to above with respect to the situation which led
to that decision by the dealers.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account during the period from Feb
ruary 28 to June 8, 1946, inclusive, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
At this point Mr. Young, Assistant Director of the Division of
Research and Statistics of the Board of Governors, joined the meeting.
In response to a request for statements by the economists, Mr.
Thomas said that various proposals had been made for dealing with the
problems in the monetary and credit field which had been created by war
financing, and that it was proposed to discuss some of these at this
meeting instead of reviewing the present economic outlook which had not
changed in any of its fundamental aspects since the last meeting of the
Committee except to emphasize the dislocations brought about by the war.
He then read a statement in which he discussed principally proposals
that had been suggested for additional controls by authorizing (1) a
further increase in reserve requirements of banks, (2) a requirement

6/10/46 -5
that banks maintain a secondary reserve of Treasury bills and certifi
cates equal to a specified percentage of net demand deposits, and (3)
a limitation on the amount of long-term bonds that commercial banks
could hold.
Mr. Langum amplified the manner in which the secondary reserve
plan referred to by Mr. Thomas could be made more effective and objec
tions to the plan could be eliminated.
Mr. John H. Williams made a statement in which he discussed the
desirability of an approach to the problem of monetary and credit
controls under existing powers which would not call for legislation but
which would result in unfreezing the interest rate structure to a
limited extent, as compared with a more elaborate program requiring
legislation. He also suggested a possible method of supplementing the
proposals which he understood the Board of Governors was to present to
Congress, so as to remove the guarantee to the Treasury and recapture
interest rate variability without increasing the cost of the debt to
the Treasury.
Copies of the statements by Messrs. Thomas, Langum, and Williams
have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
The meeting then recessed and reconvened at 2:20 p.m. with the
same attendance as at the end of the morning session.
In a discussion of the statements made by the economists, ques
tion was raised as to the commitment made by the Board of Governors,

6/10/46 -6
with respect to future support of the existing rates on Government secu
rities, in the letter which it addressed to the Secretary of the Treas
ury on April 19, 1946, regarding the proposed elimination of the
preferential discount rate on advances secured by short-term Government
obligations and in the press release issued by the Board on April 24,
1946, when the preferential rate was discontinued at the Federal Reserve
Banks of New York, Philadelphia, and San Francisco.
Chairman Eccles stated that the press release made it clear that
the Board did not favor a higher level of interest rates on United States
securities than the Government was then paying, but that that did not
mean that the Board was committed for all time or in the event conditions
should change to such an extent as to require the adoption of a different
policy. He did feel that the Board was committed for some time to come
and that nothing would injure the Federal Reserve System more under pres
ent conditions than to let interest rates rise. He did not think that
was the way in which the problem should be met unless Congress and the
public should favor it, and he stated that the Board proposed to present
the problem in its annual report so that it could be discussed publicly,
and that, if it appeared that the public preferred an increase in rates
to any other solution, then the System should have no hesitancy in taking
that course.
Mr. Sproul expressed the opinion that the Board's letter of April
19, the press release of April 24, and the Treasury press release of the
same date with respect to the preferential discount rate, when taken

6/10/46 -7
together, constituted a statement that the maintenance of the 7/8 per
cent rate was guaranteed by the System. He said that he had not been
in favor of any commitment to the Treasury other than for the time be
ing, for the reason that the basic situation might change in such a way
as to make System action desirable, and that any commitment for the
indefinite future would take the initiative out of the hands of the
System and place it with the Treasury on a matter which was the respon
sibility of the System. He recognized that credit policy was a sub
ordinate part of the fight against inflation, but felt that it would be
necessary for the country to use every means at its disposal to meet
the problem, that to ignore the credit factors in the picture was a
mistake, and that to await the verdict of Congress or the public as to
what should be done, would probably mean failure to meet our responsi
bilities in the immediate future. He said that there had been two lines
of policy open to us in checking a further increase in bank credit and a
further decline in interest rates:
(1) To proceed by modest steps
(a) Removing the encouragement to borrowing
at Federal Reserve Banks.
(b) Reintroducing some element of flexibility
and unpredictability in interest rates
by which he meant, at an appropriate
time, permitting some modest increase in
short rates while maintaining the 2-1/2
per cent long-term rate.
(c) Repaying Government debt out of accumulated
balances and looking forward to a balanced
budget or surplus in the next fiscal year.

6/10/46 -8
(d) Stepping up campaign for sale of savings
bonds, and
(e) Later provision of a restricted 2-1/2 per
cent bond which could not be made part
of a "roll-over" operation.
(2) A more ambitious plan to maintain present short
and long rates and to control expansion of bank
credit and combat a further decline in rates by
means of new and substantial powers over bank
investments and reserves.
The modest program, he thought, would have been a possible means
of meeting the situation effectively; the ambitious program would not
unless more prompt legislative action than seems likely was forthcoming,
and unless a more complete control, than the program itself included,
over the credit machinery and capital markets of the country was en
visaged. He said that in the existing circumstances once the market
became convinced that the existing rates would stand it would resume the
previous practice of "playing the pattern of rates". He added that the
response to the elimination of the preferential rate and the program for
the retirement of Government debt indicated that the situation might
have been met by the more modest approach, and he felt that the System
could have given a commitment, for the time being only, without causing
the Treasury to precipitate a public issue on that point.
He also expressed the opinion that a commitment of that kind
should not be given without a meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee so that there would be an opportunity to exchange views and opinions,
that the Federal Open Market Committee was drifting into a situation in

6/10/46 -9
which action was being taken by majority caucus without a meeting of the
Committee, and that that was contrary to the intent when the Committee
was created. It was his belief that whatever action was necessary to
reverse that tendency should be taken and that if more meetings of the
Federal Open Market Committee and its .executive committee were necessary
they should be held.
If a commitment had been made to the Treasury which resulted in
the System losing its freedom of action, Mr. Sproul thought that the
appointment of a new Secretary of the Treasury afforded an excellent
opportunity to seek a reconsideration of the matter, the abandonment of
the commitment, and a return to the simpler policy which he bad sug
gested. He added that the decision seemed to be an urgent one for the
reason that the System might soon need to be concerned with the ex
pansion of credit for private use, in undesirable ways, as well as with
the further monetization of the public debt, and that considerable time
might elapse before the necessary legislation could be enacted to make
possible the more elaborate methods of credit control that had been
proposed. He also said that if either policy was to have any right to
be called monetary policy or monetary control it must aim toward making
credit less easily available and therefore more costly, and that this
could not be done with a frozen pattern of rates. He said he would like
to have the Federal Open Market Committee take the whole problem up with
the new Secretary of the Treasury as promptly as possible to see if a
program could be worked out which would leave the System with some

6/10/46 -10
discretion with which to meet an imminent situation. He concluded with
the statement that an increase in the rate on certificates from 7/8 to
1 per cent or 1-1/8 per cent would not be a large increase nor a large
price to pay if it would help combat inflation, and that it would re
store flexibility in the rate structure and get away from a frozen
pattern of rates.
Chairman Eccles stated that there was a fundamental difference
in Mr. Sproul's approach to the problem and his own, and that he would
be opposed to taking the matter up with the new Secretary of the Treas
ury at this time. He thought that the situation was not one that would
justify such action, that the Government security market was stable at
the present time and prices were at a lower level than in the recent
past, and that any action to reopen the rate question would be con
sidered as an attempt on the part of banks to get a higher rate.
Mr. Sproul did not agree that the step would be so interpreted
if it were made clear that it was for the purpose of exercising proper
credit controls.
Chairman Eccles did not think that a higher rate of interest
unless it was a very much higher rate-would have any substantial
effect in curbing the demand for credit for private purposes. He saw
no way of stopping an expansion of private credit by rate action ex
cept by such high rates as would seriously affect the Government secu
rity market, and if such action were taken by the System it would be
received in much the same way as action to increase rates was received

6/10/46 -11
following the last war. He added that to deal with the problem by rate
action would be to overemphasize the importance of credit policy in re
lation to other matters.
Mr. Sproul recognized that there were other things such as a
balanced budget, all out production, and perhaps temporary maintenance
of some of the war-time controls that were more important than credit
policy but that some of these controls were breaking down rapidly and
that the interest rate would be one of the instruments that should be
used in the whole program against inflationary pressures.
Chairman Eccles referred to the fact that the question of the
preferential discount rate was fully discussed at the last meeting of
the Federal Open Market Committee as well as at previous meetings. He
also said that the Presidents were furnished with copies of the corre
spondence with the Treasury relating to the matter; that the last letter
from the Treasury regarding it was the result of the position taken by
the Presidents at the time of the last meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee that they could not give the Treasury the assurance that the
Banks would not act on the preferential rate in the near future; and that
when the action of the Banks came to the Board for decision another meet
ing of the Federal Open Market Committee or its executive committee was
not called for, as the matter was one for approval or disapproval by the
Board. He added that the release was submitted to Messrs. Sproul and
Leach as members of the executive committee, that they did not agree
that the commitment with respect to rates should be made, that their

6/10/46 -12
views were presented to the Board of Governors and considered by it, and
that the press release was issued by the Board after it had had the bene
fit of their views. He went on to say that, in view of that situation,
he did not want the Presidents of the other Federal Reserve Banks to
get the impression that proper consideration had not been given to the
matter or that the Board had exercised any authority that it did not
have.
Mr. Sproul stated that in connection with the elimination of the
preferential rate there was a discussion of open market operations to
support the 7/8 per cent rate in the event the preferential rate were
discontinued and that, while the elimination of the rate was a matter
within the authority of the Board, the question of supporting the rate
through open market purchases was a matter for consideration by the Fed
eral Open Market Committee. He also said that when he and Chairman
Eccles went to the Treasury to discuss the matter with representatives
of the Treasury, the two points of view were expressed but there had
been no action by the Federal Open Market Committee to give the Treasury
a commitment with respect to support of existing rates.
Chairman Eccles suggested that if any of the members of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee felt that a satisfactory record had not been
made they should make a motion and vote on the matter and, if the
majority of the Committee wished to vote not to support the rate, that
decision would be controlling.
Mr. Leach said that when the matter of the press release came up

6/10/46 -13
he suggested that it take the position that the elimination of the pref
erential rate would not be permitted to disturb the market for the 7/8
per cent certificates, without making the commitment to maintain the 7/8
per cent rate indefinitely.
In a further discussion Mr. Sproul stated that no one knew what
the credit situation might be in the next few months, that a further
movement into real estate, securities, and commodities might create a
situation that would be difficult to handle, and that in the absence of
further discussion with the Treasury the System's hands would be tied in
the event Congress had not acted to give the System additional powers.
Chairman Eccles said that if that situation should arise and it
appeared that an increase in rates was desirable and the System could
make a case, the Committee would not be estopped from taking the matter
up with the Treasury and, if necessary, with the President of the
United States.
Mr. John H. Williams was of the opinion that if there should be
a strong demand for credit from private sources and if on top of that
there were a strong demand for business and speculative credit the move
ment could not be controlled by monetary means, but that the large
volume of debt was a new factor in the situation which made the market
more sensitive. Therefore, if some minor flexibility were introduced
in the rate structure-and he did not think the System could do more
than that-it would have a greater retarding effect than in the past.
He felt that in the adoption of any of the programs that had been

6/10/46 -14
discussed he would like to see the System recapture some flexibility in
interest rates. In response to an inquiry, he said this action would
not involve allowing Government securities to go below par.
Chairman Eccles advanced the thought that neither the Board nor
the System had frozen the existing rate structure, but that it had be
come frozen by the war financing program during the war years and its
accompanying tremendous increase in the public debt. It was his
opinion that there was nothing that the System could do to unfreeze the
rate structure, and that the best thing it could do would be to present
the problem to Congress and point out the basic change that had taken
place since the System's existing powers were conferred which made the
use of those powers under present circumstances entirely inappropriate.
Mr. Thomas observed that the commitment made by the Board was
that the short-term rate would not be permitted to increase which made
it difficult to keep the yields on long-term securities from declining
further. However, he said, there were some things that could be done
that would help in that direction such as debt retirement and increasing
reserve requirements of central reserve city banks, which would keep the
banks under pressure and make them hesitant about expanding further.
Mr. Sproul agreed with the generality of Mr. Thomas' views,
although not on the specific question of increasing reserve requirements
of central reserve city banks but said that he did not like to have these
steps vitiated by a commitment that would eventually lead the public to
understand that the door was open for expansion at the existing rates.

6/10/46 -15
After some further discussion, Chairman Eccles stated that the
Presidents had received copies of the correspondence with the Treasury
since the last meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee with re
spect to the elimination of the preferential discount rate, the retire
ment of Government debt, and the authority granted by the Treasury to
commercial banks to hold a limited amount of restricted issues for
trading purposes, and that there were no other developments with re
spect to these matters since the last meeting that should be reported
at this time.
Consideration was then given to what if any action should be
taken with respect to the direction issued at the meeting of the Commit
tee on March 1, 1945, relating to the purchase of Treasury bills at a
discount rate of 3/8 per cent per annum. Chairman Eccles expressed the
belief that the direction should be continued for the time being but
that, inasmuch as bills had ceased to be a market instrument, the dis
continuance of the direction might be discussed with the Treasury when
the current program for retirement of debt had been completed, at which
time he hoped a program could be worked out which would avoid the neces
sity for the weekly offering of bills which were taken from the dealers
by the Federal Reserve Banks.
Mr. Sproul inquired whether, since the market for bills had
almost disappeared, there would be any point in eliminating the buying
rate and repurchase option and raising the question of direct financing
of the Treasury by the central banks. This point was discussed and

6/10/46 -16
Mr. Gilbert raised the question whether it would be desirable to dis
continue the option on the part of sellers of bills to repurchase bills
at the same discount rate. In the discussion of this point it was the
consensus that the existing direction should be continued in its pres
ent form until it was eliminated altogether.
Thereupon, it was agreed unanimously
that no action should be taken at this
time to change the direction issued by the
Committee on March 1, 1945.
In a discussion of the authority to be granted to the executive
committee to execute transactions for the System account, it was sug
gested that, in view of the change which had taken place in the policy
with respect to the maintenance of market prices, the pertinent portion
of the direction issued to the executive committee should be changed
so as to authorize such transactions for the System account as might be
necessary for the purpose of maintaining an orderly market in Treasury
securities and a general level of prices and yields of Government secu
rities which would support the Treasury issuing rates of 7/8 per cent
for one-year certificates and 2-1/2 per cent for 27-year bonds re
stricted as to ownership.
Mr. Rouse stated that, while the operations in the account be
fore another meeting of the Committee including redemption of securities
being retired would be substantial, it was believed that a limitation of
2 billion dollars on the authority of the executive committee to in
crease or decrease the total amount of securities in the account would

6/10/46 -17-
be adequate to meet the situation, assuming that the next meeting would
be held in September.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the following direction
to the executive committee was ap
proved unanimously, with the under
standing that the limitations contained
in the direction would include commit
ments for purchases and sales of
securities for the System account:
The executive committee be directed, until otherwise di
rected by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for
such transactions for the System open market account, either in
the open market or directly with the Treasury (including pur
chases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing securities,
and letting maturities run off without replacement), as may be
necessary in the practical administration of the account or for
the purpose of maintaining an orderly market in Treasury securi
ties and a general level of prices and yields of Government
securities which will support the Treasury issuing rates of 7/8
per cent for one-year certificates and 2-1/2 per cent for 27
year bonds restricted as to ownership; provided that the aggre
gate amount of securities held in the account at the close of
this date [other than (1) bills purchased outright in the market
on a discount basis at the rate of 3/8 per cent per annum and
bills redeemed at maturity and (2) special short-term certifi
cates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury] shall not be increased
or decreased by more than $2,000000,00,0.
That the executive committee be further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to ar
range for the purchase for the System open market account direct
from the Treasury of such amounts of special short-term certifi
cates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time for
the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the
amount of such certificates held in the account at any one time
shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
Chairman Eccles stated that the Treasury had been giving consid
eration to the desirability of eliminating the 6-months coupon on Treas
ury certificates and paying the interest at the time of redemption. If

6/10/46 -18
this change were made, he said, there would be no change in the 7/8 per
cent rate, although it was recognized that it would reduce the yield
slightly, but it would eliminate a great deal of unnecessary work and
expense in issuing the coupon certificate and paying the coupon when it
became due.
All of the members of the Committee concurred in the opinion
that the change would be a desirable one.
It was also suggested that it would be desirable for the Treas
ury to provide for a one million dollar denomination in all issues of
Government securities and Mr. Kennedy stated that that was being done.
Turning to the date for the next meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee, Mr. Sproul stated that the annual convention of the
American Bankers Association would be held in Chicago on September 22-25,
that some of the Presidents would like to attend the Convention, and
that it had been suggested that, in the absence of developments calling
for earlier meetings, the meetings of the Presidents' Conference and the
Federal Open Market Committee be held following September 25. There was
agreement that the date for the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee should be set tentatively for Thursday, October 3.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approv .
Chairman.