A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Monday, October 6, 1947, at 10:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Clayton
Mr. Whittemore
Mr. Gidney
Mr. Davis
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Thompson, Stead, and John H.
Williams, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Chairman,
Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board
of Governors
Mr. Smith, Economist, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Arthur Willis, Special Assistant,
Securities Department, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
Messrs. Alfred H. Williams, Young, Gilbert,
and Leedy, alternate members of the
Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Leach, McLarin, and Earhart, Presi
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,
respectively

10/6/47
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of
the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee held on June 5-6, 1947, were
approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the
minutes of the meetings of the executive
committee held on June 5 and 6, June 30,
and August 6, 1947, were approved, rati
fied, and confirmed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the action taken
by the members of the Federal Open Market
Committee on July 2, 1947, approving the
following amended direction to the Federal
Reserve Banks which discontinued the posted
rate on Treasury bills issued on or after
July 10, 1947, was approved, ratified, and
confirmed:
Until otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market
Committee, the 12 Federal Reserve Banks are directed to
purchase all Treasury bills issued prior to July 10, 1947,
that may be offered to such Banks on a discount basis at
the rate of 3/8 per cent per annum, any such purchases
to be upon the condition that the Federal Reserve Bank,
upon the request of the seller on or before the last
business day preceding the closing day on which the
Treasury will accept tenders of the bills for new Treas
ury bills, will sell to him Treasury bills of like amount
and maturity at the same rate of discount. All bills pur
chased under this direction are to be held by the pur
chasing Federal Reserve Bank in its own account and
prompt reports of all transactions in Treasury bills
are to be made to the Manager of the System Open Market
Account.

10/6/47 -3
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the action taken
by the members of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee on August 8, 1947, approv
ing an amendment to the direction issued
to the executive committee on June 6,
1947, to provide that transactions in the
System account shall be for the purpose
of supporting the current issuing rate
on Treasury certificates instead of an
issuing rate of 7/8 per cent, was ap
proved, ratified, and confirmed. The
direction as revised read as follows:
The executive committee be directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for such transactions for the System open market account,
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury
(including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of
maturing securities, and letting maturities run off with
out replacement), as may be necessary in the practical
administration of the account or for the purpose of main
taining an orderly market in Treasury securities and a
general level of prices and yields of Government secu
rities which will support the Treasury current issuing
rate for certificates and 2-1/2 per cent for 27-year
bonds restricted as to ownership; provided that the
aggregate amount of securities held in the account at
the close of this date [other than (1) maturing bills
transferred to the System account from the option ac
counts of the Federal Reserve Banks pursuant to the
direction issued by the Federal Open Market Committee
on May 5, 1947, bills purchased outright in the market
on a discount basis at the rate of 3/8 per cent per
annum, bills redeemed or exchanged at maturity, and
bills taken in exchange for maturing bills, and (2)
special short-term certificates of indebtedness pur
chased from time to time for the temporary accommoda
tion of the Treasury] shall not be increased or de
creased by more than $2,000,000,000.
The executive committee be further directed, un
til otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Com
mittee, to arrange for the purchase for the System open
market account direct from the Treasury of such amounts

10/6/47 -4
of special short-term certificates of indebtedness as
may be necessary from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the amount
of such certificates held in the account at any one time
shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the action of the
Federal Open Market Committee on Sep
tember 4, 1947, increasing from $2 bil
lion to $2.75 billion the authority of
the executive committee contained in the
first paragraph of the direction issued
at the meeting of the full Committee on
June 6 and amended on August 8, 1947, was
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Rouse presented, and read the important parts of, a
report on open market operations prepared by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York covering the period from June 5 to October 1,
1947, inclusive. He also presented a supplementary report cover
ing transactions on October 2 and 3, 1947. Copies of these re
ports have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
Following a brief discussion of the
reports, upon motion duly made and sec
onded and by unanimous vote, the trans
actions in the System account for the
period June 4,to October 3, 1947, inclu
sive, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Before this meeting there had been brought to the attention
of each member of the Committee a report of examination of the System
open market account as of June 27, 1947, made in connection with the

10/6/47 -5
regular examination of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and
submitted by the examiner in charge for the Board of Governors.
The report took no exception to the manner in which the account
was handled during the period reviewed and stated that the ac
counting procedures, records, system of internal control, and
degree of care exercised by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
in connection with the account continued to be regarded as ade
quate to its efficient administration.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the report was
received and ordered filed.
Mr. Rouse stated that with the disappearance on October 2,
1947, of option bills he had contemplated suggesting that the state
ment of procedure for the allocation of securities in the System
open market account among the Federal Reserve Banks be revised to
eliminate the references to option bills. The problem had been
discussed with Mr. Smead, Director of the Division of Bank Opera
tions of the Board of Governors, who felt that the procedure might
be simplified somewhat, and Mr. Rouse proposed that Mr. Smead and
he review the procedure and submit a recommendation to the Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded
and by unanimous vote, (1) the allocation
of securities in the System account on
October 1 was approved, ratified, and con
firmed, and (2) it was agreed that Messrs.
Rouse and Smead should study the procedure

10/6/4 -6
7
and submit a report to the executive com
mittee of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee for consideration and recommendation
to the full Committee at its next meeting.
At this time Mr. Ralph Young, Assistant Director of the
Division of Research and Statistics of the Board of Governors
entered the meeting.
Chairman Eccles called for the reports of the economists.
Mr. Thomas read a paper on "Inflation and Credit Policy" which,
after discussing the present inflationary development and com
menting that the Federal Reserve System now faced the question
of placing real restrictions on credit expansion, stated that
there were four possible lines of policy which the System might
consider for dealing with the situation:
(1) Support short-term interest rates at present levels re
gardless of what further credit expansion might occur;
(2) Permit a gradual further rise in short-term rates for
the purpose of creating some uncertainty in the market
and endeavoring to find whether credit expansion would
thus be discouraged;
(3) Abandon the policy of interest rate control and adopt
a policy of control of the volume of bank reserves,
which would be a return to prewar procedures and
might be the only possible means of actually checking
further credit expansion, and under which it would be
difficult to predict what would be the effect on in
terest rates and on the Government security market;
(4) Push more vigorously for enactment of the Board's legis
lative proposals, which proposals seemed to provide the
only really effective solution to the present problem,

10/6/47 -7
but which probably could not be enacted early enough to
deal with the current rapidly developing inflationary
pressures.
Mr. John H. Williams discussed the current outlook, giving
special attention to the foreign situation and demands of other
countries for goods produced in the United States. He stated that
the present situation was not one which could be dealt with satis
factorily by use of traditional monetary controls which might op
erate to bring about a deflation through reducing production, em
ployment, and pay rolls, that restrictions in the money supply
should be considered, but that they did not provide the answer
to the present problem which called for a further increase in out
put of goods.
Copies of the statements by Messrs. Thomas and Williams
have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Following a discussion of actions that might be taken to
combat the inflationary situation, the meeting recessed and re
convened at 10:45 a.m. on October 7, 1947, with the same attendance
as at the close of the session on October 6, except that Mr. Thomp
son and Mr. Ralph Young were not present.
Mr. Carpenter read a memorandum dated October 1, 1947, pre
pared in the Division of Research and Statistics of the Board of
Governors on open market policies for the near future. The memo
randum, a copy of which had been furnished each member of the

10/6/47 -8
Committee before this meeting, reviewed current monetary factors
and presented questions for System consideration together with an
outline of various policies that might be followed in dealing
with the present situation.
Chairman Eccles discussed briefly the effect of recent
gold imports, the possible effects of a further small increase
in the short-term rate, and the importance of action to stop
the rapid increase in bank credit through the medium of bank
loans which were expanding at a rate of about $10 billion a
year, thereby adding to the money supply at a more rapid rate
than could be offset by the reduction of Government debt. He
also mentioned the change in the lending policies of banks re
sulting from the recent increase in the short-term rate and
stated that, while a further increase might have some psycho
logical effect on the banks and on their lending policies, it
would not have any effect on the desire of the public to borrow
from the banks and that additional steps to meet this problem
would be necessary.
He went on to say that he was satisfied from a recent
conversation with Under Secretary of the Treasury Wiggins that
the Treasury would not be willing to concur in a further increase
in the short-term rate unless it could be shown that it would have
an anti-inflationary effect that would make it worth the additional

10/6/47 -9
cost. It would not be possible, he said, even if Congress were
sympathetic, to obtain enactment of the proposals contained in
the annual reports of the Board of Governors for 1945 and 1946
in time to be of any value. He questioned the ability of the
System to do much to affect the existing situation but said
that there were steps that could be taken, including an effort
to persuade member banks to look at their loan policies from a
national credit standpoint. In this connection, he said it had
been suggested that a statement be issued by the Board of Gov
ernors, the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit In
surance Corporation, and the Association of Supervisors of State
Banks, which would warn the banks of the danger of further credit
expansion and would exercise a restraining influence on further
expansion of bank credit.
During the discussion of what such a statement might con
tain, Chairman Eccles said that there had been discussions of the
matter with representatives of the Comptroller of the Currency,
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Association of
Supervisors of State Banks, and that further meetings were being
arranged. He added that these discussions grew out of a suggestion
which he had made to Under Secretary of the Treasury Wiggins last
summer that a meeting be called of representatives of the Federal
bank supervisory agencies for the purpose of discussing closer

10/6/47 -10
cooperation between the agencies, that such a meeting was called
at which it was agreed that there should be closer and continuing
cooperation, that subsequent meetings were held and that further
discussions would be had looking to the issuance of a statement
along the lines referred to above.
After commenting on the questions presented in the memo
randum of October 1, 1947, previously referred to, Mr. Sproul
stated that an overall credit policy designed to curtail the
primary influences in the present period of maximum utilization
of our resources would not be the answer to our problem, and that,
therefore, we should first look for the specific sources of trouble
and see what could be done about them. In so far as bank credit
was a factor, he felt that the System would have to accommodate
itself to the powers it already had and not continue to refer
to powers that it might have had but which were not forthcoming,
and that in formulating policy within the limits of its authority
the System should (1) neither minimize the possible effectiveness
of its powers nor, for reasons which he outlined, exaggerate the
importance of the recent expansion of bank loans, (2) proceed as
rapidly as Treasury caution would permit in the program of raising
short-term rates so as to lessen the urge on the part of banks to
reach out for long-term Government securities or to make risky or
speculative loans, (3) adjust Federal Reserve Bank discount rates

10/6/47 -11
to the change in rates on short-term Government securities, (4)
take additional steps to offset the effect of the gold inflow un
less such inflow resulted in bank purchases of securities from
the System account or in the building up of excess reserves, (5)
by public statement and by alerting the examiners exercise some
influence on the side of cautious lending by banks, and (6) do
whatever can be done to head off a rapid relaxation of terms and
a rapid increase in the volume of credit following the expiration
of consumer credit controls on November 1, 197.
Following a further comment by Mr. Sproul that the use of
selective credit controls, including consumer credit control and
possibly real estate loan control, should be re-examined as one
of the effective ways of dealing with the present situation, there
was a general discussion of the relative effectiveness of quali
tative and quantitative credit controls as anti-inflationary
measures. This led to a further discussion of the actions that
were available to the System and the Treasury to carry out an
anti-inflationary program.
After consideration of the courses of action that were
available, it was suggested that the following program be put
in written form by the executive committee and discussed by
Messrs. Eccles and Sproul with appropriate representatives of
the Treasury. It was recognized that, in addition to action

10/6/47 -12-
by the Federal Open Market Committee, the program would require
action by the Treasury, the Board of Governors, the Federal Re
serve Banks and others, and that, to the extent that the pro
posed actions were within the jurisdictions of the respective
agencies, the program would be regarded as a recommendation by
the Federal Open Market Committee that the actions be taken:
1. Treasury cash balances would be used for the re
tirement of Government debt, particularly certificates
and bills held in the System open market account, as a
means of offsetting the effects of gold imports and ex
ercising a tightening influence on the credit situation.
2. The short-term rate on Government securities
would be increased to 1-1/8 per cent by the end of 1947.
This would be accomplished by refunding the November 1
certificates into a 14-month 1-1/8 per cent note or an
11-month one per cent certificate, the December 1 cer
tificates into a 13-month 1-1/8 per cent note, and the
January 1 certificates into a 12-month 1-1/8 per cent
certificate.
3. Federal Reserve Bank discount rates would be
increased in keeping with the increase in the rate on
short-term Government securities.
4. Reserve requirements of member banks in central
reserve cities would be increased in three 2 per cent
steps.
5. A statement would be issued by the Board of
Governors emphasizing, in connection with the termi
nation of Regulation W on November 1, the danger of
more liberal instalment credit terms and of a further
growth in the outstanding volume of consumer credit.
This statement would be released by the Board, would
be given wide publicity by the Federal Reserve Banks,
and would be sent by the Presidents over their own
signatures to all Regulation W registrants in their
respective districts.

10/6/47 -13
6. The Board of Governors, the Comptroller of the
Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and
the Association of Supervisors of State Banks would issue
a statement pointing out the danger of further over-all
expansion of bank credit through the medium of bank loans
and the policies that would be followed by the banking
agencies in dealing with this problem in the examination
of banks.
In connection with the suggestion that short-term rates be
increased further, Mr. Evans stated that in the absence of further
evidence of the value of such an increase he would not favor it,
that the recent increase was not effective as a deterrent to bor
rowing from banks, and that, until action could be taken which
would be effective, he could not vote to approve a further in
crease.
In a discussion of this point it was suggested that, while
it might not be possible to show definitely what the effect of the
recent increase in short-term rates had been, it had had some ef
fect in the direction of prompting a more restrictive policy on
the part of banks with respect to bank loans, and that a further
increase would be an important element in an over-all program that
could be presented to the Treasury as the best course of action to
follow within the limits of existing powers.
Reference was made to the question of Treasury policy in
connection with the refunding of maturing savings bonds and Chair
man Eccles stated that at its meeting yesterday, the executive

10/6/47 -14
committee voted to suggest to the full Committee that a recommen
dation be sent to the Treasury that individual holders of maturing
savings bonds be given the option to invest funds received in pay
ment for such bonds in (1) new series E bonds without regard to
the annual limit of $3,750 or (2) a special non-marketable 10-year
issue which would carry a 2-1/2 per cent coupon and be redeemable
at any time after one year.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, it was agreed
that a recommendation along the lines
proposed by the executive committee
should be submitted to the Treasury.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
the 6-point program outlined above was
approved, Mr. Evans voting "no" to the
extent that the program contemplated a
further increase in short-term rates.
In taking this action it was understood
that when the statement of the program
had been prepared by the executive com
mittee it would be discussed by Messrs.
Eccles and Sproul with representatives
of the Treasury and, if no objection
were raised by the Treasury to the
portion of the program for which it
would have responsibility, the various
steps of the program would be initiated.
During a discussion of the program Chairman Eccles re
ferred to the suggestion previously made that the Federal Open
Market Committee prepare a statement of the situation with which
it was confronted which might be submitted to the Congress by the
Board as a part of its annual report. He said that such a statement

10/6/47 -15
might be submitted as a special joint report by the Committee and
the Board of Governors which would be sent to the Congress early
in January or February and which would point out that the Congress
could not expect the System, with the limited powers it now has,
to prevent monetary and credit expansion.
Chairman Eccles referred to the letter addressed to Mr.
Whittemore under date of July 7, 1947, by Mr. Charles E. Spencer,
Jr., President of the First National Bank of Boston and a member
of the Federal Advisory Council, in which it was proposed that,
for the purpose of increasing the attractiveness of Treasury
bills to commercial banks, the Open Market Committee each day
set a buying rate on Treasury bills which would be paid that
day at any Federal Reserve Bank. The letter had been submitted
to the Federal Advisory Council for consideration and Chairman
Eccles stated that at its meeting on September 23, 1947, at which
Mr. Spencer was present, the Council unanimously recommended that
the proposal be not adopted. He added that the suggestion would
make Federal Reserve credit even more readily available to banks
than at present, that under present conditions it was undesirable
to facilitate access to such credit, and that he felt no further
consideration should be given to the proposal at this time. The
other members of the Committee were in agreement with this view.
In connection with the discussion of the Spencer proposal,

10/6/47 -16
Chairman Eccles said that the Federal Advisory Council had stated
that it understood that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York had
requested banks of its district not to purchase and sell Federal
funds outside the district, and that the Council was opposed to
any action which implied a policy that borrowing by member banks
should be confined to Federal Reserve Banks. He added that the
Board had informed the Council that the matter was one of System
interest because any action in that direction would affect open
market and discount policy as well as the reserve position of
member banks, and that if action were desirable it should be
taken on a System basis and not by one of the Federal Reserve
Banks acting alone. He suggested that such action might be con
sidered as an additional point in the anti-inflationary program
outlined by the Committee, but he questioned whether it would
have much influence.
Mr. Sproul said that the New York Bank had not regarded
this matter as one involving System credit policy but as a ques
tion of unsecured loans by member banks. He said that the prac
tice of lending Federal funds within a city or a Federal Reserve
district when the lending bank presumably would know the condi
tion of the borrowing bank was a useful one, but that inter
district transactions might involve some risks, and that, since

10/6/47 -17
such transactions were carried on over the Federal Reserve leased
wires, failure of the Reserve Bank to take a position with respect
to them would, in effect, give them the Bank's blessing. Mr. Sproul
went on to say that the policy of the New York Bank had not been
one of prohibiting interdistrict transfers but rather, whenever
the question was raised by a member bank or the Reserve Bank
noticed large transactions going over the leased wires, to call
attention to the possible risks involved in making unsecured
loans. He added that some banks in New York were making such
transfers and others were not.
There was a brief discussion of the matter and it was the
consensus that it did not call for action by the Committee.
There was a discussion of the authority to be given to
the executive committee to direct transactions for the System
Open Market account. Mr. Sproul suggested that it would be de
sirable to revise the existing direction to indicate that opera
tions were carried on for the purpose, among others, of maintain
ing a supply of funds in the market that would be related to the
needs of commerce and business.
After a discussion of this suggestion,
upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the following direction to
the executive committee was approved, with
the understanding that the limitations con
tained in the direction would include commit
ments for the System open market account:

-18-
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for such transactions for the System open market account,
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury
(including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of
maturing securities, and letting maturities run off with
out replacement), as may be necessary, in the light of
the general credit situation of the country, for the
practical administration of the account, for the main
tenance of stable and orderly conditions in the Govern
ment security market, and for the purpose of relating
the supply of funds in the market more closely to the
needs of commerce and business; provided that the ag
gregate amount of securities held in the account at
the close of this date other than special short-term
certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to
time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury
shall not be increased or decreased by more than
$2,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee,
to arrange for the purchase for the System open market
account direct from the Treasury of such amounts of
special short-term certificates of indebtedness as may
be necessary from time to time for the temporary accom
modation of the Treasury; provided that the total amount
of such certificates held in the account at any one time
shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
Mr. Sproul presented a memorandum addressed to him by
Mr. Rouse under date of September 30, 1947, in which the latter
suggested the reestablishment of the authority given by the Fed
eral Open Market Committee to the Federal Reserve Banks in 1936
and terminated in 1945 to make temporary purchases of Government
securities under resale agreements for periods of not to exceed
15 days. The reasons for the suggestion were outlined in the
memorandum and were discussed at this meeting. Some of the

10/6/47 -19
members of the Committee questioned whether the authority should be
granted and suggested that action be deferred to afford an opportu
nity for further discussion.
Upon motion duly made and seconded and
by unanimous vote, it was agreed that the
executive committee should study the matter
and submit a recommendation at the next meet
ing of the full Committee.
It was tentatively agreed that the Presidents would be in
Washington on December 8 and 9, 1947, and that meetings of the
Federal Open Market Committee and the Presidents' Conference would
be held at that time.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Approved: Secretary
Chairman.