A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Thursday, February 27, 1947, at 10:35 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. C layton
Mr. Leach
Mr. McLarin
Mr. Young
Mr. Peyton (alternate for Mr. Clerk, who died
on September 28, 1946)
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Townsend, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Rauber, Wheeler, and John H.
Williams, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Chair
man of the Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary of
the Board of Governors
Messrs. Ralph A. Young and Morse,
Assistant Directors of the Di
vision of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Musgrave, Chief, and Mr. Smith,
Economist, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Messrs. Whittemore and Gidney, alternate
members of the Federal Open Market
Committee

2/27/47 -2
Messrs. Alfred H. Williams, Leedy, Gilbert,
and Earhart, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Kansas
City, Dallas, and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Stead, Vice President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Mr. Johnson, General Counsel of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
Chairman Eccles called for the reports of the economists.
Mr. Thomas made a statement on the economic prospects for 1947-1948
and also presented a paper which analyzed the structure of the public
debt and problems connected with its management. Mr. Wheeler then
made a statement on means of increasing the effectiveness of actions
taken by the Federal Reserve to influence credit conditions, and,
following a discussion of the remarks of Messrs. Thomas and Wheeler,
Mr. John H. Williams reviewed the current domestic and international
economic situation and discussed the outlook. Copies of the state
ments by Messrs. Thomas, Wheeler, and Williams have been placed in
the files of the Federal Open Market Committee and are attached here
to.
Following a general discussion of questions raised by the
economists' statements, the meeting recessed and reconvened at
10:10 a.m. on February 28, with the same attendance as at the ses
sion on February 27, except that Mr. Davis, President of the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of St. Louis and alternate member of the Federal

2/27/47 -3
Open Market Committee, Mr. Kincaid, Associate Economist, and Mr.
Smead, Director of the Division of Bank Operations of the Board
of Governors, were present, and Messrs. Wheeler, Ralph A. Young,
Morse, Townsend, and Johnson were not present.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on October 3, 1946, were ap
proved.
The progress of the program for retirement of the Govern
ment debt since the last meeting of the full Committee and its ef
fects on the Government securities and money markets and on the
Treasury cash position were discussed, and Chairman Eccles stated
that current receipts of the Treasury had held up better than had
been anticipated, and that it appeared that another billion dol
lars of certificates could be retired April 1 and perhaps an ad
ditional amount before the end of this fiscal year. He noted that
the Treasury desired renewal of the authority of the Federal Re
serve Banks to purchase up to five billion dollars in securities
direct from the Treasury, that a bill had been introduced in Con
gress continuing this authority after March 31, 1947, and that he
had been called to appear at hearings on the bill to be held be
ginning Monday, March 3, 1947, before the House Banking and Cur
rency Committee.

2/27/47 -4
All of the members of the Committee had been furnished a
draft of the letter to the Treasury with respect to the savings
bond program, which had been prepared but which, in accordance
with the decision reached at the meeting of the executive com
mittee on February 17, 1947, had not been sent. Mr. Sproul
stated that it was the intention of the executive committee of
the Federal Open Market Committee to ask that the full Commit
tee, at a meeting in the autumn of this year, consider what sug
gestions should be made to the Treasury before it reached a de
cision with respect to its policy during 1948 regarding the of
fering of a special security which would encourage holders of
maturing savings bonds to reinvest their funds.
Chairman Eccles said that the matter would be of consider
able importance from the longer range standpoint when Series E sav
ings bonds started to mature in 1951, and that it should be given
a great deal of study before a recommendation was made to the Treas
ury.
In connection with a discussion of proposals that the Treas
ury issue a long-term security, Chairman Eccles reviewed the letter
and memorandum sent to the Treasury under date of January 22, 1947,
and which had been approved by the executive committee at its meet
ing on February 17. He also said it might be desirable to send

2/27/47 -5
another letter to the Treasury which would answer some of the argu
ments recently presented to the Treasury by insurance and banker
groups in support of a long-term marketable issue. A draft of a
memorandum prepared under date of February 27, 1947, for consider
ation in this connection was then distributed by Mr. Musgrave and
read by Mr. Carpenter. The memorandum,after stating the circum
stances under which a long-term security would be desirable, pointed
out the reasons why the objective sought would not be served by a
marketable issue and the reasons for the recommendation that a non
marketable issue of the Series G type be made available.
Messrs. Eccles and Sproul reported briefly on their discus
sion of this matter with Fiscal Assistant Secretary Bartelt at their
luncheon meeting yesterday. They had gotten the impression from the
discussion that the Treasury had not yet reached a decision on the
issuance of a long-term security, and that in their discussion Mr.
Bartelt had seemed impressed with the statement that merely putting
out a 2-1/2 per cent bond for the purpose of keeping the long-term
interest rate from declining would be dealing with the effects and
not the basic causes, since, if the long-term rate should again come
under pressure, it would probably be not because of an excess of sav
ings but because of further monetization of the debt as a result of
member banks "playing the pattern of rates". Chairman Eccles also

2/27/47 -6
said that, with the debt retirement program coming to an end, the
pressure on the long-term interest rate would likely be resumed,
and that, in the absence of the enactment by Congress of legis
lation such as that proposed in the Board's Annual Report for
1945, the Federal Open Market Committee and the Treasury would
be faced with two alternatives as a means of preventing a decline
in the long-term rate, (1) issuing enough 2-1/2 per cent long-term
bonds to satisfy the demand for that type of security, a move which
would cost the Treasury more than a rise in short-term interest
rates, or (2) permitting a rise in short-term rates so as to re
move the incentive to "play the pattern of rates". Chairman Eccles
also suggested that the Committee write a letter to the Treasury
along the lines of the memorandum mentioned above so that the Treas
ury would have this view as well as the views being presented by the
groups recommending a long-term marketable security.
After some further discussion, during which
certain changes were suggested in the language
of the memorandum, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the executive
committee was authorized to send a letter to
the Treasury transmitting substantially the
recommendations contained in the memorandum
on the issuance of a long-term security.
Reference was then made to the draft of a memorandum on changes
in Treasury bill policies which had been discussed informally by Chair
man Eccles and Mr. Sproul with the Treasury on February 17, 1947, in

2/27/47 -7
accordance with the action taken at the meeting of the executive com
mittee on February 17, 1947. Subsequently Mr. Sproul had suggested
several clarifying changes in the memorandum, which he had sent to
Chairman Eccles with a letter dated February 21, 1947. Chairman
Eccles stated that all of the changes except one were changes in
form only and were acceptable to him. The one exception would elimi
nate a statement that any change in the rate at which bills were sup
ported by the System would be made only after "concurrence by the
Treasury", and Chairman Eccles felt that change should not be made.
He stated that it was generally agreed that a change in the bill rate
would not be made without the concurrence of the Treasury, that in
asmuch as the preliminary memorandum discussed with the Treasury had
contained the words "concurrence by the Treasury" its elimination
now might raise a question as to whether the System intended to act
without Treasury concurrence, that to raise such a question at this
time would be a mistake, and that he believed the elimination would
be an assertion of independence of the System which would not in
practice be carried out.
Mr. Sproul said that he felt it was important not to abandon
whatever independence we have, by giving our proxy to the Treasury
in advance, that he agreed that it was extremely unlikely the System
would take action on this matter without concurrence by the Treasury,

2/27/47 -8
that the Committee should not feel it had been committed as to word
ing and action by a preliminary memorandum prepared in haste and for
exploratory discussions, and that he believed the relations with the
Treasury were now such that the reason for the elimination of these
words need not and would not cause any suspicion on the part of the
Treasury that the System presently has in mind increasing short-term
rates on the public debt against the wishes of the Treasury.
During a discussion of the matter, Mr. Clayton suggested a
change in the memorandum which would eliminate the paragraph con
taining the words to which Mr. Sproul objected and which would state
in the opening paragraph of the memorandum that policies followed
during the war years needed to be reviewed "with the view to reach
ing an agreement for an adjustment of policies and action to changed
conditions".
Mr. Sproul said that this wording would be acceptable to him,
and Chairman Eccles stated that he preferred the original wording
under the circumstances, but that he would not object to the reword
ing if it was approved with the understanding that he might say to
Mr. Bartelt that the wording of the preliminary memorandum had been
changed in order to enable the Committee to approve the memorandum
without the statement of a minority view, and that the change did
not mean that the Treasury would not have the complete cooperation

2/27/47 -9-
of the Federal Reserve System.
Mr. Evans said he did not favor the proposed change because
it was of no practical significance, and the retention of the lan
guage used in the preliminary memorandum would avoid the possibility
of needlessly raising an issue between the Board and the Treasury.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
upon motion duly made and seconded, the
proposed change was approved with the
understanding suggested by Chairman Eccles.
On this action Mr. Evans voted "no".
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded and by unanimous vote, the re
vised memorandum was approved unanimously
as follows for transmission to the Treas
ury:
"CHANGES IN TREASURY BILL POLICIES
"Treasury and Federal Reserve policies and procedures
followed during the war with respect to Treasury bills need
to be reviewed, now that the period of heavy war finance has
passed, with a view to reaching agreement for an adjustment
of policies and action to changed conditions. Two aspects
of these policies should be considered:
(A) Weekly replacement of Federal Reserve maturi
ties, and
(B) Elimination of the posted buying rate and re
purchase option.
"(A) Replacement of Federal Reserve Bill Maturities
"Existing arrangements, through which the Federal Reserve
Banks replace their maturing holdings of Treasury bills, involve
a cumbersome procedure initiated by the Secretary of the Treasury
(Mr. Morgenthau) which is unsatisfactory, at least now that most
of the bills are held by the Reserve System.
"The weekly refunding operations could be simplified by
permitting holders of maturing bills to exchange them for the

2/27/47 -10-
"new issue of bills. Under this procedure the Treasury would
provide that bills awarded on tenders could be paid for either
by cash or by surrender of a like face amount of the maturing
issue of bills, with an adjustment for the discount. Pending
any other change in policies, the rate could continue to be
determined as at present. The Federal Reserve System would
tender for the amount of maturing bills held in the System and
option accounts (at a price it would determine-currently
99.905 for ninety-one day bills), and would not need to con
tinue the present arrangement whereby dealers bid for bills
and sell them to the System to replace its maturities. It
would still be necessary, of course, to see that the total
of each weekly offering of bills is covered by bids at the
determined rate.
"This change in refunding procedure could be introduced
immediately and without other changes in bill policy but in
connection with it, a general revision of policy on Treasury
bills may also be considered.
"(B) Elimination of Posted Buying Rate and Repurchase Option
"The posted rate of 3/8 per cent for the purchase and re
sale of Treasury bills by the Federal Reserve Banks was a war
time measure designed to influence market rates for Government
securities and encourage banks to make full use of their re
serves. Under current conditions these arrangements no longer
serve their original purpose. With a pegged certificate rate
and only 1 1b/2il lion dollars of bill holdings outside the Fed
eral Reserve Banks, certificates have replaced bills as the
principal market instrument influencing short-term rates, and
as a medium for investment of short-term funds or the adjust
ment of reserve positions of banks. Affirmatively, the rein
statement of the Treasury bill as a money market instrument
would provide increased flexibility in debt management and
reserve adjustment.
"In considering the termination of the buying rate and
repurchase option, decisions need to be made with respect to:
(1) Timing of the actions
(2) New policy regarding amounts of bills issued
and rates
(3) Added cost to Treasury and effect on System
earnings
"(1) Timing - Because of the emphasis that the market
may place on the elimination of the buying rate, the change

2/27/47
"should be made when it is desired to exert some pressure
or restraining influence. Accordingly, it might be post
poned until there is a curtailment in the debt retirement
program to the point of lifting the pressure on member
bank reserve positions, which prevailed during the period
of large-scale debt retirement last year, and has been
accentuated by net tax receipts in the first quarter of
1947; or until private credit expansion appears to be
proceeding at too rapid a rate. April might be a pro
pitious time for such action. The change whenever made
would apply only to bills issued subsequently; existing
privileges would continue to apply to issues of bills out
standing at the time of the change, until they mature.
"(2) Bill policy - If the posted buying rate and re
purchase option on Treasury bills are eliminated, there are
various possibilities as to policies that may be followed
in issuing bills and establishing rates.
"(a) One possibility would be to permit bills to find
their level in the market. It is assumed that the bill rate
would rise toward the certificate rate which the Federal Re
serve System would continue to maintain at the Treasury is
suing rate of 7/8 per cent. The system would continue to
refund its holdings of bills into new bills to the extent
that they were not taken by the market. In view of the
probable higher rate on bills, the market probably would
take more bills than at present.
"(b) Another possibility would be for the Treasury to
discontinue entirely the issuance of bills and replace ma
turing bills with additional issues of certificates. With
the certificate rate supported at a fixed level and the bill
rate permitted to rise to approximately the same level, it
may be said that there is little reason to have outstanding
two short-term instruments serving essentially the same pur
pose.
"(c) A third possibility would be for the System to
stabilize the market for bills, not at 3/8 per cent but at
whatever rate or rates would permit the Treasury to continue
to issue one-year certificates with a 7/8 per cent coupon.
The certificate rate would be maintained largely and in
directly through the supported bill rate. Since bills do
not carry a fixed-rate coupon, their rate could be supported
without public announcement of a fixed rate; this would have
the advantage of permitting some flexibility within a narrow
range. The system would engage in open-market operations in

2/27/47 -12-
"bills for the purpose of stabilizing the bill rate at the
desired level and would refund its weekly maturities through
exchanges as proposed under (A) above. The Treasury would
continue to issue Treasury bills weekly in the same amounts
now outstanding or increase or decrease the amount to suit
its needs. The Reserve System would tender for new bills
to replace its maturities and be prepared to buy through
the market any additional amount of bills that might be
necessary to complete the sale by the Treasury of its
weekly offerings at satisfactory rates. Under such con
ditions, it is likely that the market would take more
bills than at present, which would result in partial al
lotments on our exchange subscriptions. Any such increase
in holdings of Treasury bills by other than the Reserve
System would probably be accompanied by a decrease in hold
ings of certificates of indebtedness and, conversely, any
reduction in the Reserve System's holdings of Treasury bills
would probably be accompanied by an increase in holdings of
certificates.
"These changes in policies and practices would make the
Treasury bills again a useful market instrument and would per
mit greater flexibility in monetary and debt management poli
cies, without interfering with the general policy of stabi
lizing interest rates.
"(3) Federal Reserve earnings and interest cost to the
Treasury - Elimination of the buying rate and repurchase op
tion on Treasury bills raises questions of Treasury financing
costs and System earnings. A rise in the bill rate, or the
substitution of certificates for bills, would increase Fed
eral Reserve earnings, which are already large, and would
also increase the interest cost to the Treasury. Federal Re
serve earnings will continue at a high level indefinitely, as
it is unlikely that there will be any substantial reduction
in the total amount of the System's holdings of Government
securities in the near future.
"In order that the System may pass on to the Treasury
its earnings in excess of requirements, two approaches may
be considered:
"(a) Use may be made of a heretofore dormant provision
of the Federal Reserve Act. Paragraph 4 of section 16 of that
Act authorizes the Board of Governors to charge the Federal
Reserve Banks interest on whatever amount of Federal Reserve
notes they issue in excess of the amount of gold certificates
held by the Federal Reserve Agent as collateral security for

2/27/47 -13-
"such notes. The rate of interest charged at each Federal
Reserve Bank could be fixed by the Board, from time to time,
so as to absorb some of the earnings of the Reserve Banks,
and the amounts collected could be turned over to the Treas
ury. This would require no legislation and could be made
effective by Board action immediately.
"(b) Another possibility is to impose a tax on the
earnings of the Federal Reserve Banks (similar to the old
franchise tax). This would require legislation.
"Either provision would make it possible to return to
the Treasury not only any additional earnings obtained by
the System from higher rates on Treasury bills (perhaps 50
million dollars or more a year) but also some of the earn
ings of the System on its present portfolio at existing
rates (from 50 to 75 million dollars a year)."
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of
the executive committee of the Federal
Open Market Committee as set forth in the
minutes of the meetings of the executive
committee on October 3 and December 11,
1946, and January 10 and February 17, 1947,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
A report of open market operations prepared by the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York was presented by Mr. Rouse, Manager of the
System Open Market Account covering the period from October 3, 1946,
to February 24, 1947, inclusive, together with supplementary reports
prepared by the New York Bank covering transactions executed on Feb
ruary 25, 26, and 27, 1947. During the course of Mr. Rouse's com
ments on the reports, copies of the report first mentioned were dis
tributed, and copies of all reports have been placed in the files
of the Federal Open Market Committee.
After a brief discussion, upon motion
duly made and seconded and by unanimous

2/27/47 -14
vote, the transactions in the System ac
count for the period from October 3, 1946,
to February 27, 1947, inclusive, were ap
proved, ratified, and confirmed.
Chairman Eccles then referred to the memorandum prepared by
the staff group on foreign interests under date of May 1, 1946, which
had been presented to the Committee at its meeting on October 3, 1946,
and which, in accordance with the action then taken, had been placed
on the agenda for consideration at this meeting. He said there was
no pressure from the National Advisory Council or from the Aldrich
Committee, which advises the President on the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund,
to make securities of the Bank eligible for open market purchases
by the System, that the only purpose of such action would be to pro
vide a better market, that any legislation for that purpose would
have to be initiated by the System, and that it seemed to him it
would be a mistake for the Reserve Banks to engage in stabilization
operations in securities of the International Bank, since it would
lead to pressure for similar operations in other securities and the
securities should either stand on their own feet in this market or
should not be issued.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, it was agreed that
legislation to enable the Federal Reserve
Banks to engage in stabilization operations

2/27/47 -15
in securities of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development should not be
sought by the System.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.