A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, December 9, 1947, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Clayton
Mr. Whittemore
Mr. Gidney
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Gilbert (alternate for Mr. Davis)
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Neal, Thompson, Stead, and John
H. Williams, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board
of Governors
Mr. Smith, Economist, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Arthur Willis, Special Assistant,
Securities Department, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
Messrs. Alfred H. Williams, Young, and Leedy,
alternate members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Leach and Earhart, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and San
Francisco, respectively
Messrs. Clark and Hitt, First Vice Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta
and St. Louis, respectively

12/9/47 -2
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on October 6-7, 1947, were
approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the
minutes of the meetings of the executive
committee held on October 6-7 and 14,
1947, were approved, ratified, and con
firmed.
A report of open market operations during the period October
7, 1947, to December 3, 1947, was read and commented upon by Mr. Rouse.
He also presented a supplementary report covering transactions executed
on December 4, 5, and 8, 1947. Copies of these reports have been placed
in the file of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Mr. Rouse stated in connection with his report that the recent
period had been a very difficult one from the standpoint of handling
open market operations, that on two or three occasions, because of
psychological factors, the market was dangerously close to an avalanche
of selling, but that it was to be expected that there would be a con
siderable amount of selling while the present unsettling influences,
including discussions of possible anti-inflation measures, continued.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System account for the period
October 4 to December 8, 1947, inclusive,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.

12/9/47 -3
Chairman Eccles stated that he felt there should be no concern
about the substantial amount of selling of Treasury bonds that had taken
place, that the Committee had been anticipating for a long time that
yields on long-term bonds should increase, and that to whatever extent
action in raising short-term rates had contributed to this development
it represented a step toward the objectives of open market policy dur
ing recent months. He felt, however, that the increase in short-term
rates was a negligible factor and that because of increased opportuni
ties for investment and great demands for capital funds there would
have been pressure on the long-term market if nothing had been done
to increase the short rate.
He also referred to retirement of securities held by the Fed
eral Reserve Banks as a further cause of pressure on the banks to
sell Government securities to the Reserve Banks to provide needed
reserves. He stated that the commercial banks apparently were sell
ing long-term and buying short-term issues, and that the fact that
there had been a net decrease in the System's holdings of securities
was evidence of the fact that on balance the commercial banks were
not "running away" from Government securities but rather that the
policy of the System of keeping the banks under pressure was having
the desired effect of causing them to reverse the practice that they
had been following for a considerable period of selling short-term
and buying long-term issues.

12/9/47 -4
Chairman Eccles questioned whether the System, through the
purchase of unrestricted issues and the Treasury by the purchase of
restricted issues, should continue to maintain existing prices of
Treasury bonds, thereby providing an opportunity to holders to sell
securities at a substantial premium, and outlined reasons why it
would be better to permit the prices of such securities to decline
to a level nearer par.
Mr. Sproul agreed that selling of Governments would continue
as long as there was a gap between savings and the demand for funds.
He felt that if, by a combined program of debt management and Fed
eral Reserve action the purchase by the System of long-term issues
could continue to be offset by the sale of short-terms, it would be
a very successful operation in terms of the situation that the Sys
tem has been facing. He was of the opinion that the level of mar
ket prices of securities was not a question of how much profit
might accrue to banks and other holders but of how the System could
continue to exercise its influence so that this selling of long and
buying of short Governments might continue without accelerating the
fears of holders to a point at which there would be selling of Gov
ernment securities at a rate which would force the System to put an
excessive amount of funds into the market. He stated that, while
he favored bringing the prices of bonds down, it should not be done

12/9/47 -5
at the risk of bringing about a fear psychology that would affect
adversely Treasury financing operations, the System's credit pro
gram, and the confidence in Government securities of a wide variety
of holders.
In the course of a discussion of the considerations enter
ing into a determination of the level at which prices of Treasury
obligations should be supported and the timing of changes in ex
isting support levels, it was suggested that, as was to be ex
pected, the present discussions in Congress and in committee hear
ings of various proposed methods for combating inflation were re
sulting in a sensitive and unsettled Government securities mar
ket, and that for that reason it might be better to defer any
change in the present support program until the latter part of
December, when prices could again be lowered.
During this discussion Messrs. Vardaman and Vest left the
meeting to attend the argument before the Supreme Court of the Bank
of Lakewood Village case in which the Board of Governors is involved.
Mr. Thomas presented briefly the possible effects on the
market of debt retirement through the first quarter of 1948 and
commented on a chart showing the yields on various restricted and
unrestricted issues of Government securities on December 30, 1944,
April 6, 1946, August 29, 1947, and December 1, 1947, and on the

12/9/47 -6
possible effects of a further increase in the short-term rate and
what if any spread there should be between restricted and unre
stricted and between other individual issues of Government se
curities.
Chairman Eccles renewed his suggestion that the market
should be permitted to decline nearer to par on the long-term
issues even if it did result in increased selling to the Federal
Reserve Banks. He felt that System purchases would be less if
that procedure were followed than would otherwise be the case,
In this connection he expressed the view that the System should
not purchase any additional amounts of partially tax exempt is
sues but that they should be permitted to find their natural
level in relation to other issues.
Mr. Rouse commented that these issues had been acquired
only when they had declined to a level when they were clearly
out of line with prices of other issues.
Mr. Sproul stated that the problem was whether Govern
ment security prices should be permitted to decline further
while the market was subject to the disturbing influences of
current discussions of measures to combat inflation or whether
the present program should be continued until the market had
steadied to a point where a resumption of a downward movement

12/9/47 -7
could be undertaken without encouraging selling throughout the list
in addition to selling for the purpose of meeting demands for re
serve funds.
Chairman Eccles said he agreed that action to allow market
prices to decline should not be taken immediately but that the Com
mittee should recognize that, because of the retirement of debt out
of Treasury cash balances and other factors which would put pres
sure on the market, there would be continuous selling of securities
over the next several months and the System should not be disturbed
by a situation it had intentionally helped to bring about.
Mr. Sproul responded that the Committee need not be dis
turbed by that situation but by the temporary situation that might
encourage unnecessary liquidation in addition to the selling re
ferred to by Chairman Eccles. There was not a difference in ap
proach, he said, but a question when the downward movement should
again be resumed.
Mr. Rouse expressed the view that it was a question whether
the Committee should run the risk of panicky conditions in the Gov
ernment securities market for the benefit of a 3/8 or 1/2 per cent
decline on the restricted 2-1/2's and he questioned whether such
a move was worth that risk. He agreed that the market should be
placed on a lower level at the first opportunity without incurring
such a risk.

12/9/47 -8
Chairman Eccles stated he had discussed the matter with Under
ecretary Wiggins, who also questioned the desirability of maintaining
existing premiums on bank eligible securities.
Mr. Thomas suggested that, if action to reduce the level of
prices were not taken now, there might not be another opportunity
over the next four months because of pressures resulting from retire
ment of Government debt.
Mr. Rouse stated that if prices were to be reduced the decline
should take place quickly.
After some further discussion of the timing of action and of
the undesirability of permitting banks and other holders to realize
substantial premiums on their holdings of securities, Chairman Eccles
questioned whether, since it was recognized that insurance companies,
savings banks, and other investors would be forced to sell bank eli
gibles to meet more favorable investment demands, the System should
make it possible for them to sell at substantial premiums rather
than to make a downward adjustment quickly and put real support
under the market at the lower prices agreed upon. He recognized
that the argument would be made that, while anti-inflation measures
were being debated in the present special session of the Congress,
there was greater uncertainty in the market than otherwise would be
the case, and that probably after the session had recessed the mar
ket would be quieter and provide a better situation in which to act.

12/9/47 -9
He said that if the System could get through the period of the spe
cial session with purchases of between one and two hundred million
of securities a week action might be deferred that long at which
time if there was continued selling, indicating an opinion in the
market that the System would not support existing rates, he would
favor letting the market decline immediately. He felt strongly
that action should not wait as long as four months and Mr. Sproul
agreed that it was not a question of waiting for any such period
but of choosing our time in the immediate future.
There was a discussion of the suggestion that the market be
allowed to decline 1/32 or 2/32 before Congress recessed which might
make for an easier adjustment later and Mr. Rouse expressed the view
that that would result in increased selling to avoid further declines
in price and that it would be better to be prepared to let prices de
cline by 1/4 or more of a point at one time.
There was general agreement with the suggestion that there
would be less selling if the market were held at the present level
until action was taken to let prices fall immediately to a point
at which they would be aggressively supported than would be the
case if prices were allowed to go off more gradually.
At this point Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Chairman of the
Board of Governors, joined the meeting.

12/9/47 -10
During a discussion of these alternatives and of the point to
which prices should be allowed to decline it was suggested that the
restricted 2-1/2's should be held at par or slightly above and that
the rest of the market should be allowed to find its level in rela
tion to that price and the 1-1/8 per cent certificate.
Mr. Szymczak inquired whether there had been any discussion
with representatives of the Treasury of the question whether any is
sues should be allowed to decline below par, and it was agreed that
before a decision was made on this point it should be taken up with
the Treasury.
At the conclusion of the discussion, it was agreed that, in
the event the market continued substantially as at present, the ex
ecutive committee should carry out the existing policy with respect
to support of the market until after the Treasury's January refund
ing had been completed, at which time prices of bonds should be per
mitted rapidly to decline, if the market did not support itself, to
a level of not more than 100-1/2 and not less than par on the longest
restricted 2-1/2 per cent issue and to not less than par on a 1-1/8
one-year certificate. If, in the interim, market selling should in
crease substantially, the executive committee would be authorized
to permit prices to decline as rapidly as was consistent with the
maintenance of orderly market conditions. If it should appear in

12/9/47 -11
carrying out these instructions that some issues of bonds might go
below par, the Committee would be authorized, after consultation
with appropriate representatives of the Treasury, to determine
whether these issues would be allowed to decline below par or wheth
er they should be held at or above par.
Chairman Eccles then reviewed the seven point program out
lined at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on Oc
tober 7, 1947, stating that a letter setting forth the program had
been sent to the Secretary of the Treasury under date of October 14,
1947. With respect to specific steps in the program, he stated that
the Treasury had accepted the Committee's recommendations as to Treas
ury financing during the remainder of this year, that the Treasury
was following the recommendations with respect to transfers of funds
from war loan deposit accounts to the Federal Reserve Banks, that
the statement stressing the dangers inherent in an excessive expan
sion of consumer credit and urging the adoption of self-imposed re
straints had been issued by the Board and each Federal Reserve Bank,
and that a joint statement from the bank supervisory agencies re
lating to credit extensions had been prepared, issued, and favorably
received. He went on to say that the only parts of the program which
had not been put into effect were (1) an increase in discount rates
at the Federal Reserve Banks, (2) an increase in reserve require
ments for central reserve city banks, and (3) the proposed policy

2/ /47 -12
1 9
with respect to refunding maturing savings bonds.
Chairman Eccles stated that the Board of Governors had given
consideration at a recent meeting to action to be taken to increase
the discount rates at the Reserve Banks and felt that they should
be increased to 1-1/4 per cent within the near future. He went on
to say that he and Mr. Sproul had had an exchange of correspondence
on the question whether the discount rate should be raised to 1-1/8
or 1-1/4 per cent, Mr. Sproul taking the position that the increase
should be to 1-1/8 per cent and he taking the position that it should
be to 1-1/4 per cent.
The reasons which Chairman Eccles and Mr. Sproul gave for
their respective positions were discussed and the effect of an in
crease in rates to either suggested level and of its timing was con
sidered in the light of conditions existing in the Government secu
rity market and the possible effects upon System open market oper
ations. It was the consensus of those present that, for the rea
sons discussed, an increase in discount rates should be deferred
until after the announcement of refunding of Treasury securities
maturing in January and that action might be taken by the Banks
in time for approval by the Board on Friday, December 19, 1947
for announcement after the market closed, to become effective on
Monday, December 22.

12/9/47 -13.
The meeting then recessed and reconvened at 2:30 p.m. with
the same attendance as at the end of the morning session except
that Messrs. Vardaman and Vest were present and Mr. Thurston and
Mr. Stead were not in attendance.
During a discussion of the program to be followed with re
spect to the retirement of the Government debt, including the re
tirement of securities held by the Federal Reserve Banks, there
was distributed a copy of a memorandum prepared in the Division
of Research and Statistics of the Board of Governors under date
of December 4, 1947, on the financing outlook. The memorandum
stated that the Treasury cash balances during the period Decem
ber 1, 1947, through June 30, 1948, would be large enough to per
mit the retirement of $100 million of bills each week through the
first week of January and $200 million a week thereafter through
May and that if full exchange were offered for every maturing is
sue of certificates and bonds during that period it would be pos
sible to retire System holdings of these maturing issues except
in June. If this program were followed, there would be a retire
ment of $4.9 billion of certificates and bonds and $4.7 billion
of bills, all but $800 million of which would be held by the Fed
eral Reserve Banks.
Chairman Eccles expressed the opinion that in view of the
changing situation it would be desirable for the full Committee not

12/9/47 -14
to plan too far ahead but to authorize the executive committee, de
pending on the amount of Treasury balances available, (1) to retire
Federal Reserve holdings of maturing securities during the first
quarter of 1948, including $100 million of bills through the first
week of December and $200 million a week thereafter, (2) to pro
pose to the Treasury the refunding of the remaining certificates
and bonds maturing in that period into 12- to 14-month securities
which would have a proper relationship to a 1-1/8 per cent one
year certificate, unless in the meantime it should become evident
(which was not expected) that a higher rate would be desirable,
and (3) to recommend, in consultation with representatives of the
Treasury, the amounts to be held in Treasury war loan accounts
during the period.
Messrs. Sproul and Rouse questioned whether the entire
amount of System holdings of January 1 and February 1 certificates
should be retired and whether the program of retirement of System
holdings should be as rapid during the first quarter of 1948 as
Chairman Eccles had proposed. Mr. Rouse stated that it might be
found, after careful analysis, that the situation in the market
would be such that it would be desirable to pay off some of the
February certificates and March 15 bonds held outside the Federal
Reserve Banks and thus relieve the pressure on the market result
ing from March tax payments, and that it would be desirable to

12/9/47 -15
examine the situation from week to week to determine what the pro
gram should be.
In a discussion of his suggestion, Mr. Rouse stated that
he agreed that the program followed should be one of keeping un
remitting pressure on the reserve position of member banks during
the first six months of 1948, with the exception of a short period
around the first of February when he would put funds back into the
market to relieve the extreme pressure which would exist at that
time.
The matter was also considered in the light of the possible
return flow of currency following the year end and of further gold
imports.
Chairman Eccles indicated that he would not be willing to
follow Mr. Rouse's suggestion unless action were also taken by the
Board of Governors during the period to increase reserve require
ments of banks in central reserve cities.
The proposal was made that, because of the substantial
changes in the situation that might occur before another meeting
of the full Committee, the best procedure to follow would be to
have a general understanding with respect to the program which
the executive committee would follow. This suggestion was agreed
to unanimously and it was understood that, in carrying out the

12/9/47 -16
direction of the full Committee with respect to operations in the
System account, the executive committee, in consultation with repre
sentatives of the Treasury, would follow a program of retirement of
Federal Reserve Bank held securities, and submit recommendations to
the Treasury with respect to the maintenance of Treasury balances
in the war loan accounts and with the Federal Reserve Banks which,
in the judgment of the executive committee in the light of condi
tions as they develop during the period, would be appropriate to
keep pressure on the market and utilize to the best advantage the
large Treasury cash balances that would be available during the
period.
In a discussion of the authority to be granted by the full
Committee to the executive committee Mr. Rouse suggested that be
cause of conditions that would prevail in connection with Treasury
refunding operations and tax collections it would seem desirable
that the executive committee have authority to increase or decrease
the amount of securities held in the System account by as much as
$3 billion.
After a discussion of this sugges
tion, upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the following di
rection to the executive committee was
approved with the understanding that the
limitations contained in the direction
would include commitments for the System
open market account:

12/9/47 -17
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for such transactions for the System open market account,
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury
(including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of
maturing securities, and letting maturities run off with
out replacement), as may be necessary, in the light of
the general credit situation of the country, for the
practical administration of the account, for the main
tenance of stable and orderly conditions in the Govern
ment security market, and for the purpose of relating
the supply of funds in the market more closely to the
needs of commerce and business; provided that the ag
gregate amount of securities held in the account at the
close of this date other than special short-term certif
icates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for
the temporary accommodation of the Treasury shall not
be increased or decreased by more than $3,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee,
to arrange for the purchase for the System open market
account direct from the Treasury of such amounts of
special short-term certificates of indebtedness as may
be necessary from time to time for the temporary accom
modation of the Treasury; provided that the total amount
of such certificates held in the account at any one time
shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
Chairman Eccles stated that, in accordance with the action
at the last meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, the ex
ecutive committee at its meeting just prior to this meeting agreed
to propose to the full Committee that it approve the following rec
ommendation which had been made by Messrs. Rouse and Smead, Director
of the Division of Bank Operations of the Board of Governors, with
the understanding that (1) the complete details would be worked out
and the changed procedure would be put into effect on January 1,

12/9/47 -18
1948, and (2) a full written statement of the procedure would be
submitted at the next meeting of the executive committee and the
Federal Open Market Committee for ratification:
1. That interest bearing securities in the Account be
allocated at the first of the year on the basis of
the expense and dividend ratio of each Bank as against
all the Banks; that this allocation be the only one
for the year; and that the same basis of allocation
continue in use. However, profits and losses on in
terest bearing securities would continue to be al
located on the basis of the average holding ratio
for the preceding five years.
2. Holdings of Treasury bills would likewise be allo
cated on the expense and dividend ratios to the ex
tent that the several Reserve Banks were able to ac
quire such securities within the limits of maintain
ing the reserve ratio of 35 per cent or such other
percentage as the Committee may determine. Profit
and loss on Treasury bills would be allocated on
the basis of the current Treasury bill holding ratio
of each Bank as of the day profit or loss is realized.
Chairman Eccles also said that the executive committee
would recommend that the executive committee be authorized, should
circumstances develop between meetings of the Federal Open Market
Committee requiring some adjustment in the allocation procedure,
to take such action as appeared to be desirable pending the next
meeting of the Committee.
In discussing the recommendation Mr. Rouse stated that an
effort had been made to simplify the procedure of allocation and
make it more understandable to those who have to deal with it only

12/9/47 -19
occasionally and to reduce the amount of work involved in carrying
out the allocations.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the recommenda
tions of the executive committee were
approved.
Mr. Leedy suggested that consideration be given to adopting
a procedure of allocation that would tend to equalize the surplus
accounts of the Federal Reserve Banks in relation to their paid
in capital accounts.
Chairman Eccles stated that, in accordance with action taken
at the meeting on October 7, the executive comittee had discussed
the proposal made in a memorandum from Mr. Rouse to Mr. Sproul under
date of September 30, 1947, that the authority given by the Federal
Open Market Committee to the Federal Reserve Banks to purchase Gov
ernment securities under resale agreements be restored, and that,
while it had not reached agreement as to the action to be taken,
the executive committee had approved unanimously a suggestion that
a memorandum be prepared which would state fully the reasons that
might be advanced for and against action by the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee granting the authority, that the memorandum be sent
to all members of the Federal Open Market Committee before the
next meeting of the executive committee, and that the recommenda
tion be made at this meeting of the full Committee that the exec-

12/9/47 -20
utive committee be authorized to grant the authority if, after con
sideration of the reasons for and against such action, the committee
felt at its next meeting that the authority should be granted.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the recommendation
of the executive committee was approved.
It was tentatively agreed that the next meetings of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee should be held on February 27 and March
1, 1948, with the understanding that the next meeting of the Presi
dents' Conference would be held in Washington on February 24-26,
1948.
Chairman Eccles stated that the matters which had been dis
cussed at this meeting were of very great importance from the stand
point of their possible effects on the Government security market,
that there were many people who would like to know the actions the
Committee proposed to take, and that it would be very unfortunate
if anyone present should talk about or make any statement in con
nection with the Committee's discussions which would disclose in
any way the nature of the discussions. Accordingly, he suggested
that everyone present be on his guard not to make any statements,
inadvertent or otherwise, which might give any indication of what
the future policies of the System might be with respect to open
market operations or discount rates.

12/9/47 -21
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary
Approved:
Chairman.