A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Thursday, June 5, 1947, at 2:45 p.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Clayton
Mr. Whittemore
Mr. Gidney
Mr. Davis
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. McCracken and Stead, Associate
Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Chairman
of the Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary of the
Board of Governors
Mr. Musgrave, Chief, and Mr. Smith,
Economist, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Alfred H. Williams, Young, Gilbert,
and Leedy, alternate members of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee
Messrs. Leach, McLarin, and Earhart, Presi
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,
respectively
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of
the meetings of the Federal Open Market

6/5/47
Committee held on February 27-28 and
March 1, 1947, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the
minutes of the meetings of the executive
committee on February 27, March 1, April
1, and May 2, 1947, were approved, rati
fied, and confirmed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the action taken
by the members of the Federal Open Market
Committee on April 2, 1947, pursuant to a
recommendation of the executive committee,
to increase from 1-1/2 billion to 2 billion
dollars the limitation on the authority of
the executive committee with respect to
increasing or decreasing the total amount
of securities in the System account, con
tained in the first paragraph of the direc
tion issued at the meeting on March 1,
1947, was approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
members of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee on April 24, 1947, (a) authorizing each
Federal Reserve Bank to place weekly
tenders for new Treasury bills in an amount
not exceeding the amount of weekly maturi
ties in the option account and authorizing
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to
place tenders for new Treasury bills in an
amount not exceeding the amount of weekly
maturities in the System open market account,
and (b) amending the direction issued by the
Committee on March 1, 1945, with respect to
the purchase of Treasury bills to read as
follows, were approved, ratified, and con
firmed. The circumstances under which these
actions were taken are set forth in the
minutes of the meeting of the executive com
mittee on May 2, 1947:
Until otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Commit
tee, the 12 Federal Reserve Banks are directed to purchase all

6/5/47 -3-
Treasury bills that may be offered to such Banks on a discount
basis at the rate of 3/8 per cent per annum, any such pur
chases to be upon the condition that the Federal Reserve Bank,
upon the request of the seller on or before the last business
day preceding the closing day on which the Treasury will accept
tenders of the bills for new Treasury bills, will sell to him
Treasury bills of like amount and maturity at the same rate of
discount. All bills purchased under this direction are to be
held by the purchasing Federal Reserve Bank in its own account
and prompt reports of all transactions in Treasury bills are to
be made to the Manager of the System Open Market Account.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the action of the
members of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee on May 5, 1947, in issuing the
following direction to the Federal Re
serve Banks was approved, ratified, and
confirmed. The reasons for the direction
are referred to in the minutes of the
meeting of the executive committee on May
2, 1947:
On the morning of the closing day for the receipt of tend
ers for new Treasury bills (generally Monday), each Federal
Reserve Bank will send advice to reach the Manager of the Sys
tem open market account, not later than one p.m. (on Monday,
May 5, not later than 2 p.m.) New York time, the amount of all
maturing bills subject to the option and the amount of all
maturing bills not subject to the option held in the Bank's
option account, which will be transferred at par on the
maturity date of the bills (generally Thursday) to the System
open market account. Bills acquired on May 1 in exchange for
maturing bills will, as a separate transaction, be transferred
to System account at book value on Wednesday, May 7, and pay
ment therefor will be made through interdistrict settlement
fund. With respect to maturing Treasury bills sold to any Fed
eral Reserve Bank prior to April 25, 1947, for which the seller
still retains the option to repurchase at any time before
maturity, the Federal Reserve Bank will honor any request by
the seller to repurchase such bills and immediately advise the
Manager of the System open market account the amount of bills
repurchased by the seller. The amount of bills transferred by
the Federal Reserve Bank to the System open market account on
the maturity date will be reduced by the amount of bills re
purchased by the seller. The Manager of the System open market
account will provide for such contingencies from bills avail
able by reason of partial allotment and by tendering for

6/5/47 -4
exchange a smaller amount of bills than the total holdings in
the System account.
On the maturity date of the bills transferred to the Sys
tem open market account, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
will credit each other Federal Reserve Bank, through the
interdistrict settlement fund, the amount of maturity value of
the bills transferred with immediate advice of the amount so
credited and the disposition to be made of the maturing bills
(which will be cancelled and shipped to the Treasury for re
demption or in settlement for allotment on exchange tender in
New York for the System open market account, and the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York will furnish the other Federal Reserve
Banks with shipment numbers).
A report of open market operations prepared by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York covering the period from March 1 to June 3, 1947, inclu
sive, was presented by Mr. Rouse, who read the principal portions of the
report. A copy of the report has been placed in the files of the Federal
Open Market Committee.
After a brief discussion, upon
motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account for the period February
28 to June 3, 1947, inclusive, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed,
Mr. Sproul stated that the Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
had been advised of the recommendations made to the Treasury since the
last meeting with respect to debt retirement and that the Treasury had
followed substantially the program recommended by the Federal Open Market
Committee and its executive committee up to the end of May. In connection
with Mr. Sproul's comment, there were distributed copies of a memorandum
prepared by Mr. Musgrave under date of June 6, 1947, entitled "Financing
outlook".
With respect to the discontinuance of the posted rate on Treasury

6/5/47 -5
bills, Mr. Sproul stated that following the meeting of the executive
committee on May 2, 1947, at which he reported on discussions with
representatives of the Treasury during the period between that meeting
and the meeting of the full Committee on March 1, 1947, further in
formal discussions had taken place and that there were certain aspects
of the matter, including the possible effect on the certificate rate,
that the Treasury wished to consider further. He also said that when
the executive committee met with Under Secretary Wiggins at luncheon
on May 2, 1947, the latter suggested possible alternatives to an
announcement that the posted rate would be discontinued and expressed
concern that any action, looking to an increase in the short term
rate, might cause some outstanding obligations to sell at less than
par. Mr. Wiggins asked, Mr. Sproul said, that the members of the ex
ecutive committee consider the possibility of substituting 180-day
bills (to which the posted rate would not apply) for existing 90-day
bills with the thought that by this procedure any announcement of the
elimination of the posted rate could be avoided. Mr. Sproul went on
to say that, when Chairman Eccles and he met with Messrs. Snyder,
Wiggins, and Bartelt on June 3, the opinion was expressed to the Treas
ury representatives that their suggestions would not be effective in
solving the problems at which they would be directed, that they might
confuse the market, and that they might make it more difficult to
achieve the agreed objectives. They were also told, Mr. Sproul said,
that the Federal Open Market Committee was still of the opinion that
the posted rate should be eliminated as soon as possible, that any

6/5/47 -6
repercussions resulting from that action would be minor ones, that when
the time came to change the rate on certificates the System had weapons
in its hands effectively to meet any adverse reaction that might take
place, and that any fear of certificates selling below par was un
realistic because certificates were considered in terms of yield and a
slight dip below par would not concern anyone. Mr. Sproul added that
he had the impression that the Treasury representatives agreed that the
posted rate should be discontinued but still had questions as to when
it should be done. While Under Secretary Wiggins indicated that a de
cision would be forthcoming from the Treasury this week, nothing further
had been heard. Mr. Sproul made the further comment that, in addition
to discussing these problems with the Treasury officials, he and Chair
man Eccles had continued to advocate the issuance by the Treasury of a
long-term series G-type security, and that the Treasury had also seemed
receptive to this idea but thus far had been reluctant to put it into
effect.
Following Mr. Sproul's report, Mr. Musgrave's memorandum on the
financing outlook was read and there was a discussion of the further
recommendations to be made to the Treasury with respect to debt retire
ment.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the following letter
to the Secretary of the Treasury was
approved and it was understood that during
the period before the next meeting of the
full Committee and in accordance with the
practice that had been followed during the

6/5/47
Treasury debt retirement program, the ex
ecutive committee would continue to sub
mit monthly recommendations with respect
to further debt retirement:
"At the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee which
was held yesterday, the Committee discussed the outlook for the
Treasury debt retirement program with particular reference to
the July 1 maturity. After examination of the estimated posi
tion of the Treasury at the end of the month and the uncer
tainty pertaining to such position, the Committee recommends
that the Treasury offer to exchange the maturing certificates
for a like amount of new 12-months 7/8 per cent certificates.
If it should develop later in this month that additional funds
will be available and the fiscal outlook justifies their immedi
ate use for debt retirement, it is the Committee's view that
the retirement of additional Treasury bills provide a more
flexible as well as a particularly suitable means of utilizing
such funds. In that case, the Executive Committee should be
glad to discuss with you the further retirement of Treasury
bills."
Chairman Eccles then stated that, at its meeting earlier today,
the executive committee discussed briefly the suggestion that the July,
August, and September certificate maturities be replaced as they matured
with certificates maturing July 1, 1948, so that if in connection with
the October issue of certificates it should be determined to increase the
rate to, say, one per cent, the longest outstanding certificate issue
would be nine months and the rate could be increased without any of the
outstanding issues falling below par. Chairman Eccles added that no con
clusions had been reached by the executive committee on this question,
but suggested that it might be desirable for the full Committee to author
ize the executive committee to make a recommendation to the Treasury along
these lines if, after further study, such a procedure seemed desirable.
Mr. Evans stated that he was opposed to increasing the rate on
certificates because the burden of such an increase would fall on the

6/5/47 -8
farmers, the small businessmen, and the taxpayers. He recalled the
situation after World War I when the Federal Reserve System was blamed
for increasing interest rates, tightening credit, and causing a fall
in prices, and he said that in some places the Federal Reserve System
was still held responsible. He further stated that, in his opinion,
an increase in the certificate rate would have no effect on the infla
tionary pressures, that the lifting of controls had removed whatever
brakes the Government had on inflationary pressures, that we now have
inflation, and that an increase in the certificate rate would have no
noticeable effect upon these pressures and would be about as effective
as a slingshot against a grizzly bear. He also stated that an increase
in the certificate rate would not endanger the long-term rate on E, F,
and G bonds which individuals purchase. This rate is fixed and it is as
low as it should go. The banks would be the only group to gain if the
certificate rate were increased. He stated that this would be very un
fortunate from a public relations standpoint, and that as long as the
banks are getting such a large part of their revenue from interest on
Government securities they could ill afford to ask for increased taxes
in order to increase these earnings. He stated that there were other
ways, as outlined in the Board's Annual Report, for handling the situa
tion and that the arguments for increasing the certificate rate were not
acceptable to him and he was opposed to such an increase. He favored,
as in the past, eliminating the repurchase agreement for bills and also
allowing the bill rate to fluctuate under the present certificate rate.

6/5/47 -9
Mr. Sproul said that the proposal referred to by Chairman Eccles
would be for the purpose of "clearing the decks" in the event it was
decided later to increase the short-term rate but that it did not con
template an immediate recommendation that the rate be increased.
Chairman Eccles stated that while the steps that had been taken
by the System and the Treasury had stopped temporarily the decline in
yields on long-term securities resulting from "playing the pattern of
rates", it could be expected that the long-term issues would continue to
be under pressure, that the sale of securities from trust accounts or
the issuance of a long-term restricted security would not correct the
situation, that the Treasury representatives felt it would be a mistake
for the long-term savings rate to decline further, and that, if there
were an increase in the short-term rate to prevent further monetization
of the debt, it would be possible to determine whether the pressure on
the long-term rate represented an excess of savings funds over the demand
for such funds or whether the pressure resulted from the difference in
long- and short-term rates. He also said that, since Congress had not
seen fit to give the System the additional powers suggested in the
Board's Annual Report for 1945, the Committee was faced with the alterna
tives of allowing the long-term rate to decline further or permitting
the short-term rate to rise to a point where there would be no incentive
for banks to continue to "play the pattern of rates". He recognized
that such an increase would not be effective in combating inflationary
conditions and that any increase in rates for that purpose would have to

6/5/47 -10
be so large that it would completely upset the Government securities
market.
Mr. Sproul stated that an increase in the short-term rate would
not be for the purpose of combating present inflation but rather for the
purpose of preventing further increases in the already excessive money
supply. Action would be taken in the light of the System's responsi
bility for general monetary and credit conditions, and not for the
advantage or disadvantage of any group or segment of the community. It
is the only action available to the System which will help prevent
further playing of the "pattern of rates" and further monetization of
the public debt, by narrowing the spread between short and long rates
and by creating some uncertainty with respect to rates.
In a discussion of the possible effects of an increase in short
term rates, Mr. Evans questioned whether it would be effective in achiev
ing the desired results and suggested that all other possible alterna
tives should first be thoroughly explored. He also questioned whether
there should be an increase in the short-term rate at a time when
Congress was acting to cut Government expenses, decrease taxes, and dis
continue other existing instruments for combating inflation such as the
authority to regulate consumer credit.
In response to Mr. Evans' inquiry as to how high it was thought
the short-term rate would have to go to have the desired effect, Chair
man Eccles stated that the rate should be permitted to go up by steps
to perhaps 1-1/4 per cent as a maximum. The reason for his opinion was
that the yield on securities held by banks which would mature over the

6/5/47 -11
next five years would not average more than 1-1/4 per cent and, if they
could refund these maturities into a 1-1/4 per cent obligation, the
pressure on the long-term rate would cease.
Chairman Eccles also said that the Treasury was considering the
problem of refunding the bonds and the notes which mature this fall,
that some of the members of the Treasury staff had suggested a 1-1/2
per cent market issue, but that he would be opposed to such an issue
because it would establish rights in the maturing securities and, as
long as the System was supporting the market and in effect making all
issues of Government securities demand obligations, there was no point
in the Treasury paying 1-1/2 per cent for a 7-year obligation which
would be eligible for purchase by the banks.
Mr. Evans stated that he would regard an increase in the short
term rate with greater favor if there could be an agreement by the
banks and the Treasury as to what securities the banks would hold, and
the interest rate they would receive. He questioned whether an in
crease in the short-term rate would be very effective in preventing
banks from selling short-term and purchasing long-term issues.
Chairman Eccles commented that the short-term rates on Govern
ment securities tended to establish the rates on private borrowing,
that these rates were so low at the present time that banks were taking
risks at rates which would not give them sufficient cushion for the
absorption of losses, and that as long as they were under pressure
because of low rates to maintain earnings they would continue to make

6/5/47 -12
such loans and would sell short-term Governments if necessary to obtain
the required funds.
Chairman Eccles also said that at hearings before committees of
Congress recently he had discussed the proposal to increase the short
term rate and that there was no unfavorable reaction to the proposal.
He added that, while the Treasury appeared to be in accord with such an
increase, it was a question of timing and he was satisfied from his
most recent discussion with Under Secretary of the Treasury Wiggins that
the Treasury would not concur in the elimination of the posted rate on
Treasury bills or any action looking toward an increase in the short
term rate until after the end of June.
At the conclusion of the discussion, Chairman Eccles suggested
that the full Committee authorize the executive committee to make a
recommendation to the Treasury with respect to the consolidation at
maturity of existing Treasury certificates into four or five issues
each year if, after further study, it seemed to the executive committee
to be desirable that such action be taken as a preliminary step to an
increase in the short-term rate.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
Chairman Eccles' suggestion was approved,
Mr. Evans voting "no".
Reference was then made to the recommendation approved by the
Committee on February 28, 1947, that a long-term restricted bond be
issued by the Treasury. Chairman Eccles suggested that the Committee
authorize renewal of the recommendation to the Treasury, and that the
letter containing this recommendation suggest that the Treasury consult

6/5/47 -13
with the executive committee before making sales of long-term market
issues of Treasury securities from Government accounts, because of the
close relationship of such sales to open market operations which were the
continuing concern of the Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the following
letter to the Treasury was approved:
"At the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
which was held on June 5, we again considered the desirability
of the Treasury issuing a G-type bond such as was recommended
by the Committee in March of this year.
"The Committee writes to reaffirm its earlier recommenda
tion. For a number of reasons, it appears highly desirable
that prompt action be taken in this matter. In recent months,
there has been an increasing need for meeting pressures on
the long-term yield which can not and should not be met in
definitely by sales of marketable bonds for Government accounts
and we think it important that a policy on the longer term
issue should be formulated prior to dealing with the refunding
of the large volume of fall maturities.
"Mr. Sproul and I are at your disposal for further dis
cussion of the matter, looking to the early issuance of such
securities. We should also like to have the opportunity to
consult with you from time to time if and when further sales
of securities from Government accounts are contemplated because
of their close relationship to the Open Market operations which
are the continuing concern of the Committee."
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, it was agreed that,
pending action to discontinue the posted
rate on Treasury bills, no changes should
be made in the direction issued by the
Federal Open Market Committee to the
twelve Federal Reserve Banks on April 24,
1947, with respect to the purchase of
Treasury bills for the respective Banks'
option accounts.
There was unanimous agreement that the authority issued to the ex
ecutive committee at the last meeting of the full Committee to direct the

6/5/47 -14
execution of transactions for the System account should be changed (1)
to bring the direction into conformity with the procedure now in effect
for transferring maturing bills held in the option accounts of the Fed
eral Reserve Banks to the Syste account and the exchange of bills in
the System account for new bills, and (2) to increase from 1-1/2 billion
to 2 billion dollars the limitation contained in the first paragraph of
the authority of the executive committee to increase or decrease the
amount of securities held in the System account.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the fol
lowing direction to the executive commit
tee was approved, with the understanding
that the limitations contained in the
direction would include commitments for
purchases and sales of securities for the
System open market account:
The executive committee be directed, until otherwise di
rected by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for
such transactions for the System open market account, either
in the open market or directly with the Treasury (including
purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing securi
ties, and letting maturities run off without replacement), as
may be necessary in the practical administration of the
account or for the purpose of maintaining an orderly market
in Treasury securities and a general level of prices and
yields of Government securities which will support the Treas
ury issuing rates of 7/8 per cent for one-year certificates and
2-1/2 per cent for 27-year bonds restricted as to ownership;
provided that the aggregate amount of securities held in the
account at the close of this date [other than (1) maturing bills
transferred to the System account from the option accounts of
the Federal Reserve Banks pursuant to the direction issued by
the Federal Open Market Committee on May 5, 1947, bills purchased
outright in the market on a discount basis at the rate of 3/8
per cent per annum, bills redeemed or exchanged at maturity, and
bills taken in exchange for maturing bills, and (2) special
short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to
time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury] shall not
be increased or decreased by more than $2,000,000,000.

6/5/47 -15
That the executive committee be further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to
arrange for the purchase for the System open market account
direct from the Treasury of such amounts of special short-term
certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to
time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided
that the amount of such certificates held in the account at
any one time shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
There was a discussion of the time for the next meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee and it was tentatively agreed that the
meeting should be held on October 2 and 3, 1947.
The meeting then recessed and reconvened at 10:00 a.m. on Friday,
June 6, 1947, with the same attendance as at the earlier session except
that Mr. Townsend, Assistant General Counsel, Messrs. Neal, John H.
Williams, and Thompson, Associate Economists, Mr. Parry, Director of
the Division of Security Loans of the Board of Governors, and Messrs.
Ralph A. Young and Morse, Assistant Directors of the Division of Research
and Statistics of the Board of Governors, were also present.
Chairman Eccles called for the reports of the economists and Mr.
Thomas asked that Mr. Neal give the first report covering prospects for
the future in industry and trade. This report was followed by a dis
cussion of the agricultural outlook by Mr. McCracken, a report on the
real estate situation by Mr. Thompson, and a statement by Mr. Stead with
respect to employment, wages, and labor-management relations.
Copies of the economists' statements have been placed in the
files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Mr. Thomas stated that the picture painted by the four statements
of the economists was one of inflation, the kind of condition that the

6/5/47 -16
System, in considering proper fiscal and monetary policies during the
war, had sought to avoid. Because of the termination of controls, he
said, inflation had developed although it was not nearly as serious as
it might have been if certain policies of control had not been adopted.
He added that, although there were differences of opinion as to the
causes of inflation, it was important to recognize that the alleged
causes, such as high prices, price support activities, demands of labor,
wage policies of the Government, high profit margins in the building
industry, etc., were the results as well as causes and none of them
would have caused the rise in prices that had taken place if it had not
been for the war and the resulting shortages of goods. He also said
that the question was what should be done about the existing situation,
and that while it appeared that the country was approaching or had passed
the peak of inflation the downturn was not evident enough at this time to
justify concern about bolstering the economy against a recession. It
was his opinion that throughout the war and postwar period there had been
too many fears of postwar deflation, with the result that actions which
should have been taken to counteract inflation were not taken, because of
the fear that they would result in contraction, and that, although any
downturn should be taken care of at the proper time, the important thing
at the moment was to stop abnormal pressures on the inflationary side.
Mr. John H. Williams shared Mr. Thomas' view, stating that this
was a time when a "hands-off" policy might be pursued and that the coun
try had become so fearful of deflation during the 30's that there was a
tendency to adopt measures to shore up the economy whenever there was an

6/5/47 -17
indication of contraction. He referred to the suggestion that national
income should not be permitted to go down too fast, as the decline might
get out of hand. He felt that this situation would not occur because,
for one reason, the business community was never as aware of the nature
of this problem as it was at the present time, and that there was a
great deal of available buying power and of unfilled demand particularly
for durable goods and it would not take a very substantial correction in
the situation to make that demand effective. He thought that there
would and should be a mild recession which would be corrective in nature
and would set the stage for a long period of balanced prosperity. He
made the further comment that many people were concerned about the
foreign picture and how it might affect the economy of this country, but
that we were faced with a similar situation following the First World
War which was largely cleared up and followed by a period of prosperity.
It was his opinion that the foreign situation probably would continue to
be a sustaining factor in our economy for some time to come. He was very
much concerned about the British and German situation but he did not
think that the foreign picture in its entirety would constitute a de
flationary factor as far as the economy of this country was concerned
because the United States would be called upon to supply goods and
services abroad for a long time to come which would help the economy in
a period of adjustment.
Mr. Rouse presented a supplementary
report (a copy of which has been placed
in the files) covering operations in the
System open market account on June 4 and

6/5/47 -18
5, 1947, and, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, these
transactions were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary,
Approved:
Chairman.