A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Saturday, March 1, 1947, at 10:10 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Clayton
Mr. Whittemore
Mr. Gidney
Mr. Davis
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open Market
Account
Mr. John H. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary to the
Board of Governors
Mr. Musgrave, Chief, and Mr. Smith,
Economist, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics
of the Board of Governors
Messrs. Alfred H. Williams and Gilbert,
alternate members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Mr. Stead, Vice President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis
The Secretary reported that advices of the election for a
period of one year commencing March 1, 1947, of members and alter
nate members of the Federal Open Market Committee representing the
Federal Reserve Banks had been received, that each newly elected

3/1/47 -2-
member and alternate member had executed the required oath of of
fice, and that it was the opinion of the Committee's Counsel, on
the basis of the advices received, that the following members and
alternate members were legally qualified to serve:
Allan Sproul, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, with L. R. Rounds, First Vice President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate member;
Laurence F. Whittemore, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston, with Alfred H. Williams, President of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, as alternate
member;
Ray M. Gidney, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland, with C. S. Young, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate member;
Chester C. Davis, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis, with R. R. Gilbert, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas, as alternate member; and
J. N. Peyton, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, with H. G. Leedy, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, as alternate member.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous votes, the following officers of
the Federal Open Market Committee were elected
to serve until the election of their successors
at the first meeting of the Committee after
February 29, 1948, with the understanding that
in the event of the discontinuance of their
official connection with the Board or a Federal
Reserve Bank, as the case might be, they would
cease to have any official connection with the
Federal Open Market Committee. In connection
with the election of Mr. Morrill, it was agreed
unanimously that the bylaws of the Federal Open
Market Committee which provide that the Secretary
of the Board of Governors shall be Secretary of
the Committee should not be changed, but that Mr.
Morrill should continue to serve as Secretary
notwithstanding the applicable provision of the
bylaws

3/1/47 -3-
Marriner S. Eccles, Chairman
Allan Sproul, Vice Chairman
Chester Morrill, Secretary
S. R. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Woodlief Thomas, Economist
John H. Williams, Alfred C. Neal,
Donald S. Thompson, William H.
Stead, and Paul W. McCracken,
Associate Economists
George B. Vest, General Counsel
J. Leonard Townsend, Assistant Gen
eral Counsel
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York was selected to execute
transactions for the System open market
account until the adjournment of the first
meeting of the Committee after February
29, 1948.
Mr. Sproul stated that the Board of Directors of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York had selected Mr. Rouse as Manager of the Sys
tem Open Market Account, subject to the selection of the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York by the Federal Open Market Committee as the
Bank to execute transactions for the System account and his approval
by the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the selection of
Mr. Rouse as Manager of the System Open
Market Account was approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous votes the following were
selected to serve with the Chairman of
the Federal Open Market Committee (who,
under the provisions of the bylaws, is
also Chairman of the executive committee)

3/1/47
as members and alternate members of the
executive committee until the selection
of their successors at the first meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee after
February 29, 1948:
Members Alternate Members
Ernest G. Draper M. S. Szymczak
James K. Vardaman, Jr. Lawrence Clayton
R. M. Evans
(To serve in the order
named as alternates for
Messrs. Eccles, Draper, and
Vardaman, except that upon
Mr. Ransom's return, he will
serve as the first alternate
in the absence of Chairman
Eccles and as the third alter
nate in the absence of Messrs.
Draper and Vardaman.)
Allan Sproul Ray M. Gidney
Chester C. Davis J. N. Peyton
(To serve in the order named
as alternates for Messrs.
Sproul and Davis.)
Mr. Carpenter stated that the existing authority for distri
bution of the weekly open market report prepared by the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York did not include Mr. Roelse, as Vice President
in charge of the Research Department, and that it was suggested that
the authority be changed to include that position.
In accordance with this suggestion,
upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the distribution of the
weekly report to the following was approved:
1. The members of the Board of Governors.

3/1/47 -5
2. The Presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks.
3. The Secretary, the Economist, and the Associate
Economists of the Federal Open Market Committee.
4. The Secretary of the Treasury.
5. The Under Secretary of the Treasury.
6. The Fiscal Assistant Secretary of the Treasury.
7. The Chief of the Division of Bank Operations of
the Board of Governors.
8. Mr. Rounds, alternate member of the Federal Open
Market Committee; the Assistant Vice President of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York working under
the Manager of the System Account; the Manager of
the Securities Department of the New York Bank;
the Vice President in charge, and the Manager, of
the Research Department of the New York Bank; and
the confidential files of the New York Bank as
agent for the Federal Open Market Committee.
Reference was made to the resolution adopted by the Federal
Open Market Committee on November 20, 1936, authorizing the Federal
Reserve Banks, subject to the provisions of section 14 of the Fed
eral Reserve Act as amended and the regulations, conditions, and
limitations of the Board of Governors prescribed thereunder, but
without further direction or authorization from the Federal Open
Market Committee, to purchase and sell at home or abroad cable trans
fers and bills of exchange and bankers' acceptances payable in for
eign currencies to the extent that such purchases and sales might
be deemed to be necessary or advisable in connection with the es
tablishment, maintenance, operation, increase, reduction, or dis
continuance of accounts of Federal Reserve Banks in foreign coun
tries. As stated at the meeting of the Committee on March 1, 1946,

3/1/47 -6
when this resolution was last considered, the purpose of this action
was to simplify the procedure in connection with the handling of ac
counts with foreign central banks which were subject to special super
vision by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under
section 14 of the Federal Reserve Act,
Mr. Sproul stated that accounts were maintained by the Fed
eral Reserve Bank with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, and
the Bank of France, that the amounts in these three accounts were
relatively very small, totaling at present about $102,000, and that
the need for continuance of the authority which would permit pur
chases and sales necessary to the maintenance of these accounts still
existed, unless it was desired that specific approval of the Federal
Open Market Committee be obtained covering small transactions exe
cuted in the management of the accounts.
There was unanimous agreement that
no action should be taken with respect to
the resolution at this time.
Mr. Carpenter read an excerpt from the minutes of the meet
ing of the Committee on November 30, 1937, in which it was stated
that since securities acquired by Federal Reserve Banks in settle
ment of claims account closed banks would be so small as to be un
important from the standpoint of credit control, the Committee would
interpose no objection to Federal Reserve Banks holding such securities

3/1/47 -7
or to the sale of such securities whenever deemed to be desirable by
the holding Bank.
Chairman Eccles asked whether there was any need for contin
uing the authority or whether it would be better to allow it to lapse
and, if conditions arose which might make such authority desirable
again, to consider the question at that time.
Mr. Gidney stated that the conditions had not changed since
consideration was given to termination of the authority on March 1,
1946, that it had not been used for a considerable period of time,
that its use was not anticipated, but that if a condition arose where
the use of such authority might be desirable, the necessity for quick
action to protect the interests of a Federal Reserve Bank would make
it desirable to have the authority in effect.
It was agreed unanimously that no
action should be taken at this time to
terminate or amend the authority.
There were then distributed copies of a memorandum dated Feb
ruary 25, 1947, on the outlook for the debt retirement program. It
appeared from the information contained in the memorandum that a sub
stantial Treasury balance would be available for continuing the debt
retirement program during April and perhaps during June and July, and
there was a discussion of the recommendation to be made to the Treas
ury upon receipt of the usual request for the Committee's views in

-8-
connection with the certificates maturing on April 1. Consideration
was given to the suggestion that the Treasury retire $1.5 billion of
the April 1 maturity and whether anything should be said at this time
with respect to retirements in June and July. It was the consensus
that because of the uncertainty regarding Treasury balances the Com
mittee should recommend the retirement of only $1 billion of the April
maturities and that recommendations with respect to June and July ma
turities should be deferred until later when it would be apparent wheth
er the high level of Treasury receipts was being maintained.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, it was agreed that
upon receipt of the usual request from
Mr. Bartelt, the following letter should
be sent to the Secretary of the Treasury:
"In response to Mr. Bartelt's request, I am transmit
ting to you the recommendations of the Federal Open Market
Committee with respect to April financing. The Committee
recommends that one billion dollars of April 1 certificates
be retired, in order to continue the program of orderly debt
reduction which has been so successfully followed in the
recent past, and to obtain the modest interest saving in
volved.
"Because receipts have been and appear likely to be
considerably higher than had been expected, it is now esti
mated that the Treasury balance at the end of March will be
over 5 billion dollars, including the 800 million of free
gold derived from Monetary Fund transactions. It is also
estimated that the balance at the end of April will be at
least 3.8 billion, assuming one billion of April 1 certifi
cates are retired, and will not be less than 3 billion on
June 30 despite the expected excess of expenditures during
the last quarter of the fiscal year.

3/1/47 -9
"It will be possible to finance the March 15 and
the proposed April 1 retirements out of the Treasury
balances with the Federal Reserve Banks plus a call on
war loan deposits of 500 to 800 million dollars on March
15. A call of approximately this amount at this time
would be desirable to reduce the easing of the money
market that will result from the March 15 payment of
maturing notes."
In connection with the direction issued by the Federal Open
Market Committee on March 1, 1945, with respect to purchases and
sales of bills by the Federal Reserve Banks, Chairman Eccles stated
that it did not appear that there was any action to be taken toward
changing the direction until the question of future policy with re
spect to Treasury bills had been more fully determined.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, it was agreed
that no action should be taken at this
time to change the direction issued at
the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee on March 1, 1945, with respect
to the purchase of Treasury bills by the
twelve Federal Reserve Banks.
In connection with the authority to be granted to the ex
ecutive committee to execute transactions for the System open market
account, it was suggested that because of the somewhat reduced size
of Treasury operations in connection with the program for the retire
ment of the public debt, the limitation on the authority of the ex
ecutive committee to increase or decrease the total amount of securi
ties in the System account should be fixed at $1,500,000,000 instead
of $2,000,000,000.

3/1/47 -10-
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded and by unanimous vote, the fol
lowing direction to the executive committee
was approved, with the understanding that
the limitations contained in the direction
would include commitments for purchases and
sales of securities for the System open mar
ket account:
The executive committee be directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for such transactions for the System open market account,
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury
(including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of
maturing securities, and letting maturities run off without
replacement), as may be necessary in the practical adminis
tration of the account or for the purpose of maintaining an
orderly market in Treasury securities and a general level
of prices and yields of Government securities which will
support the Treasury issuing rates of 7/8 per cent for one
year certificates and 2-1/2 per cent for 27-year bonds re
stricted as to ownership; provided that the aggregate amount
of securities held in the account at the close of this date
[other than (1) bills purchased outright in the market on a
discount basis at the rate of 3/8 per cent per annum and
bills redeemed at maturity and (2) special short-term cer
tificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for
the temporary accommodation of the Treasury] shall not be
increased or decreased by more than $1,500,000,000.
That the executive committee be further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to
arrange for the purchase for the System open market account
direct from the Treasury of such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the amount of such certificates held in the ac
count at any one time shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
It was tentatively agreed that the next meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee would be held during the week beginning June 2,
1947.

3/1/47 -11
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved.
Chairman.