A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys
tem in Washington on Monday, March 1, 1948, at 10:45 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Clayton
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Gilbert
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Williams
Mr. Young
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board
of Governors
Mr. Smith, Economist, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Irons, Vice President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas
Mr. McCabe, Chairman designate, Board of
Governors
The Secretary reported that advices of the election, for a
period of one year commencing March 1, 1948, of members and alter
nate members of the Federal Open Market Committee representing the
Federal Reserve Banks had been received, that each newly elected
member and alternate member had executed the required oath of

3/1/48
office, and that it was the opinion of the Committee's Counsel, on
the basis of the advices received, that the following members and
alternate members were legally qualified to serve:
Allan Sproul, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, with L. R. Rounds, First Vice President of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate
member;
Alfred H. Williams, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia, with Hugh Leach, President of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, as alternate
member;
C. S. Young, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, with Ray M. Gidney, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate member;
R. R. Gilbert, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas, with W. S. McLarin, Jr., P-esident of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, as alternate member;
H. G. Leedy, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City, with C. E. Earhart, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, as alternate
member.
Mr. Sproul suggested that, pending the designation of Mr.
McCabe as Chairman of the Board of Governors, Mr. Eccles be elected
Chairman of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Inasmuch as the President had indi
cated his intention to designate Mr. Thomas
B. McCabe as Chairman of the Board of Gov
ernors and Mr. Eccles as Vice Chairman, and
in the meantime Mr. Eccles was serving as
Chairman pro tempore of the Board, upon
motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, Mr. Eccles was elected Chair
man of the Federal Open Market Committee to

3/1/48 -3
serve as such until the date when Mr. McCabe
takes office, and the latter was elected to
serve as Chairman of the Federal Open Market
Committee beginning on that date and until
the election of his successor at the first
meeting of the Committee after February 28,
1949.
Upon motions duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous votes, the following
additional officers of the Federal Open
Market Committee were elected to serve
until the election of their successors at
the first meeting of the Committee after
February 28, 1949. In connection with
the election of Mr. Morrill, it was agreed
unanimously that the bylaws of the Federal
Open Market Committee, which provide that
the Secretary of the Board of Governors
shall be Secretary of the Committee should
not be changed, but that Mr. Morrill should
continue to serve as Secretary notwithstand
ing the applicable provision of the bylaws:
Allan Sproul, Vice Chairman
Chester Morrill, Secretary
S. R. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
George B. Vest, General Counsel
J. Leonard Townsend, Assistant Gen
eral Counsel
Woodlief Thomas, Economist
Karl R. Bopp, Watrous H. Irons,
John K. Langum, T. Bruce Robb,
and John H. Williams, Associate
Economists
In taking the above actions it was under
stood that in the event of the discontin
uance of their official connection with
the Board or a Federal Reserve Bank, as
the case might be, the individuals elected
would cease to have any official connec
tion with the Federal Open Market Commit
tee.

3/1/48 -4
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York was selected to execute
transactions for the System open market
account until the adjournment of the
first meeting of the Committee after
February 28, 1949.
Mr. Sproul stated that the board of directors of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York had selected Mr. Rouse as Manager of the
System Open Market Account, subject to the selection of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York by the Federal Open Market Committee as
the Bank to execute transactions for the System account and his
approval by the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the selection of
Mr. Rouse as Manager of the System Open
Market Account was approved.
Upon motions duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous votes, the following
were selected to serve with the Chairman
of the Federal Open Market Committee
(who, under the provisions of the bylaws,
is also Chairman of the executive com
mittee) as members and alternate members
of the executive committee until the
selection of their successors at the
first meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee after February 28, 1949:
Members Alternates
*Marriner S. Eccles R. M. Evans
M. S. Szymczak J. K. Vardaman, Jr.
Allan Sproul Ernest G. Draper
Alfred H. Williams (To serve in the order named
as alternates for the mem
bers selected from the Board
of Governors.)
*When Mr. McCabe takes
office.

3/1/48
Alternates
C. S. Young
R. R. Gilbert
(To serve in the order named
as alternates for Messrs.
Sproul and Williams.)
Chairman Eccles referred to the resolution adopted on Novem
ber 20, 1936, authorizing the Federal Reserve Banks, subject to the
provisions of section 14 of the Federal Reserve Act, as amended, and
regulations, conditions, and limitations of the Board of Governors
prescribed thereunder, but without further direction or authoriza
tion from the Federal Open Market Committee, to purchase and sell
at home or abroad cable transfers and bills of exchange and bankers'
acceptances payable in foreign currencies to the extent that such
purchases and sales might be deemed to be necessary or advisable
in connection with the establishment, maintenance, operation, in
crease, reduction, or discontinuance of accounts of Federal Re
serve Banks in foreign countries. The resolution was last con
sidered at the meeting of the Committee on March 1, 197, at which
time it was indicated that the purpose of this action was to sim
plify the procedure in connection with the handling of accounts
with foreign central banks which were subject to such supervision
of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under sec
tion 14 of the Federal Reserve Act.

3/1/48 -6
Mr. Sproul stated that three accounts were presently being
maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with foreign
banks, namely, the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, and the
Bank of France, that the amounts in these accounts continued to
be small, totalling only $95,000, and that, for reasons previously
stated, it was desirable that the authority be continued.
There was unanimous agreement that
no action should be taken to terminate
or amend the resolution at this time.
Reference was made to an excerpt from the minutes of the
meeting of the Committee on November 30, 1937, in which it was
stated that the Committee would interpose no objection to Federal
Reserve Banks holding securities which they acquired in settlement
of claims against closed banks or to the sale of such securities
whenever deemed desirable by the holding Bank, since the volume
of such securities would be so small as to be unimportant from
the standpoint of credit control.
There was a brief discussion of
the need for this authority and it was
agreed unanimously that no action
should be taken at this time to termi
nate or amend the authority.
There was a further discussion of the recommendations to
be made to the Treasury with respect to Treasury financing and
debt management during which Chairman Eccles stated that in ac
cordance with the action taken at the meeting on Friday, February

3/1/48 -7
27, 1948, a letter covering the recommendations that had been agreed
upon would be prepared and submitted to the members of the executive
committee for approval. He suggested that, in view of the changes
in the membership of the full Committee, it would be desirable at
this meeting to confirm the authority to the executive committee to
send the proposed letter.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the executive
committee was authorized to prepare and
present to the Treasury recommendations
with respect to Treasury financing and
debt management in accordance with the
discussion as recorded in the minutes of
the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee on February 27, 1948.
Mr. Carpenter read the direction issued to the executive
committee at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on
December 9, 1947, authorizing the executive committee to arrange
for transactions in the System open market account. In a discus
sion of desirable changes in the wording of the direction, it was
agreed that the words "more closely" should be omitted from a
clause in the first paragraph of the direction which would then
read as follows: "for the purpose of relating the supply of
funds in the market to the needs of commerce and business".
There was also a discussion of the authority that would be
needed by the executive committee during the next few weeks in
view of the probable large volume of security purchases by the

3/1/48 -8
Federal Reserve Banks growing out of pressure upon the reserve po
sition of banks because of income tax collections. At the conclu
sion of the discussion Chairman Eccles stated that, should such
action be desirable, additional authority could be granted to the
executive committee by telephone approval of the members of the
full Committee, and he suggested that the authority of the exec
utive committee be continued with the same limitations as to
amounts as were fixed at the meeting on December 9.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the following
direction to the executive committee
was approved, with the understanding
that the limitations contained in the
direction would include commitments for
the System open market account:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for such transactions for the System open market account,
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury
(including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of
maturing securities, and letting maturities run off with
out replacement), as may be necessary, in the light of
the general credit situation of the country, for the
practical administration of the account, for the mainte
nance of stable and orderly conditions in the Government
security market, and for the purpose of relating the sup
ply of funds in the market to the needs of commerce and
business; provided that the aggregate amount of securi
ties held in the account at the close of this date other
than special short-term certificates of indebtedness
purchased from time to time for the temporary accommoda
tion of the Treasury shall not be increased or decreased
by more than $3,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee,

3/1/48 -9
to arrange for the purchase for the System open market
account direct from the Treasury of such amounts of
special short-term certificates of indebtedness as
may be necessary from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total
amount of such certificates held in the account at any
one time shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
At Chairman Eccles' request, Mr. Rouse reviewed the discus
sion at the meeting of the executive committee on February 26, 1948,
concerning the complaint of dealers who were not qualified to do
business with the System open market account that they were being
forced out of business because the Federal Reserve Banks had been
the principal buyers of Government securities in recent weeks and
because they could not qualify to do business with the System ac
count under the terms established by the Committee in 1944. During
a discussion of the matter along the lines set forth in the minutes
of the executive committee meeting referred to, views were expressed
to the effect that a careful study of the situation should be made,
particularly with respect to the position of the smaller dealers,
to determine whether the present rules should be modified to enable
additional dealers to qualify to transact business directly with
the System account.
Mr. Sproul stated that the New York Bank had been asked to
make a comprehensive report to the executive committee, which would
reexamine the matter and report to the full Committee.
Chairman Eccles stated that the executive committee, at its
meeting on February 26, considered again the desirability of making

3/1/48 -10
a special report to Congress of the kind referred to at the October
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee with respect to the
monetary and credit problems with which the Committee had to deal,
and that the executive committee had agreed unanimously that in
view of the events that had transpired since last October there
would be no point in making the report, and that such a recommen
dation should be made to the full Committee. He outlined the
reasons for the recommendation, and Mr. Sproul added that, while
the Committee might again wish to consider the matter, he felt
there was no basis for making a report at this time.
Following a discussion, the recom
mendation of the executive committee was
approved unanimously.
The date for the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee was set tentatively for Thursday and Friday, May 20 and
21, 1948, with the understanding that a meeting of the Presidents'
Conference would be held in Washington on May 18 and 19, 1948,
and that the details of the program for the week would be worked
out by the Secretaries of the Committee and the Presidents' Confer
ence.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.