A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, November 30, 1948, at 10:35 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. McCabe, Chairman
Mr. Clayton
Mr. Draper
Mr. Eccles
Mr. Evans
Mr. Gilbert
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Williams
Mr. Young
Mr. Rounds (alternate for Mr. Sproul)
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Townsend, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Bopp, Irons, Robb, and John H.
Williams, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Riefler, Assistant to the Chairman,
Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board
of Governors
Mr. Ralph Young, Associate Director, Divi
sion of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. T. L. Smith, Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and Sta
tistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Arthur Willis, Special Assistant,
Securities Department, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
Messrs. Gidney, Leach, McLarin, and Earhart,
alternate members of the Federal Open
Market Committee

Messrs. Davis and Peyton, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and
Minneapolis, respectively, and Mr. Willett,
First Vice President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of
the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee held on November 15, 1948,
were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions set
forth in the minutes of the meeting of
the executive committee of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on October 4,
1948, were approved, ratified, and con
firmed.
Mr. Rouse read a report of operations in the System open
market account covering the period November 12 to 24, 1948, inclu
sive, and a supplemental report covering transactions for the period
November 25 to 29, inclusive. Before presentation of these reports,
there had been distributed copies of a report prepared at the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of New York of open market operations covering
the period October 4 to November 24, 1948, inclusive. Copies of
the three reports have been placed in the files of the Federal
Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System account for the period
November 13, 1943, to November 29, 1948,
inclusive, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.

11/30/48 -3
Chairman McCabe then called upon Mr. Thomas, who reviewed
the background of public debt management and Federal Reserve policy
and discussed the problems now confronting the Federal Open Market
Committee with respect to policies to be followed in the future.
During the course of his discussion, Mr. Thomas stated that the
alternatives available to the Committee were:
To continue the past policy of rigid support of a
fixed pattern of rates which would make the economy
highly susceptible to unrestricted inflation in a
period of full production and employment when invest
ment demand was in excess of current savings;
To change Federal Reserve policy so as to permit a
completely flexible market (Mr. Thomas added that it
was questionable whether any such policy would be
feasible in view of the large public debt and the at
titude of holders toward the debt);
To move toward a more effective immobilization of
public debt holdings so that they will not be thrown
on the market.
In commenting on the last mentioned alternative, Mr. Thomas
stated that various measures which might be used in such a program
would include:
(a) Additional authority to raise reserve requirements of
member banks. This might take the form of (1) a straight increase
in requirements on the present basis, (2) a set of reserve require
ments with variations as to classes of deposits, but with uniformity
as to type and location of banks, (3) optional or security reserves
which would permit banks to hold reserves in the form of earning

11/30/48 .4
assets and thus help to maintain earnings, and (4) payment of in
terest by the Federal Reserve Banks on a part of the reserve bal
ances which banks were required to hold.
(b) Flexibility in short-term rates. He thought this was
essential in a long-term program of monetary controls, not because
the rates were important in themselves but because of the fact that
when the System adopts a policy of decreasing member bank reserves
it should not be hampered by a policy of maintaining rigid short
term rates.
(c) Adoption of a long range conversion program. The pres
ent policy of support was essentially an inflationary one, he said,
and it would not be possible to solve this dilemma unless long-term
restricted issues were converted into issues which would be so held
that System support would not be necessary. In this connection he
discussed briefly the program outlined in the memorandum of Novem
ber 12, 1948, copies of which were distributed at the meeting of
the Committee on November 15, 1948.
In making his remarks, Mr. Thomas referred to a memorandum
on the outlook for bank reserves and Treasury financing dated Novem
ber 29, 1948, and to a memorandum on the economic outlook prepared
under date of November 30, 1948, for use at this meeting of the
Committee. These memoranda were distributed at the meeting and
copies have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market
Committee.

11/30/48 .5
Chairman McCabe referred to the memorandum dated November 12,
1948, with respect to a conversion operation for restricted bonds,
stating that, in a conversation following that meeting, Secretary
of the Treasury Snyder indicated an interest in having members of
the Treasury staff get together informally with members of the Com
mittee's staff to study the question with a view to the formulation
of a program for consideration by the Treasury and the Committee.
Chairman McCabe also said that he had asked that Messrs. Thomas,
Morrill, and Riefler serve as representatives of the Committee in
these discussions.
In response to a question from Chairman McCabe as to prog
ress made by the committee appointed to study the advisability of
the Treasury refunding some of the long-term securities held by
the System account with special short-term issues at a lower in
terest rate, Mr. Thomas stated that the committee, which was ap
pointed following the meeting on October 4, 1948, had under con
sideration a draft of memorandum prepared at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York but that it did not have anything to present at
this time. He also commented that this problem would be related
in some respects to the conversion operation referred to above.
Chairman McCabe stated that, when he presented to Secretary
Snyder the letter approved at the last meeting of the Committee, he
stressed the desire of the Committee to work toward a free market

1l/30/48 -6.
in Treasury bills and that, therefore, it was allowing the rate to
rise gradually in relation to the 1-1/4 per cent certificate rate,
with the result that the System's holdings of Treasury bills had
declined to about 40 per cent of the total outstanding.
Chairman McCabe referred to the present policy of support
ing the longest term restricted issues at 8/32 above par and the
longest term bank eligible issue at 1 point above par. He re
viewed the discussion at the meeting of the executive committee
of the suggestion that these premiums be eliminated, at which
time it was understood that there would be further discussion
of the problem at this meeting of the full Committee.
There was a discussion of the suggestion, in the course
of which members of the Committee and the Presidents of the Fed
eral Reserve Banks who were not members of the Committee expressed
their views as to the policy that should be followed. It was the
majority view that, for substantially the reasons stated at the
meeting of the executive committee, the present policy should be
continued for the time being. It was suggested in this connection,
however, that it might be understood that in a period of pressure
on the support price Mr. Rouse might let the support price on the
bank eligibles of September 1967-1972 drop somewhat below 101 on
the ground that, since the policy was to support a long-term rate
of 2-1/2 per cent, that issue should not be supported at a premium.

11/30/48 -7
With that understanding, Mr. Rouse said, the issue might decline
to a premium of 8/32, at which the longest term restricted issues
were being supported. The members of the Committee concurred in
this understanding.
In a short discussion of the use of balances in war loan
accounts, Chairman McCabe referred again to the recommendation
made to the Treasury that it use funds available in its balances
to purchase securities from the System account as a means of con
tinuing pressure on member bank reserves. Instead of adopting
this suggestion, he said, the Treasury was following a policy of
retiring $100 million of bills each week, a large part of which
were held outside the Federal Reserve Banks.
Turning to a discussion of a possible further increase in
the short-term interest rate, it was stated that this question had
been settled for the December and January financing, but that it
should be considered again in January in connection with the re
funding of February and March maturities. In this connection it
was suggested that a meeting of the executive committee might be
held around the beginning of the new year to consider recommenda
tions that might be made to the Treasury at that time.
During this discussion, Mr. Clayton suggested that the
Committee authorize the executive committee to renew the recom
mendations made to the Treasury at the last two meetings of the

11/30/48
Committee if, in the judgment of the executive committee, such action
seemed desirable before another meeting of the full Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, Mr. Clayton's
suggestion was approved.
Reference was then made to the direction to be issued to the
executive committee for effecting transactions in the System open
market account and it was suggested that the direction issued at
the meeting on October 4, 1948, be renewed.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following direction to the
executive committee was approved, with
the understanding that the limitations
contained in the direction would include
commitments for the System open market
account:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise di
rected by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for
such transactions for the System open market account, either
in the open market or directly with the Treasury (including
purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing secu
rities, and letting maturities run off without replacement),
as may be necessary, in the light of the general credit
situation of the country, for the practical administration
of the account, for the maintenance of stable and orderly
conditions in the Government security market, and for the
purpose of relating the supply of funds in the market to
the needs of commerce and business; provided that the ag
gregate amount of securities held in the account at the
close of this date other than special short-term certificates
of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury shall not be increased or de
creased by more than $2,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to ar
range for the purchase for the System open market account
direct from the Treasury of such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from

11/30/48 -9
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such certificates held in
the account at any one time shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
It was tentatively agreed that, in the absence of unforeseen
developments, the next meetings of the Committee would be held on
February 28 and March 1, 1949.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.