A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Monday, October 4, 1948, at 11:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. McCabe, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Clayton
Mr. Draper
Mr. Eccles
Mr. Evans
Mr. Gilbert
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Williams
Mr. Young
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Bopp, Irons, Langum, Robb, and
John H. Williams, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Riefler, Assistant to the Chairman
of the Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board
of Governors
Mr. Ralph A. Young, Associate Director,
Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Smith, Economist, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Arthur Willis, Special Assistant, Se
curities Department, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
Messrs. Gidney, Leach, McLarin, and Earhart, alter
nate members of the Federal Open Market Committee

10/4/48
Messrs. Davis and Peyton, Presidents of the Fed
eral Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Minneapolis,
respectively, and Mr. Willett, First Vice Presi
dent of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on May 20, 1948, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the min
utes of the meetings of the executive com
mittee held on May 20, June 23, August 11,
and September 8, 1948, were approved, rati
fied, and confirmed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
members of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee on August 11, 1948, and September 24,
1948, increasing from $1,500,000,000 to
$3,000,000,000, and from $3,000,000,000 to
$4,000,000,000, respectively, the limitation,
contained in the first paragraph of the direc
tion issued on May 20, 1948, on the authority
of the executive committee to direct trans
actions in the System account were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
A report of open market operations prepared by the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York covering the period from May 20, 1948, to
September 29, 1948, inclusive, was then read and discussed by Mr.
Rouse. He also presented a supplementary report covering commit
ments on September 30 and October 1, 1948. Copies of the report
first mentioned were distributed during the meeting and copies of
both reports have been placed in the files of the Federal Open
Market Committee.

10/4/48 -3
Upon otion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System account for the period May
20, 1948, to October 4, 1948, inclusive,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
In connection with the report of transactions in the System
open market account Mr. Sproul called attention to the substantial
increase that had taken place in the System holdings of Government
securities maturing in more than 10 years and suggested that a study
be made of the advisability of the Treasury refunding some of the
long-term securities held in the System account with special short
term issues bearing a lower interest rate.
Mr. Sproul's suggestion was discussed
and, upon motion duly made and seconded,
Chairman McCabe was authorized unanimously
to appoint a committee to study the matter
and report to the Federal Open Market
Committee.
Secretary's note: Following the meeting Chairman
McCabe appointed Messrs. Thomas, Rouse, and
Riefler as the members of this committee.
Chairman McCabe then called upon Mr. Thomas for the reports
of the economists.
Mr. Irons said that, despite a strong degree of inflation
consciousness and moderately restrictive credit measures, the demand
for bank credit had continued strong and the banks had been able and
apparently willing to meet at least a considerable part of that de
mand, that both inflationary and deflationary forces were at work
in the economy, and that if natural forces were allowed to exert

10/4/48 -4
their influences the economy might find itself past the peak of the
inflationary boom and faced with a readjustment. He added, however,
that in view of the international situation and the possibility that
the country would enter upon a program of large defense and military
preparedness expenditures the outlook was for more inflation and
more additions to bank loans, and that he doubted whether drastic
credit restriction would be either adequate to do the job of re
straining inflation or compatible with the sort of defense program
contemplated.
Mr. Thomas said that in his view further inflationary busi
ness expansion was to be expected at least through the first half
of 1949, that there was some possibility of a sharp further in
flationary development if the international situation worsened,
and that in the longer run the question was whether the economy
could make piecemeal adjustments from this situation or whether
the unstabilizing factors were such that a collapse was inevitable.
He also stated that he felt it more than likely that additional
measures of credit restraint would be needed in order to keep the
inflation from getting out of hand, that if present demands for
credit were not met the inflation might be broken at this stage,
and that the Federal Reserve System should use such restraints as
it had to avoid a worse collapse later on.

10/4/48 -5
Mr. John H. Williams expressed the opinion that inflation
was in the process of wearing itself out, that the prospect was
for moving sidewise or even downward, that a serious downturn
was unlikely, and that the present Federal Reserve policy di
rected toward the raising of short-term interest rates should be
continued as vigorously as possible but that this was not an ap
propriate time to unpeg the long-term rate.
Copies of the statements of Messrs. Irons and Williams
and of the paper on The Business Outlook from which Mr. Thomas
talked have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
At Chairman McCabe's request Mr. Sproul reviewed develop
ments since the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on
May 20, 1948, following which the meeting recessed and reconvened
at 2:10 p.m. with the same attendance as at the morning session.
Mr. Sproul referred to a memorandum prepared under date of
October 1, 1948, pursuant to the request of the executive committee
at its meeting on August 11, 1948, on "Federal Reserve Policy with
Respect to Treasury Bill Rates". Copies of the memorandum were
distributed to all members of the Committee before this meeting
and a copy has been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market
Committee. Mr. Sproul reviewed briefly the contents of the memo
randum and the discussion at the meeting of the executive committee

10/4/48 -6
this morning, stating that there was general agreement by the ex
ecutive committee that (a) the System's weekly bids for Treasury
bills should be designed to effect some redemption of System hold
ings of bills each week so as to absorb reserves and thereby put
more pressure on bank reserves, (b) that the New York Bank should
experiment in its operations in bills so as to make the penalty
for selling bills as heavy as it could within the general program
for support of the bill and certificate rates, and (c) that the
bill rate should be allowed to rise as close to the present 1-1/4
per cent certificate rate as possible without affecting that rate
and when the certificate rate moved up from 1-1/4 per cent the
bill rate should be allowed to move up as close to the certificate
rate as possible.
He also said that it was the view of the executive commit
tee that the Federal Open Market Committee should move promptly to
increase the market rate on one-year Treasury certificates, and
that to this end there should be a meeting with the Secretary of
the Treasury as soon as possible to discuss the action to be taken
in the market to bring about a rise in short-term rates in antici
pation of the January Treasury financing. He added that, if the
Committee approved this procedure and if the Secretary of the
Treasury did not object to the proposed action, market operations
should bring about a rise in the short-term rate to perhaps 1-1/2

10/4/48 -7
per cent prior to the January financing and that, as the certificate
rate moved up, the support prices of other shorter-term issues would
be adjusted accordingly. If the Treasury disagreed with the program,
Mr. Sproul said, the Committee would then have to consider whether
to proceed despite Treasury objections.
In response to an inquiry from Mr. Clayton as to whether the
executive committee had given consideration to increasing the short
term rate to 1-3/8 per cent instead of 1-1/2 per cent, Mr. Sproul
said that the thought was to get banks interested in buying short
term securities rather than long, that the executive committee felt
that the increase could go to 1-1/2 per cent, but that no definite
rate was proposed and that, if the situation seemed to call for it,
the rate might not go beyond 1-3/8 per cent.
Mr. Sproul made the further comment that the program out
lined above would be presented to the Treasury as a matter which
the Open Market Committee wished to discuss; not as something the
Treasury would be expected to approve or disapprove, but to which
it could object if it chose to do so. If, he said, there were de
lay, as was the case this summer, and the Treasury did not express
agreement or objection, the Committee should press the matter.
Mr. Evans stated that it seemed to him that the course of
events had clearly demonstrated the need for additional authority
over bank reserves in the form of the special reserve plan previously

10/4/48 -8
proposed by the Board or the plan under which reserve requirements
would be based on the type of deposit rather than the location of
the bank, and that before Congress convened the Board of Governors
and the Presidents should undertake to reach an agreement so that
the over-all credit policies of the System would have full System
support. There was a discussion of Mr. Evans' suggestion but no
conclusions were reached.
Before this meeting there were distributed to those present
copies of a memorandum prepared in the Board's Division of Research
and Statistics on the outlook for bank reserves and Treasury fi
nancing. Mr. Thomas referred to the recommendations that might be
made to the Treasury with respect to the use of Treasury balances
as a means of affecting member bank reserves during the remainder
of the year. This matter was discussed, together with the possi
bility of further debt retirement by the Treasury and action to
increase the discount rates at the Federal Reserve Banks.
Chairman McCabe called on the members of the Federal Open
Market Committee and the Presidents who were not members of the
Committee for their views on the program proposed by the executive
committee and discussed at this meeting, and it was the consensus
that the program should be carried out. During their individual
comments the Presidents expressed a variety of views on the ques
tion raised by Mr. Evans with respect to increased authority over
bank reserve requirements.

At the conclusion of the individual
statements, upon motion duly made and sec
onded, and by unanimous vote, the program
as recommended by the executive committee
and discussed at this meeting was approved,
with the understanding that Messrs. McCabe
and Sproul would present the program to the
Secretary of the Treasury at the earliest
possible date.
Secretary's note: Following the meeting, Chairman McCabe
called the office of Secretary Snyder for an appointment
for the afternoon of Wednesday, October 6, but learned that
the Secretary was out of the city. An appointment was made
for Messrs. McCabe and Sproul to see the Secretary on Wednes
day, October 13, 1948, at which time the following letter,
which had been approved by the members of the executive
committee of the Federal Open Market Committee, was handed
to the Secretary as a statement of the views of the Federal
Open Market Committee:
"In my letter of September 13, 1948, I stated that some
time in the near future Mr. Sproul and I, in behalf of the
Federal Open Market Committee, would like to discuss with
you the two matters referred to in the letter and other mat
ters relating to the credit and monetary situation. This
letter has been prepared as a basis for a discussion of
policies to be followed during the remainder of the current
year.
"It is believed that the period will be characterized
by additional sales of bonds by nonbank holders which will
have to be purchased by the Federal Reserve Banks in ac
cordance with the present policy of supporting the 2-1/2
per cent long-term rate. It is possible that such pur
chases by the System will be in substantial amounts. These
transactions, together with a further gold inflow, will add
to bank reserves at a time when there is a strong demand
for bank loans. In order to curb the inflationary effects
of this expansion, it is important that substantial pressure
be kept on the reserve position of banks. To accomplish
this the Federal Open Market Committee proposes that sub
stantially the following program be undertaken promptly.
"1. Short-term rates.
a. Treasury bill policies. The rates on the Sys
tem's weekly bids for exchanges of maturing bills will be

10/4/48 -10-
"adjusted so as to bring about reduction in the System's
portfolio at the time of the exchange. This will absorb
bank reserves and put the banks under some restraint. The
policy with respect to bills will be designed to achieve,
as suggested in my letter of August 11, 1948, a greater
degree of flexibility in the bill rate and, it is expected,
will result in higher rates on Treasury bills in relation
to the current rate on certificates.
"b. Certificates. The Federal Open Market Com
mittee will also allow the market yields on certificates
to increase. This increase will encourage banks to pur
chase Government securities or to maintain their holdings
and thereby discourage further loan expansion during the
remainder of the period. Furthermore, it will permit
the investment in short-term securities of corporate and
other balances which would not be attracted by existing
rates. This increased demand will enable the System to
sell some of its holdings and thereby absorb bank re
serves. Depending on market conditions, the rate might
be permitted to go as high as 1-1/2 per cent.
"c. Other short-term securities. The rates at
which the System supports other short-term securities will
be adjusted to conform to the higher certificate rate and
the 2-1/2 per cent long-term rate.
"2. Debt retirement and Treasury refunding.
Because of its restrictive effect, it is desirable
that the Treasury continue to draw upon its war loan
balances to retire securities held by the Federal Reserve
as rapidly as the Treasury's cash position permits. It
appears at the present time that bills could be retired at
the rate of $100 million a week for a number of weeks and
at the same time available trust funds could be used to
purchase marketable securities. Such purchases would re
duce the amount the System would have to purchase in sup
port of the long-term 2-1/2 per cent rate. If it should
develop during the period that System support was not
necessary for that purpose, the Treasury could purchase
the issues needed for trust account investment directly
from the System account.
"As suggested in my letter of September 13, it is
recommended that the $571 million dollar issue of bonds
to be redeemed on December 15 be refunded. This issue
is held entirely outside the Federal Reserve and retire
ment in cash would put funds into the market unnecessarily.
The terms of the refunding as well as of the certificates

-11-
"maturing on January 1, 1949, would be considered later
in the light of developments with respect to the short
term rate.
"3. Treasury balances.
Also as proposed in my letter of September 13, 1948,
it would be desirable for the Treasury to time calls on
war loan deposit accounts so as to exert some drain on
bank reserves. In carrying out the transactions referred
to above the Treasury could reduce its war loan balances
as low as $500 million (they now amount to about $2.1
billion) and could also reduce its balances with the
Federal Reserve below the present level of $1.7 billion.
Large tax receipts in the first quarter of 1949 and cur
rent income in the second quarter will provide adequate
means for meeting all needs during the remainder of the
fiscal year.
"4. Other System actions.
It is believed that as soon as the market rate on
certificates has risen above the 1-1/4 per cent rate,
the discount rate of the Federal Reserve Banks should
be increased to 1-3/4 per cent. Such action would be
an indication to the public of the System's views with
respect to the need for restraint. Also the Board of
Governors will continue to study the situation for the
purpose of determining the action that should be taken
during the period further to increase member bank re
serve requirements."
With respect to the authority to be granted to the execu
tive committee to effect transactions in the System open market
account, Mr. Rouse said that, on the assumption there would be a
meeting of the full Committee in December, an authority of $2 bl
lion would be adequate.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following direction to the
executive committee was approved, with the
understanding that the limitations contained
in the direction would include commitments
for the System open market account:

10/4/48
-12-
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for such transactions for the System open market account,
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury
(including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of
maturing securities, and letting maturities run off with
out replacement), as may be necessary, in the light of
the general credit situation of the country, for the
practical administration of the account, for the main
tenance of stable and orderly conditions in the Govern
ment security market, and for the purpose of relating
the supply of funds in the market to the needs of com
merce and business; provided that the aggregate amount
of securities held in the account at the close of this
date other than special short-term certificates of in
debtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury shall not be increased or
decreased by more than $2,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee,
to arrange for the purchase for the System open market
account direct from the Treasury of such amounts of
special short-term certificates of indebtedness as may
be necessary from time to time for the temporary accom
modation of the Treasury; provided that the total amount
of such certificates held in the account at any one time
shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
It was agreed unanimously that the
Presidents would discuss informally the
date for the next meeting of the Presidents'
Conference and that during the joint meeting
of the Board of Governors and the Presidents
tomorrow a tentative date would be fixed for
the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.