A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Friday, February 27, 1948, at 10:15 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Eccles, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Clayton
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Evans
Mr. Gidney
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Whittemore
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Neal, Stead, Thompson, and John H.
Williams, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open Market
Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board of Gov
ernors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Smith, Economist, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and Sta
tistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Arthur Willis, Special Assistant, Securi
ties Department, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York
Messrs. Alfred H. Williams, Young, Gilbert, and
Leedy, alternate members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Leach, McLarin, and Earhart, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively

2/27/48 -2
Messrs. Bopp and Irons, Vice Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and
Dallas, respectively, Messrs. McCracken and
Robb, Directors of Research of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Minneapolis and Kansas City,
respectively, and Mr. Ralph A. Young,
Associate Director of the Division of Re
search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. McCabe, Chairman designate, Board of Gov
ernors
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of
the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee held on December 9, 1947, were
approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of
the executive committee of the Federal
Open Market Committee as set forth in
the minutes of the meetings of the exec
utive committee held on December 9, 1947,
and January 20, 1948, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Chairman Eccles stated that at the meeting of the executive
committee on January 20, 1948, there had been distributed copies of
a report prepared by Messrs. Rouse and Smead pursuant to the action
taken at the last meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee with
respect to the allocation of securities in the System open market
account, and that the procedure was approved unanimously by the
executive committee at that meeting with the understanding that
it would be submitted with a favorable recommendation for its rat
ification at the next meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee.

2/27/48 -3
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the procedure for
the allocation of securities in the System
open market account, as set forth in the
minutes of the meeting of the executive
committee on January 20, 1948, was ap
proved, ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Rouse presented and discussed a report of open market
operations covering the period from December 9, 1947, to February
20, 1948, inclusive, together with a supplemental report covering
commitments made on February 24, 25, and 26, 1948, and there fol
lowed a brief discussion of the transactions that had taken place
and the conditions that had prevailed in the market during the
period covered by the reports. Copies of the report first men
tioned were distributed during the meeting and copies of both
reports have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System account for the period
December 9, 1947, to February 26, 1948,
inclusive, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Mr. Thomas then presented a report on economic prospects
and their financial implications, stating that inflationary forces
continued to be the dominant economic factor in the United States
and throughout most of the world, that the recent sharp decline in
prices of several commodities had weakened somewhat, for the time

2/27/48 -4
being at least, upward pressures on the general price level, but
that in view of special circumstances bearing upon these selective
price declines it should not be concluded that the underlying in
flationary spiral of costs, prices, and incomes which characterized
1947 had ceased to operate. He also said that an analysis of eco
nomic prospects led to the conclusion that there would continue to
be a demand for bank loans in 1948 that might result in a credit
expansion exceeding that of 1947, that such a development would
mean a continued large volume of expenditures at high and perhaps
advancing prices supported by expanding bank credit, that if such
developments occurred the economic situation would become increas
ingly vulnerable, that continuing inflationary developments along
these lines would heighten the risk of a serious deflationary set
back at some stage, and that the policy determining authorities of
the Federal Reserve System would need to face the question whether
the resources of the System should continue to be used to support
such a course of developments. A copy of Mr. Thomas' statement
has been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Mr. Bopp then reported the results of a survey of business
sentiment as measured by a meeting of Philadelphia business leaders
held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia on February 18,
1948, stating that the outstanding impression gained from the meet
ing was that there was no tendency to view the early future with

2/27/48 -5
alarm although a note of caution had been introduced into the out
look by the recent sharp declines in commodity markets, that there
was general agreement that some price adjustments would have to be
made over the relatively near future in view of the better balance
between supply and demand, and that none of those at the meeting
looked forward to any serious recession of economic activities as
a near-term prospect. Mr. Bopp also said that the problems of
meeting greatly increased capital requirements and the difficulty
of attracting venture capital were brought up repeatedly, and that
the discussion indicated that business expected to go to banks to
an increasing degree during 1948 for new capital funds. He added,
however, that it was the general view that postwar investment plans
were running out and, except in special instances such as in the
utilities and oil industries, the rate of investment in later years
would be substantially lower than during the immediate postwar years.
Following Mr. Bopp's remarks, Mr. John H. Williams made a
statement, a copy of which has been placed in the files of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee, with respect to the foreign situation
in which he commented that economic recovery in Europe had pro
ceeded more rapidly than was generally realized and had reached a
point where output in several countries was larger than in the
prewar period, that despite this recovery Western European coun
tries were confronted with inflationary forces postponed from the

2/27/48 -6
war, and that they faced a difficult problem in meeting their bal
ances of payments over the next several years. He also said that
the impact of European conditions had been a major influence upon
the United States economy throughout the postwar period and espe
cially in 1947, during the second half of which the need for fur
nishing food to Europe had been a major spearhead of our inflation.
He felt that there was need for continued help by the United States
to Europe along the lines of the European Recovery Program, that an
important question was the means by which the Program should be fi
nanced in view of the domestic anti-inflationary policy, that the
recent drop in domestic food and farm commodity prices introduced
uncertainty as to whether the inflationary pressures might have
run their course, and that if this proved to be the case he felt
that funds to finance the European Recovery Program should be ob
tained in part by borrowing from nonbank sources. As to the future
impact of the European Recovery Program on the domestic economy,
Mr. Williams felt that the effects probably would be more helpful
than harmful, since our general objective must be to maintain a
large volume of production and employment in the United States
while doing everything possible to stabilize or reduce prices.
In this connection he stated that, while monetary measures were
important and should be used in dealing with the inflation prob
lem, the chief danger in the present uncertain circumstances might
be in pursuing a too severe rather than a too mild policy.

2/27/48
Copies of a memorandum prepared in the Board's Division of
Research and Statistics with respect to Treasury financing and bank
credit were then distributed. The memorandum, a copy of which has
been placed in the Federal Open Market Committee files, stated that
during the remaining six weeks of the first quarter of 1948 an ex
cess of Treasury tax and other receipts over current expenditures
would enable the Treasury to build up large deposits with Federal
Reserve Banks and thus withdraw funds from commercial banks, that
such a drain would make it necessary for commercial banks to liq
uidate some of their assets, that such liquidation presumably
would take the form of sales of Government securities most of
which would be purchased by the Federal Reserve System, that this
need for liquidation should put some pressure on banks and dis
courage them from making loans, and that it appeared that banks
might need to sell almost $2 billion of securities to the Federal
Reserve during this period if reserves were to remain substantially
at their present level.
The memorandum also discussed probable developments during
the period March 31 to June 30, 1948, stating that tentative es
timates indicated the Federal Reserve might find it necessary to
sell as much as $1 billion of Government securities during that
period to prevent an increase in reserves available to banks for
credit expansion, and it presented the outline of a possible

2/27/48 -8
program of debt retirement and new financing during the rest of the
first quarter of the year and the period from March 31 to June 30.
With respect to the estimate of the growth in reserves of banks
during the second quarter of the year, Mr. Thomas said that at the
meeting of the executive committee yesterday it was pointed out es
timates made by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York arrived at a
conclusion that the easing of pressure on banks would be much less
(perhaps as much as $2 billion) than was indicated by the estimates
prepared at the Board.
Chairman Eccles stated that it seemed clear that the situa
tion for the rest of this quarter would be one of substantial pres
sure on bank reserves as a result of which he felt it would be de
sirable to permit war loan deposits to accumulate in commercial
banks. He also said he felt no change should be made in the pres
ent policy of retiring a portion of weekly issues of maturing Treas
ury bills. With respect to the second quarter, Chairman Eccles
said that if the expected easing in the reserve position of banks
took place, there would probably be a tendency for banks to seek
additional investments either by expanding loans or by purchasing
additional securities, that if these investments were in the form
of short-term securities there would be less argument for increas
ing the short-term rate, and that to keep banks from resuming the

2/27/48 -9
purchase of longer term Government securities it might be desirable
to narrow the spread between yields on short-term and long-term Gov
ernment securities, which indicated a recommendation to the Treasury
that certificates maturing April 1, 1948, be refunded with an 11
month issue of 1-1/8 per cent certificates. He went on to say that
such an issue would indicate to the market a probable rise to 1-1/4
per cent in the rate to be paid on certificates maturing June 1,
but that it would not necessarily commit the Treasury at this time
to the adoption of such a rate if the entire outlook changed sub
stantially in the meantime. He also said that if the Treasury
was not now willing to consider the possibility of advancing the
rate on certificates to 1-1/4 per cent on June 1, it would be
undesirable to issue an 11-month 1-1/8 per cent certificate on
April 1.
Mr. Sproul stated that the Committee was faced with the
need for making important decisions when the available statisti
cal information on which to base those decisions was not as help
ful as the members of the Committee would like, that the unknown
factors in the situation were very important and many important
factors involved a large element of psychology, and that the
difference of $2 billion in the estimates of the staff of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the estimates made by the
Board's staff was of extreme importance because it might mean

2/27/48 -10
that if the latter estimates were correct the Treasury would be
putting about $1 billion into the market and if the New York fig
ures were correct the Treasury would take $1 billion out of the
market in the second quarter. In these circumstances, he said,
the Committee had to make its decisions at this meeting more
largely on the basis of judgment than had been the case at times
in the past.
Mr. Sproul felt that the most important question now was
whether the recent break in commodity markets (a) was the begin
ning of a major readjustment of the distortions and strains in
our economy which might involve a business recession of serious
proportions; (b) was a correction of an unbalanced situation which
would contribute to the maintenance of a generally strong position,
although leaving us with some inflationary pressures still at work;
(c) was a minor interlude in a continuing postwar inflationary
boom. He added that, if it was the first, monetary and debt pol
icies should be reversed so as to avoid contribution to what might
become a drastic deflation; if it was the second, existing pol
icies should be continued about as at present until the outlook
was more clearly defined; and if it was the third, the System
should intensify pressure if it had the means to do so. He ex
pressed the view that policies should be conducted according to
the second possibility, and that no further calls should be made

2/27/48 -11
on war loan accounts during this quarter. He also discussed the
conditions which would influence debt management decisions in the
second quarter and would form the basis for a recommendation that
the April 1 maturity of Treasury certificates be refunded with an
11-month 1-1/8 per cent certificate as suggested by Chairman Eccles.
He felt that such an issue would be a threat of higher rates to
come without definitely and finally committing the Treasury to an
increase in the certificate rate in connection with the June 1 re
funding, that for the present no further increase of reserve re
quirements of central reserve city banks should be made, and that
the suggested program should be subject to reversal within the
rest of the current half-year if conditions changed to warrant
such a reversal.
Mr. Sproul suggested that the immediate recommendations to
the Treasury should be (1) that no further calls be made on war
loan accounts during the first quarter, (2) that withheld taxes
be channeled through war loan accounts as soon as that change in
procedure can be made effective, and (3) that an 11-month 1-1/8
per cent certificate be offered in exchange for the April 1 matu
rity, which would be an indication that a 1-1/4 per cent rate
would be established in connection with the June refunding if
conditions at that time made such action desirable and that the
action might be followed by an increase in the discount rate.

2/27/48 -12
It was his view that these recommendations would meet the immediate
situation and that early in the second quarter, when trends could
be more clearly defined, recommendations could be made with respect
to further actions that might be taken.
There was a general discussion of the current monetary and
credit situation and the possible effects of actions available to
the System and the Treasury under existing conditions, as well as
of the possible effect of a grant to the System of additional au
thority to regulate the expansion of bank credit while at the same
time carrying out its policy of supporting the Government securi
ties market.
Toward the end of the discussion Mr. Sproul again suggested
that the three actions previously mentioned by him be recommended
to the Treasury with the understanding that the retirement of Sys
tem bill holdings would be continued at the rate of at least $100
million a week through April and perhaps beyond that time.
Mr. Evans repeated his view that the short-term rate should
not be increased further, that an increase in the rate to 1-1/4 per
cent would not be effective as an anti-inflationary measure, that
the existing short-term rates were too high with the result that
in 1947 banks had net current earnings before income taxes of about
11 per cent on their invested capital, and that this might have very

2/27/48 -13
undesirable effects upon the attitude of the public towards com
mercial banks. He added that the most effective, efficient, and
economical method for channeling short-term Government securities
into the banks would be by the special reserve plan. This method
would enable the Government to finance its short-term securities
at a rate of interest fair to the banks and the tax payers. The
alternative plan of constantly increasing the short-term rate is
a weak, inefficient, and costly process for accomplishing the de
sired result.
Chairman Eccles stated that an increase in the rate to
1-1/4 per cent would not be for the purpose of increasing bank
earnings but to narrow the spread between short- and long-term
rates so that when banks had excess reserves after the first quar
ter of the year there would be less likelihood of their buying
long-term securities because of the higher yield, thereby putting
pressure on the long-term rate as was done last year.
Chairman Eccles then suggested that the full Committee au
thorize the executive committee to submit to the Treasury recom
mendations on the four points proposed by Mr. Sproul.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
Mr. Sproul's proposal was approved with
the understanding that the executive com
mittee would also make such further rec
ommendations with respect to Treasury fi
nancing and debt management as appeared
to be desirable pending another meeting

2/27/48 -14
of the full Committee. Mr. Evans voted
"no" on the portion of the above action
that contemplated a further increase in
the short-term rate.
In connection with the foregoing discussion, Chairman Eccles
said that one of the most inflationary factors in the expansion of
bank credit for some time had been the growth in mortgage credit,
that the Board was on record with Congress as feeling that Govern
ment insurance and guarantee provisions with respect to housing
credit should be tightened, that the program contained in the Presi
dent's special message to Congress last week went beyond what was
already being done, and that if such a program was enacted it would
have seriously adverse effects on the problem of inflation and cred
it control. Chairman Eccles also said that the Board would send a
summary of this bill to the Presidents of all the Federal Reserve
Banks so that they would have available an analysis of the proposed
legislation.
There was then distributed copies of a memorandum prepared
in the Board's Division of Research and Statistics under date of
February 25, 1948, to which were attached schedules prepared at
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York of yields on a proposed new
series of Treasury savings notes intended to meet the conditions
of a 1-1/8 per cent and a 1-1/4 per cent certificate rate. Ref
erence was made to the conclusion reached at the meeting of the

2/27/48 -15
executive committee on January 20, 1948, that no recommendation
should be made to the Treasury with respect to a new series of
savings notes until a decision had been made on an increase in
the short-term rate to 1-1/4 per cent. The matter was discussed
and the members of the Committee indicated that they continued to
be of that opinion.
After a brief discussion of possible
terms of the new series of savings notes,
upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the executive commit
tee was authorized, after a decision had
been reached by the Treasury whether the
short-term rate would be increased, to
formulate and submit a recommendation to
the Treasury with respect to the issuance
of a new series of savings notes, if in
the judgment of the executive committee
such action was desirable.
Reference was made to recent statements by the Secretary of
the Treasury at a press conference which appeared to commit the
Treasury and the Federal Reserve System to the support of all issues
of securities at par. Mr. Sproul stated that he felt that, inasmuch
as the President of the United States had avoided such a commitment
in his Economic Report to Congress, and as the Federal Open Market
Committee's present policy provided for the maintenance of only the
long-term 2-1/2 per cent rate, the Secretary of the Treasury should
avoid making such statements.
The matter was discussed and Chairman Eccles suggested that,

2/27/48 -6
at the appropriate time, when other matters were being considered
with the Secretary of the Treasury, the statement be made to him
that the question of the nature of the commitment of the System
with respect to support of the Government security market had been
raised with the members of the Committee as it undoubtedly had been
with representatives of the Treasury, that the only commitment that
the System had made was, under existing and prospective conditions,
to maintain the 2-1/2 per cent long-term rate and not that it would
support all issues of Government securities at par, and that it was
the feeling of the Committee that care should be taken to avoid any
statement which might give the impression that any other commitments
had been made.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, Chairman Eccles'
suggestion was approved.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.