A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys
tem in Washington on Thursday, May 20, 1948, at 10:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. McCabe, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Clayton
Mr. Draper
Mr. Eccles
Mr. Evans
Mr. Gilbert
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Williams
Mr. Young
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Townsend, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Bopp, Irons, Langum, Robb, and
John H. Williams, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Riefler, Assistant to the Chairman of
the Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board
of Governors
Mr. Smith, Economist, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Arthur Willis, Special Assistant,
Securities Department, Federal Re
serve Bank of New York
Messrs. Leach, Gidney, McLarin, and Earhart, alter
nate members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Whittemore, Davis, and Peyton, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, St.
Louis, and Minneapolis, respectively.

5/20/48 -2
Messrs. Thompson and Johns, Vice Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and
Kansas City, respectively.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meet
ings of the Federal Open Market Committee
held on February 27 and March 1, 1948,
were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the ex
ecutive committee of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee as set forth in the minutes
of the meetings of the executive committee
held on February 26, March 1, and April 21,
1948, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
A report of open market operations covering the period from
March 1, 1948 to May 17, 1948, inclusive, was then read and dis
cussed by Mr. Rouse. He also presented a supplemental report cov
ering commitments made on May 18 and 19, 1948. Copies of the
report first mentioned were distributed during the meeting and
copies of both reports have been placed in the files of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account for the period February 27,
1948 to May 19, 1948, inclusive, were ap
proved, ratified, and confirmed.
A report of examination of the System open market account
as of February 20, 1948, made in connection with the regular ex
amination of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and submitted by
the examiner in charge for the Board of Governors, had been
brought to the attention of each member of the Committee before

5/20/48 -3
this meeting. The report noted three exceptions to the policy of
restricting transactions in United States Government securities
for the System open market account to brokers and dealers who, in
the opinion of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, met the
qualifications outlined by the executive committee of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee. These exceptions consisted of:
1. The purchase of Treasury bills in the amount of
$3,300,000 from an unqualified dealer;
2. The direct sale of $4,040,000 Treasury Bills
to a member bank; and
3. The purchase of $300,000 Treasury Bonds from
an unqualified dealer.
The examiner's report also noted that the exceptions were reported
by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to the executive committee
of the Federal Open Market Committee in the reports of System open
market account transactions with qualified dealers for the months
of August, October, and December 1947, respectively.
In commenting on the exceptions, Mr. Rouse stated in con
nection with the first that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
had previously purchased bills awarded to the unqualified dealer
on tenders at the "pegged" 3/8 per cent rate, and that the firm
did not realize that the reversion to a market rate changed the
situation. Under the circumstances it appeared to the Reserve
Bank, Mr. Rouse said, that the transaction was justified and that
it could be used as the occasion for advising the dealer that the

5/20/48 -4
Federal Reserve Bank could not deal with the dealer in this respect
unless he should become qualified. Mr. Rouse also said that the
second transaction was for the purpose of completing a $5 million
order received from a member bank under market conditions and for
reasons which appeared to make the transaction a proper one, but
that no further purchases or sales would be arranged with the Sys
tem account on member bank orders. The third transaction, Mr.
Rouse added, was simply an oversight under pressure of work.
Following Mr. Rouse's comments, upon
motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the report was received
and ordered filed.
Reference was then made to the recommendation made by the
executive committee of the Federal Open Market Committee as recorded
in the minutes of its meeting on April 21, 1948, that no change be
made at the present time in the statement of terms established by
the Federal Open Market Committee in 1944 upon which the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, as agent for the System account, trans
acts business with brokers and dealers in United States Government
securities.
Mr. Carpenter stated that a report had been prepared by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York pursuant to the action at the meet
ing of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 1, 1948, that
it had been considered at the meeting of the executive committee
on April 21, 1948, and that the executive committee voted unanimously

5/20/48 -5
to concur in the conclusion reached in the report made by the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of New York and to recommend to the full Com
mittee that no change be made at this time in the statement of
terms or their interpretation.
Mr. Rouse stated that there had been very little complaint
by unqualified dealers that they were at a disadvantage in effect
ing transactions in Government securities during the past few
months and that there appeared to be no problem such as might
have existed at the time the question was raised by some of the
smaller dealers around the end of 1947.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, it was agreed
that no change should be made in the
form or interpretation of the statement
of terms upon which the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, as agent for the Sys
tem account, transacts business with
brokers and dealers in United States
Government securities.
Chairman McCabe then called for the reports of the economists.
In accordance with a procedure suggested by Mr. Thomas, Mr.
Langum made a statement outlining the factors which had contributed
to changes in the "active money supply" and in bank reserves in
the period since the end of February 1946 when the public debt was
at its highest point.
Following Mr. Langum's remarks, Mr. Thomas gave a report
on the economic outlook in which he cited, among other factors, the
continuing inflationary pressures and the need for additional

5/20/48 -6
authority to limit credit growth in future months as a means of
avoiding still further additions to the money supply. In connec
tion with his remarks, Mr. Thomas referred to a memorandum pre
pared in the Division of Research and Statistics under date of
May 19, 1948, on the Outlook for Treasury Cash Position, and
copies of the memorandum were distributed.
Mr. John H. Williams then discussed the economic outlook,
concluding that, while there was still an inflation potential in
the money supply especially if velocity increased, a considerable
part of the inflationary pressures had already been soaked up by
the increases in prices that had occurred and that the economy
might be well on the road toward an adjustment.
Copies of the statements of the three economists and of the
Outlook for Treasury Cash Position have been placed in the files
of the Federal Open Market Committee.
During a discussion of the situation, Mr. John H. Williams
stated that it seemed clear to him that the present situation
called for continuing the monetary policies that had been in ef
fect unless it should develop that these policies would have posi
tive deflationary effects. He went on to say that present interest
rate levels, not only short-term but long-term, were abnormally low,
that rates such as these had never before existed, that short-term
rates had always been important instruments of monetary control,
and that he thought it was important to increase such rates and

5/20/48 -7
he would be willing to see longer term rates go up in order to be
able to exercise a greater influence in the money market.
Mr. Alfred H. Williams asked for the views of the other
economists.
Mr. Bopp stated that he felt inflationary pressures in the
economy were still great and that, in fact, they were getting
stronger.
Mr. Thompson said that he felt that the most significant
recent development in that connection was the survey of consumer
finances which showed that demand was outrunning the supply, that
more consumers expected to buy heavy durable goods in 1948 than
in 1947, and that as long as there was little prospect of reduc
ing demand inflationary pressures would continue severe.
Mr. Irons felt that there were continuing inflationary pres
sures, but he agreed with the statement Mr. John H. Williams had
made, and stated that a continuation of monetary policies that
have been followed recently would be adequate for dealing with
the situation.
Mr. Robb expressed the opinion that, on balance, the infla
tionary pressures were increasing, that the public generally had
come to the conclusion that present prices were more or less per
manent, and that individuals therefore were resuming buying more
aggressively.

5/20/48 -8
Mr. Langum felt that the country was in for a continuing
period of inflationary pressures and that a further increase in
bank loans would be very inflationary in effect.
Mr. Thomas stated that at a meeting in Atlanta earlier
this month, prior to the recent increase in stock market activity,
it was the consensus of the Current Business Developments Commit
tee, composed of economists from the twelve Federal Reserve Banks,
that the hesitation and uncertainty which slowed or interrupted
the upward movement of the principal dollar measures of business
activity in the first quarter did not signal a downturn in pro
duction and employment, that the underlying sustaining forces now
appeared to be strong enough to absorb the shocks likely to be
generated either by foreign or domestic developments in the per
iod under review, and that the basic sustaining factors would be
reinforced by some expansionary influences, the most notable of
which were the disappearance of the Treasury cash surplus, in
creasing Government expenditures, and some further expansion of
credit. He went on to say that the Committee concluded that
businessmen and consumers alike since the end of the war had
weathered a succession of shocks and signals pointing toward a
downturn, each of which had been followed by the resumption of
inflationary developments, that they were now likely to be strongly
impressed by the inflationary implications of current events like
the evaporation of the cash surplus, the tax cut, defense spending,

5/20/48 -9
and the limited power of the monetary authorities to restrain credit
expansion, and that in consequence the Committee expected that
through the end of October 1948 production and employment would
continue at high levels and that wholesale prices and living costs
would advance beyond previous peaks.
At Chairman McCabe's request, Mr. Sproul reported on devel
opments since the last meeting of the Committee, stating that, in
the conversation which Chairman McCabe and he had with Secretary
of the Treasury Snyder and Under Secretary Wiggins on April 28,
the views of the Committee were presented as set forth in the let
ter sent to Secretary Snyder under date of April 26, transmitting
the recommendations with respect to debt management as agreed upon
at the meeting of the executive committee on April 21. He said
that they presented the proposals in that letter in as strong a
manner as possible and found the Treasury representatives question
ing but indicating some degree of receptiveness of the ideas ad
vanced. Treasury representatives, Mr. Sproul said, raised questions
concerning the recommendations, however, including inquiries as to
why, when the situation was quiet as it was at present and war loan
accounts could be drawn on further to maintain pressure on the mar
ket, any further steps should be taken; what would happen next
fall (when the situation might be more difficult) if all our am
munition were used now; why increase the short-term rate; and what
would be the objection to having some downward pressure on long-

5/20/48 -10-
term rates. (Mr. Sproul thought the latter was an exploratory ques
tion and that the Treasury representatives were not interested in
permitting such pressure to develop.) There was the further ques
tion what effect changes in the short-term rate would have as an
anti-inflation instrument, and Mr. Sproul said that he and Chairman
McCabe agreed that an increase in the short-term interest rate was
a minor anti-inflationary measure, but that the Committee felt it
would work in the right direction and that it was worthwhile to
use it.
Mr. Sproul went on to say that subsequent to the April 28
meeting he wrote a letter to Secretary Snyder under date of May 3,
a copy of which has been placed in the files of the Federal Open
Market Committee, and which summarized the situation as follows
"To sum up, it appears to me that the additional
need for credit to finance defense contracts during
this calendar year will be relatively small and can be
satisfactorily and readily met, in most cases, out of
available sources of bank credit; that there is nothing
in the situation yet to warrant a relaxation of general
pressure, now or in the remaining months of 1948, in
order to make certain that these few specialized needs
are adequately met. In fact, unless we wish to contem
plate a situation in which 'nonessential' demands for
credit will compete with the requirements of national
defense and our foreign aid program, we must act now to
hold the gains we have made thus far this year - to
prevent a renewed expansion of the volume of credit
and of the money supply. That is the reason and pur
pose, as I see it, of the program of the executive
committee of the Federal Open Market Committee which
we have discussed with you. And, as we said at our
meeting, the market situation is such that the sooner
we act the better."

5/20/48 -11
Mr. Sproul said that he and Chairman McCabe met again with
Secretary Snyder last Wednesday (May 12), prior to the announcement
of the June financing on May 13, 1948. He added that they went over
much the same ground as in the earlier discussion, but that the new
element in the picture was that Secretary Snyder during the inter
vening period had talked with a number of bankers from various parts
of the country, in whose opinion he had confidence, and that a ma
jority of them had told him the best thing to do was to make no
change in the short-term interest rate at this time. They felt
that the situation was not serious and would not likely get out of
hand and that an increase in the rate might be delayed at least
until next autumn. Mr. Sproul added that, although the Federal Ad
visory Council had advised the Board of Governors that the Council
was in agreement that the short-term rate should be increased, two
members of the Council, who were also members of the American Bankers
Association Committee on Government Borrowing, advised the Secretary
that the rate should not be increased and that it was probable that
such advice from the bankers had swung the decision away from the
recommendation of the Federal Open Market Committee. Although he
and Chairman McCabe again strongly presented the views of the Com
mittee as set forth in the letter of April 26, Mr. Sproul said,
they found resistance to the recommendations and left the meeting
with little feeling that an increase in short-term rates would be

5/20/48 -12
announced. Mr. Sproul also reported that on the following day Sec
retary Snyder called Chairman McCabe on the telephone and said that
he had come to a decision to refund the June and July maturities
of Treasury securities with one year 1-1/8 per cent certificates,
adding that it was the most difficult decision he had had to make
as Secretary of the Treasury because of the strong recommendations
of the Federal Open Market Committee for an increase in the rate.
Chairman McCabe said that, although the decision of the
Treasury was a grave disappointment, he felt the Committee should
follow up with further policy recommendations in an effort to se
cure agreement of the Treasury along the lines previously recommended.
Thereupon the meeting recessed and reconvened at 2:15 p.m.
with the same attendance as at the morning session except that Mr.
John H. Williams was not present.
Turning to the question of policy with respect to support
of the Government securities market, Mr. Rouse said that the ef
fect of the Treasury announcement of the 1-1/8 per cent certificate
last Thursday was instantaneous in the market and that prices of
Government bonds advanced sharply. He expressed the opinion that
prices had risen to a point where there was an opportunity for the
System to reduce its holdings of bonds acquired since November.
He felt that the System should take advantage of that opportunity,
not with a view to stopping any advance in prices but rather to
temper the rise by partially meeting the demand. He thought that

5/20/48 -13
the demand would not be large but that there would be a relatively
limited supply which would have an effect on prices unless the System
supplied bonds from the System account. He added the comment that
the immediate problem was one of giving full support to the Treasury's
June and July refunding program. After that, he said, the next ma
turity would be on September 15, and whatever policy was proposed by
the Committee should be gotten under way sometime between June 25
and August 1, 1948.
In a discussion of policy with respect to selling bonds from
the System account, Mr. Clayton suggested that it would be logical to
sell as many bonds as we could without upsetting the market.
Chairman McCabe suggested that the present policy with re
spect to bills and certificates would have to be continued until the
July financing was completed, that there should be a decision on the
question of sales of bonds from the System account, and that the
policy with respect to bills and certificates after July 1 should
also be considered. He felt that the second question was the one be
fore the Committee at the moment.
In response to a question from Chairman McCabe, Mr. Rouse
said that, as proposed by Mr. Clayton, he would suggest a policy of
selling securities whenever the System could do so to withdraw re
serves from the market and to partially meet the demand without
"topping off" the market and bringing about a price decline. If a
situation should arise, after the July refunding operation was over,

5/20/48 -14-.
in which the bond market dropped back to existing support levels Mr.
Rouse would favor lowering these prices and not buying the five- to
seven-year maturities as freely as had been done in the recent past.
On the long maturities, he said, he could conceive of a situation in
which the System could go along for possibly six months without hav
ing substantial amounts of long-terms offered to the System but that
if bank loans increased materially the situation might be different.
Mr. Sproul expressed the opinion that the policy should be
to tip the balance toward taking funds out of the market rather than
supporting the market at any particular level. That would mean, he
said, that the System could sell securities from the System account
during the period immediately ahead without interfering with the
June and July financing.
Mr. Eccles stated that he might be a somewhat more reluctant
seller than had been indicated by Messrs. Rouse and Sproul and that
perhaps his point was a question of emphasis rather than difference
of approach. He said the System had favored an increase in the
short-term rate in order to protect the long-term 2-1/2 per cent rate,
that the long-term rate could be maintained by narrowing the spread
between the long and short rate or by selling securities from the
System account and Treasury trust accounts, but that if the latter
were done it would tend to keep a wide spread between the long and
short rate, would take the pressure off the short rate, and would
make it appear less necessary that the short-term rate be raised.

5/20/48 -15
Therefore, he was inclined to let the market for the long bonds re
flect the demand, based on the continuation of the short-term rate,
until such time as agreement could be reached to raise the short
term rate.
During the ensuing discussion Mr. Rouse outlined what had
been done during the last few days with respect to offering for sale
securities from the System account and Treasury trust accounts.
The discussion resulted in an agreement that, if the bond
market continued to be strong, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
acting under the direction to be issued by the executive committee
of the Federal Open Market Committee following this meeting, would
sell bonds from the System account in such amounts as to resist a
rise in prices, it being understood that selling would be accelerated
as prices went up without at any time stopping the rise and that if
the movement were reversed and the rise were later resumed, selling
would be resumed at the lower point and would again follow the rise
upward.
With respect to the policy to be followed after July 1, 1948,
Mr. Szymczak suggested that the full Committee determine what its po
sition would be so that the executive committee would be able to
discuss the matter with the Treasury. It was his view that the full
Committee should take the position that, if inflationary pressures
continued, the short-term rate should be permitted to rise in the

5/20/48 -16
market so that when the September refunding was undertaken it would
be at a 1-1/4 per cent rate.
In a discussion of Mr. Szymczak's suggestion, it was made
clear that the question of an increase in the market rate would be
discussed with representatives of the Treasury, and that, if the
Treasury raised objection, and the inflationary situation continued
to justify an increase in the short-term rate, another meeting of the
full Committee would be called to consider what the Committee's re
sponsibilities were and what action should be taken in the circumstances.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
upon motion duly made and seconded, it
was agreed unanimously that the procedure
outlined by Mr. Szymczak and during the
ensuing discussion should be followed.
In response to an inquiry from Mr. Szymczak as to what fur
ther action should be taken by the Committee with respect to a new
issue of savings notes, Chairman McCabe suggested that the Committee
continue to urge such an offering.
Upon motion duly made and seconded the
staff was requested to prepare a draft of
letter to the Treasury, to be sent with
the approval of the members of the execu
tive committee, renewing the suggestion
that a new issue of savings notes be of
fered and that the annual limit of F and
G savings bonds for pension fund invest
ment be increased from $100,000 to $200,000
or $250,000.
In connection with the instructions to be issued to the ex
ecutive committee it was suggested that, in view of financing operations

5/20/48 -17-
and other factors that would affect the market during the next few
months, the existing limitation on the authority to make changes in
holdings of the System account was larger than would be needed and
that the amount could be reduced to $1.5 billion.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the following direction to the execu
tive committee was approved, with the
understanding that the limitations
contained in the direction would in
clude commitments for the System open
market account:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for such transactions for the System open market account,
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury
(including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of
maturing securities, and letting maturities run off with
out replacement), as may be necessary, in the light of
the general credit situation of the country, for the
practical administration of the account, for the main
tenance of stable and orderly conditions in the Govern
ment security market, and for the purpose of relating
the supply of funds in the market to the needs of com
merce and business; provided that the aggregate amount
of securities held in the account at the close of this
date other than special short-term certificates of in
debtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury shall not be increased or
decreased by more than $1,500,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee,
to arrange for the purchase for the System open market
account direct from the Treasury of such amounts of
special short-term certificates of indebtedness as may
be necessary from time to time for the temporary accom
modation of the Treasury; provided that the total amount
of such certificates held in the account at any one time
shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.

5/20/48 -18
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee should be set tentatively for the week of October 4, 1948.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned,
Secretary.
Approved: Chairman.