A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Monday, November 15, 1948, at 10:10 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. McCabe, Chairman
Mr. Clayton
Mr. Draper
Mr. Eccles
Mr. Evans
Mr. Gilbert
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Williams
Mr. Young
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Assis. nt to the Board of Governors
Mr. Riefler, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of Gov
ernors
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
October 4, 1948, were approved.
Mr. Rouse then read a report of open market operations pre
pared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York covering the period
from October 4, 1948, to November 10, 1948, inclusive. He also
submitted a report of operations on November 12, 1948 (November 11
was a holiday), and there was a brief discussion of the reports,
copies of which have been placed in the files of the Federal Open
Market Committee.

11/15/48
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account for the period October 3,
1948, to November 12, 1948, inclusive, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Chairman McCabe stated that he and Mr. Sproul (who was ill
and could not attend this meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee) called on Secretary of the Treasury Snyder on October 13,
1948, to deliver the letter prepared in accordance with the action
at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on October 4,
that they conferred with Secretary Snyder together subsequently to
discuss the matter further, and that he (Chairman McCabe) called
on the Secretary alone last Wednesday, November 10, 1948, at which
time Mr. Sproul could not be present.
At the meeting on October 13, Chairman McCabe said, there
was a general review of the situation and he and Mr. Sproul ampli
fied the views of the Open Market Committee as outlined in the Com
mittee's letter. He went on to say that Secretary Snyder said at
the first meeting that he wanted to take the matter under advise
ment, that at the second meeting the Secretary showed a sympathetic
interest in the recommendations of the Committee, but that at the
conference last Wednesday he stated that he had come to the def
inite conclusion in his own mind, because of the hesitation shown
in the market since the National election on November 2, that it
would be a mistake to increase bill and certificate rates until

11/15/48 -3
there was an opportunity to see what effect the drop in securities
prices would have and what the trend in the economic picture would
be.
Chairman McCabe added that Secretary Snyder wanted to an
nounce immediately that there would be no change in short-term rates
in connection with December and January refunding operations and
that the $571 million issue of bonds maturing on December 15, 1948,
and the certificates and notes maturing on January 1, 1949, would
be refunded with a one-year 1-1/4 per cent certificate. In addi
tion, he wanted to keep the bill rate from rising above 1.15 per
cent. Chairman McCabe stated that the reason given by the Secre
tary for the proposed announcement was that there had been so much
talk in the market about an increase in the short-term rate that
he felt it was time to bring some equilibrium into the market and
get the thing settled now, and that when the Treasury had made up
its mind he felt it was best to make the announcement immediately
so as to prevent any leaks.
Chairman McCabe stated that he protested vigorously the
making of an announcement at this time and restated, as strongly
as he could, the position of the Committee with respect to an in
crease in the short-term rate, adding that, in spite of conditions
in the stock market hesitation on the part of business, and the
fact that some bankers felt no action should be taken to increase

11/15/48 -4
rates at this time, there were continuing inflationary pressures
which called for an increase in the rate as suggested by the Com
mittee. At the end of the discussion, Chairman McCabe said, Sec
retary Snyder consented to withhold the proposed announcement until
after this meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Chairman McCabe said that he had talked with Mr. Sproul twice
from Secretary Snyder's office last Wednesday and that Mr. Sproul
agreed with the views outlined by Chairman McCabe, with the sugges
tion that the matter be discussed by the Committee, and, if the
Committee agreed, that it try to persuade the Secretary to postpone
the announcement.
In the ensuing discussion, Mr. Eccles stated that the situa
tion had changed materially since the meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee on October 4, 1948, and that the economists might
discuss, in the light of the current situation, the proposal that
the short-term rate be increased.
Mr. Riefler stated that the election had shocked those who
made investment decisions and they were making no new commitments,
that if the condition continued there could be a recession, but
that he would be skeptical as to how far it could go because basic
demands continued large, public utilities would continue to expand
in response to demand, and the military program would be larger than
now expected. However, in view of the changed situation, he felt

11/15/48 -5
that a longer term appraisal of Treasury debt management and fi
nancing policies would be in order.
Mr. Thomas stated that the reason for wanting to raise the
short-term interest rate was that the present rate structure was
artificial and unreasonable in a period of great activity or in a
period of strong demand for funds, and that as long as the present
wide spread between long-term and short-term yields continued under
existing conditions the System would be faced with the necessity of
supporting the market for long-term bonds at times when it did not
wish to be bound to give support. He felt it would have been better
if the short-term rate had been increased earlier as a move in the
direction of desirable greater flexibility in the short-term market,
and encouraging holders of liquid funds to put these funds in short
term issues.
As to the basic forces operating in the economy, he pointed
to the military program, foreign demands for American goods, and
the domestic situation, in which there was a high level of unsat
isfied demand, and stated that in his opinion there was a strong
likelihood that there would be a period of hesitation which could
be followed by an inflationary condition which would be stronger
than before, and which could end in a severe depression. In this
situation, he felt that a continued restrictive policy would be
called for.

11/15/48 -6
In connection with Mr. Thomas' remarks, reference was made
to memoranda on the Outlook for Bank Reserves and Treasury Financing
and Current Money Market Developments, dated November 5 and 12, 1948,
respectively, copies of which have been placed in the files of the
Federal Open Market Committee.
In response to a request from Chairman McCabe, Mr. Rouse
discussed possible conditions in the Government securities market
and what might be done in the System open market account to meet
changing conditions.
There followed a discussion of what should be said to Secre
tary Snyder when Chairman McCabe met with him again and there was
agreement that the announcement of the December and January refund
ing should be deferred. It was also agreed that a draft of letter
to Secretary Snyder should be prepared by Messrs. Morrill, Thomas,
Riefler, and Rouse for consideration by the Committee after luncheon.
Thereupon, the meeting recessed and reconvened at 3:15 p.m.
with the same attendance as at the morning session, except that
Mr. Thomas was not present.
Mr. Carpenter read the draft of letter to the Treasury pre
pared in accordance with the understanding at the morning session.
The draft was discussed and revised
and, upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, was approved in the
following form, with the understanding that,
if possible, Chairman McCabe would deliver
it to Secretary Snyder this afternoon:

11/15/48
"In a meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
today I reviewed the informal discussions which we have
had with you since my letter of October 13, 1948, out
lining the views and recommendations of the Federal Open
Market Committee with respect to Treasury debt manage
ment and Federal Reserve open market policies. While
Mr. Sproul was not able to attend today's meeting, be
cause of illness, I have discussed these matters with
him and he concurs in the views expressed in this let
ter.
"It is the opinion of the Committee that, notwith
standing the recent slackening in the public's sales of
bonds to the Federal Reserve and some evidences of hesi
tation in business plans and commitments, the basic forces
in the credit situation and the necessity for flexibility
in Federal Reserve open market operations continue un
changed.
"You have indicated a desire to make an immediate an
nouncement of the December and January refunding without
change in rates. It is the unanimous judgment of the
members of the Committee that a decision and therefore an
announcement would be premature at this time for the rea
son that it is not now possible to forecast market condi
tions with sufficient accuracy to justify a conclusion.
We understand that an announcement of specific rates on
the securities to be issued in a refunding operation can
be deferred until a date early in December. In the mean
time, we will continue the present support policy and
will have the benefit of market developments and can re
view them at the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee which had already been set for November 30.
"If notwithstanding this recommendation it is your
decision to announce immediately a refunding on an un
changed rate basis, I can assure you that it will be the
policy of the Committee, as heretofore, to support the
current one-year issuing rate for Treasury certificates
through the refunding period. At the same time the Com
mittee will continue the policy stated in our letter of
October 13 permitting flexibility in the Treasury bill
market up to the limit imposed by the support of the
current certificate rate.
"The suggestion has been made that between now and
the end of the year the Treasury draw upon its balances
for the purpose of continuing pressure on bank reserves.
These funds would be used most effectively if the Treasury

"were to purchase long-term securities from the System
account or, in the event the System is purchasing se
curities in the market to support the long-term rate,
if the Treasury were to purchase long-terms directly
from the market. The Committee is in agreement with
this suggestion and recommends its adoption by the
Treasury.
"The Committee is of the opinion that it has be
come more necessary than ever to determine upon a com
prehensive long-term program looking toward the re
financing of the public debt including the refunding
of some of the outstanding debt into issues and ma
turities that the market will carry without undue re
liance upon Federal Reserve support. We would like to
discuss this matter with you at your earliest con
venience."
Secretary's Note: Chairman McCabe called on
Secretary Snyder on the afternoon of Monday,
November 15, 1948, and later stated that the
Secretary read the letter approved by the Fed
eral Open Market Committee and expressed the
view that it was an excellent letter, particu
larly the last paragraph with respect to a com
prehensive long-term program. In the latter con
nection, the Secretary said he thought the staffs
of the Treasury and the Open Market Committee
should discuss such a program. He also said that
he would like to think about the balance of the
Committee's letter overnight. Chairman McCabe
told Mr. Snyder that the matter had been given
very careful thought at a meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee which lasted most of the
day and that the Committee would sincerely hope
that the Treasury would accept the Committee's
recommendation. The following morning Secretary
Snyder called Chairman McCabe to say that re
porters had been pressing for an announcement
on the refunding and that under the circumstances
he saw no other course than to make the announce
ment. The announcement that the December and
January refunding would be an offering of cer
tificates at a 1-1/4 per cent rate was made by
the Treasury on November 16, 1948.

11/15/48 -9
During the discussion of the letter set forth above, there
was distributed to the representative members of the Committee a
confidential memorandum prepared by members of the Board's staff
under date of November 12, 1948, entitled, "A Conversion Operation
for Restricted Bonds", and, at Chairman McCabe's suggestion, it
was understood that prior to November 30, 1948, the date of the
next meeting, the members of the Committee would send to the Sec
retary any views they might wish to express with respect to the
proposals contained in the memorandum.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.