A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, June 28, 1949, at 2:30 p.m.
PRESENT: Mr. McCabe, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Clayton
Mr. Draper
Mr. Earhart
Mr. Eccles
Mr. Evans
Mr. Gidney
Mr. Leach
Mr. McLarin
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System
Open Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the
Board of Governors
Mr. Riefler, Assistant to the
Chairman, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary,
Board of Governors
Mr. Ralph A. Young, Associate Director,
Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Smith, Economist, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Arthur Willis, Special Assistant,
Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Raisty, Economist, Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on May 3, 1949, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,

6/28/49 -2
and by unanimous vote, the actions of
the executive committee of the Federal
Open Market Committee as set forth in
the minutes of the meetings of the exec
utive committee held on May 3 and June
3, 1949, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Mr. Rouse then read and discussed a report of open market op
erations prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, covering
the period from May 3, 1949, to June 23, 1949, inclusive. He also
presented a supplementary report covering commitments executed on
June 24 and June 27, 1949. Copies of both reports have been placed
in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Particular attention was called by Mr. Rouse to the purchase
of special Treasury certificates on June 15 and the rate of 1/4 per
cent per annum charged the Treasury in that connection. Mr. Rouse re
ferred to the history of this rate, including the discussion and ap
proval of the same rate at the meeting of the executive committee on
August 6, 1947. There was general approval of the continuance of
the 1/4 percent rate.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System account for the period May
3, 1949, through June 27, 1949, inclu
sive, were approved, ratified, and con
firmed.
Chairman McCabe referred to discussions of open market policy
at previous meetings and to conversations which he and Mr. Sproul had
had during the past year with the Secretary of the Treasury concern
ing the policy of supporting the Government securities market, stating

6/28/49 .3
that last week he and Mr. Sproul called upon Secretary Snyder at which
time they discussed a possible change in the present support program.
Chairman McCabe then called upon Mr. Sproul to report on the conver
sation with Secretary Snyder and in this connection referred to a
letter dated June 17, 1949, from Mr. Stevens, Chairman of the Board
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to the Board of Governors,
copies of which, he said, had been sent to all Federal Reserve Banks.
The letter outlined the views of the Board of the New York Bank with
respect to the present economic situation and discussed a program for
monetary policy.
Mr. Sproul stated that he and Chairman McCabe presented to
the Secretary of the Treasury the view that declines in business in
recent months had gone faster than had been considered likely at the
beginning of this year, that further declines appeared probable, and
that the policy which allowed the market to determine when it could
obtain Federal Reserve credit was no longer appropriate. In outlin
ing to Secretary Snyder a possible change in policy, he said, there
was presented a program which contemplated the release of the Fed
eral Reserve from maintenance of the relatively fixed structure of
prices or interest rates in the Government securities market. It was
pointed out that under present circumstances the market tends to in
vest any available funds in Government securities which the Federal
Reserve Banks supply and to keep excess reserves as low as practicable.
This takes funds out of the market when we wish to put them in. Nov

6/28/49 -4
the time has come for an affirmative credit policy in the light of
the developing business situation, which would have significance to
the market, the banking system, and ourselves. Mr. Sproul added
that he and Chairman McCabe expressed the view that the present when
pressures on Government securities prices were upwards and on rates
downward might be the time for the change in policy. It was suggested
that, with the Treasury's July 1st financing out of the way, the Fed
eral Open Market Committee might begin to govern its operations with
regard to the general business and credit situation as well as to the
maintenance of orderly conditions in the Government securities market,
without attempting to maintain the relatively fixed structure of
prices and rates. This would contemplate, he said, increasing avail
ability of reserve funds, leading to buoyancy in the short-term mar
ket including some further decline in rates. With respect to long
term rates, Mr. Sproul said that the main risk perhaps would be that
the Treasury would take advantage of the favorable rate situation to
issue securities which later would not hold their place in the market
and the System would again be called upon to "support a rate" or to
protect par quotations. Mr. Sproul made the further statement that
Secretary Snyder was receptive to the approach which suggested a de
cline in interest rates rather than an increase, and that he said he
saw no objection to the program but would like to consider it further
and would get in touch with Chairman McCabe later.
Chairman McCabe stated that in subsequent conversations,

6/28/49 -5
Secretary Snyder again indicated he was favorably disposed to the
program outlined but that he would prefer that there be no public
announcement of a change in policy. In this connection, Chairman
McCabe referred to three memoranda prepared in the Board's Division
of Research and Statistics under dates of June 26 and 27, 1949, with
respect to The Current Economic Situation and Outlook, Need for
Positive Program of Credit Policy to Counteract Deflation, and Man
agement of the Bill Market Under a Program of Credit Policy to
Counteract Deflation. The memoranda had been distributed to Committee
members before this meeting and copies have been placed in the files
of the Federal Open Market Committee.
In connection with a question raised by Mr. Leach as to
whether the program would remove the peg on long-term Government
securities, Chairman McCabe expressed the opinion that there was no
need to meet that problem before it arose, that there should be some
uncertainty, and that it was not desirable for banks to feel that
long-term bonds were demand obligations. He suggested that consid
eration be given to a draft of a proposed press statement which had
been prepared in the Board's offices in the light of the conversa
tions with Secretary Snyder. Copies of the draft were then distrib
uted.
During an extended discussion, the wording of the statement
was revised and at the request of Chairman McCabe members of the Com
mittee expressed their views as to its significance and the policy

6/28/49 -6
they felt should be followed.
Mr. Earhart stated the view that the Committee had been wait
ing for a suitable time to get away from a pegged market and that in
his opinion now was the time to do so.
Mr. Gidney said that the meaning of the statement was not
clear and that he would want it to be more definite and positive. He
also said that he would be glad to get away from a pegged long-term
bond market and would prefer to make that clear in any announcement
of policy issued by the Committee, adding, however, that the action
taken rather than the statement issued would be the important factor
determining the reaction of the market and the general public to a
change in policy.
Mr. Szymczak stated that he felt the statement should make it
clear that the policy of the Committee would be to have orderly mar
ket conditions but that it should not refer to Government bonds in
such a way as to commit the Committee needlessly to support of the
long-term bonds, that in the present situation long-term securities
were selling well above par and would continue to do so for the in
definite future, that the Committee did not and could not know at
this time what the future would hold, and that, since there was no
likelihood at this time that long-term bonds would sell below par to
yield more than 2-1/2 percent, it was undesirable for the Committee
to commit itself to support that rate.
Mr. Leach stated that he would like to make it clear to

6/28/49 -7
everybody that the Committee was no longer supporting the long-term
rate of 2-1/2 percent.
Mr. McLarin stated that, on the basis of the statement pro
posed, he could not be sure whether the Committee intended to abandon
the long-term peg, but that, if there was to be a definite change
of policy in that respect, it would be desirable to state the change
in such a manner that the public could understand it.
Mr. Sproul said that understanding of the proposed action
would come more through subsequent actions in the market than from
any statement the Committee might issue and for that reason he would
not place too great importance on the statement. He also said that
he felt the Federal Reserve was in a dilemma with respect to the state
ment in that it did not wish to abandon permanently any idea that it
might have to come to the support of the Government securities market
subsequently, but that on the other hand at this moment it wanted to
abandon the policy of supporting a fairly rigid structure of interest
rates and that it desired the market to move as freely as possible
except for the necessity of maintaining orderly conditions in the mar
ket. He suggested that the Committee issue a statement in a form
which he outlined which he felt should come as close as possible to
the statement for the policy record that would be required to be pub
lished under Section 10 of the Federal Reserve Act.
Mr. Evans made the comment that he had difficulty in under
standing a policy under which when reserve requirements were lowered,

6/28/49 -8
the Committee absorbs the resulting reserves by selling securities.
He felt it was unwise to allow the public to believe that lowered
reserve requirements meant easier money conditions, when in actu
ality the Committee was not allowing the reserves to be effective
because they absorbed them through sales from the System portfolio;
that this policy was, in effect, putting a peg under interest rates,
and since Congress, against the Board's expressed desire, had
turned these reserves loose, they should be free to exert any in
fluence they might have wherever they were used. In his opinion the
Federal Reserve program of supporting the Government bond market
and in not permitting it to break par, was one of the major accom
plishments of the postwar period and had, in his opinion, profoundly
affected the course of events in this and less fortunate countries.
Mr. Sproul stated in response to Mr. Evans' first comment
that the actions of the Committee were governed by the policy of sup
porting the rate pattern. He felt it wholly unlikely that the action
which the Committee proposed to take would have the effect of causing
a loss of confidence on the part of investors, that it contemplated
permitting the additional reserve funds to become fully available to
the market, which would have the effect of increasing demand for
Government securities, but that if the situation Mr. Evans described
should arise he assumed the Committee would then be meeting and
would be desirous of doing what seemed appropriate under all the circum
stances. Mr. Sproul said that, while he would object strenuously to

6/28/49 -9
issuance of a statement that the long-term 2-1/2 percent rate would
be maintained for all time in the future, he would approve a state
ment in the form proposed which indicated that the confidence of in
vestors would be maintained but which left some doubt as to just
what would be done with respect to the long-term peg.
Mr. Evans reiterated the view that the announcement should
include a statement that the 2-1/2 percent rate on long-term Govern
ment bonds would be maintained in the future, but that he would ap
prove a statement along the lines of the one under discussion so long
as it was clearly understood that the Committee's action did not con
template abandoning support of that rate.
Chairman McCabe then raised the question whether any announce
ment of the proposed policy should be issued, in view of Secretary
Snyder's preference that the proposed change in policy not be announced
but that it become evident by the actions taken in the market. It
was the consensus of the members of the Committee that a statement
should be issued along the lines of the one under discussion, so that
all concerned would have an equal opportunity to be informed as to
the Committee's action.
Chairman McCabe then stated that he had also given some con
sideration to issuance of an additional statement jointly by himself
and Secretary Snyder, explaining in greater detail the change in
policy. One of the principal reasons for doing so, he said, would be
to obtain a clear understanding in advance with Secretary Snyder of

6/28/49 -10
the interpretation of the action. There was a discussion of such a
statement, during which Chairman McCabe read portions of a draft
he had prepared, and it was the consensus of the members of the Com
mittee that it would be preferable to stand on the Committee's of
ficial announcement of policy and that there should be no supplemen
tary or explanatory statements.
Chairman McCabe stated that in their discussions, Secretary
Snyder raised the question, in view of the size of future refunding
operations and possible new financing needs, whether there would be
any change in the policy of the Federal Open Market Committee in sup
porting the Treasury in its future financing, and Chairman McCabe
read a draft of letter for his signature to Secretary Snyder, as fol
lows:
"In connection with our recent discussions of System
policy, you asked me whether you could count on complete
support from the Federal Reserve System in future refunding
and new money financing.
"I think our record of the past is clear. There has
been maximum support on the part of the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System and of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee in your debt management problems.
"I am confident that our close and cordial relation
ship will continue in the future as it has in the past. I
am not aware of any disposition to deviate from this re
lationship which is so essential in enabling the Treasury
and the Reserve System to carry out their responsibilities.
We all agree, I am sure, that the programs and policies to
be pursued would be decided upon after full discussion and
mutual understanding."
There followed a discussion of the draft, during which Mr.
Earhart asked whether Secretary Snyder felt that under the proposed
change in policy the Federal Reserve System was committed to support

6/28/49 -11
of long-term Government bonds at par.
Chairman McCabe said that he did not think Secretary Snyder
felt the System was committed, but that he did feel it would be
catastrophic if long-term Government bonds were allowed to drop be
low par.
Mr. Sproul stated that he felt it had been made clear to
Secretary Snyder that the Federal Reserve System would retain the
obligation and the opportunity to consider that situation when and
if it arose, and that the proposed letter to Secretary Snyder con
templated that there would be mutual understanding of policy and
decision by those who had responsibility under the statutes.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the foregoing letter to
Secretary Snyder, prepared for Chairman
McCabe's signature, was approved unani
mously.
The discussion then returned to consideration of the statement
of policy to be issued by the Federal Open Market Committee, during
which various drafts and changes were considered. Mr. Riefler ques
tioned whether the new policy would preclude a change in bill opera
tions, for example, a change so that the System would not replace
maturing bills.
Mr. Sproul stated that it was clear to him that such a change
would not be precluded by the proposed statement.
Mr. Eccles said that he agreed with this interpretation, add
ing that, as he interpreted the proposed policy, if the Federal Open

6/28/49 -12
Market Committee also wished to replace maturing bills by bidding a
little higher for new bills, it would be permissible to do so. The
main point, he said, was to permit the reserves that would go into
the market as a result of the expiration of the supplemental reserve
requirements authority on June 30, 1949, to have their full effect
without interference by the System.
In response to an inquiry from Mr. Riefler, Mr. Vest expressed
the opinion that there was no legal question involved in the proposed
statement.
Mr. Clayton suggested and it was agreed that the statement as
proposed would not preclude either of the courses of action described
by Messrs. Eccles and Riefler.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following statement of pol
icy was approved unanimously with the
understanding that it would be given to
the press today for immediate release:
"The Federal Open Market Committee, after consultation
with the Treasury, announced today that with a view to in
creasing the supply of funds available in the market to meet
the needs of commerce, business, and agriculture it will be
the policy of the Committee to direct purchases, sales, and
exchanges of Government securities by the Federal Reserve
Banks with primary regard to the general business and credit
situation. The policy of maintaining orderly conditions in
the Government security market and the confidence of investors
in Government bonds will be continued. Under present condi
tions the maintenance of a relatively fixed pattern of rates
has the undesirable effect of absorbing reserves from the mar
ket at a time when the availability of credit should be in
creased."
Chairman McCabe then asked for an informal expression of views

6/28/49 -13
of the members of the Committee who were Presidents of Reserve Banks
as to changes that should be made in reserve requirements ofm ember
banks, particularly as to whether reserves should be further reduced
by the Board by an amount in addition to the release of about $800
million of reserves that would result from expiration on June 30,
1949, of the authority for supplemental reserves.
Mr. McLarin stated that he felt reserve requirements of banks
should be lowered, that reserve city banks were keeping most of their
funds invested, and that banks in nonreserve cities were selling se
curities in order to make seasonal agricultural loans. The first re
duction, he felt, should go to banks in nonreserve cities. In
response to a request from Mr. McLarin, Mr. Raisty said that, on the
basis of a recent survey in the Atlanta district, it was evident that
the smaller banks definitely desired reductions in reserve require
ments, that this was the season of heavy demand for loans, that they
were selling securities to obtain reserves for use in making loans,
and that some of them also felt a further reduction in security mar
gin requirements to 25 per cent would be helpful, feeling that a
great many stocks with long dividend records would then become avail
able for collateral for bank loans.
Mr. Leach stated that while a reduction in reserve requirements
would have the advantage of lessening the competitive advantages of
nonmember banks over member banks, he did not think a substantial re
duction at this time would be desirable from the standpoint of monetary

6/28/49 -14
policy. It was his opinion that the System should make sufficient
funds available to create a favorable climate for bank lending with
some reduction in interest rates, but that it would not be desirable
to take action that would force rates down substantially. He said
he would, however, favor reducing reserve requirements of central
reserve city banks by 2 percentage points at the same time that the
supplemental reserve requirements were lifted from reserve and non
reserve city banks.
Messrs. Earhart and Gidney stated they thought it would be
appropriate to take no action beyond letting the requirements de
crease by reason of the expiration of the statutory authority for
supplemental reserve requirements until there had been an oppor
tunity to observe the effects in the market of the resulting addi
tion of $800 million of reserves. They felt that this was a sub
stantial amount.
Mr. Eccles said that he felt that there was a question as
to the advisability of further reducing reserve requirements in
central reserve cities at this time. He pointed out that the Fed
eral Reserve Act provided for a basic requirement of 7 percent at
nonreserve city banks, 10 percent at reserve city banks and 13 per
cent at central reserve city banks and a maximum of double those
percentages; that the reserve requirements in central reserve cities
were already 2 percentage points less than the statutory limit of
26 percent, whereas in all other banks the requirements were at the

6/28/49 -15
statutory limit; and that, unless there was a very good case for
a reduction at central reserve cities, consideration would have to
be given to the psychological effect on the other banks. He stated
that the money market is extremely easy in New York and Chicago,
that loans in those cities have gone off to a substantial extent;
not because of any desire on the part of the bankers but because
borrowers are not seeking additional loans and are paying off exis
ting loans, and that, consequently, funds have been added to the
reserves in the money market with the result that rates are going
down, and money market banks are beginning to look for term loans
again. He added that banks outside central reserve cities can not
use their funds quite as effectively as the central reserve city
banks which are able to keep fully invested, and that a large part
of the $800 million that would be released by expiration of the
supplemental reserve requirements authority on June 30 would flow
quickly into central reserve city banks. Therefore, he thought
that it would be a mistake at this time to reduce the requirements
at central reserve cities although at some later time it might
prove to be desirable to reduce reserve requirements on demand de
posits 2 percentage points at all member banks.
Mr. Sproul said that, in terms of the amount of reserve
funds needed in the market, he felt the addition of $800 million
would be sufficient, but that there was the factor of location of
reserves, that central reserve city banks were not supplied with

6/28/49 -16
excess reserves, and that in terms of the psychology of the banks
with respect to their loans and investments there was something to
be said for placing those banks in a position and creating for them
a climate for credit expansion. If the funds released to reserve
and nonreserve city banks by expiration of the supplemental reserve
authority would flow into the money market as quickly as Mr. Eccles
believed, this argument might fall, and he would not want to keep on
piling up excess reserves.
In response to a question from Mr. Evans as to the volume
of excess reserves that Mr. Sproul thought would be desirable the
latter said that he thought the aggregate volume created by the re
lease of the $800 million on June 30 would be sufficient at this
time.
The discussion again returned to the question of the action
that might be taken in carrying out the policy adopted by the Com
mittee as set forth in the statement approved for release to the
press.
Mr. Riefler said that the economic situation had deterio
rated to a point where positive action on the part of the Federal
Reserve System to ease conditions was justified, and that the main
tenance of a volume of active excess reserves of around $500 million
seeking investment would influence banks to increase their financing.
Since the market has shown itself willing to hold up to about
$1,000 million excess reserves without active pressure on lending

6/28/49 -17
pattterns, this policy would imply the maintenance on a statistical
basis of $1,500 million excess reserves, or about the amount that
would be present in the market as a result of the release of $800
millions on June 30. He stated that the problem before the System
was how it could maintain this volume of excess reserves without
at the same time actively bidding short rates down and further accent
uating the present distorted pattern of interest rates. This problem
grew out of the peculiarities of the auction system of marketing
bills. The System would be able to roll over its certificates at
whatever rate was set by the Treasury in view of the market. It
could not roll over its bill holdings, however, without actively
bidding against the market to replace bills as they matured. He
said that in his view an ideal situation would be one in which the
influence of the System would be neutral with respect to the rate
for any particular maturity and was confined solely to the respon
sibility for the maintenance of excess reserves. These would them
selves, of course, produce easier rates throughout the market. How
ever, if the System desired to hold its total portfolio constant in
order to maintain the volume of excess reserves that were in prospect,
it would have to bid actively in the bill auction each week to roll
over its maturities. This would involve active competition with mar
ket bids at a time when excess reserves were active. It would force
a disproportionate drop in rates at the short end of the market and
would perpetuate and accentuate the present distortion in the interest

6/28/49 -18
rate structure as between the long and the short end. The problem,
In theory, could be met by allowing the bills to run off as they
matured and by replacing them in the System portfolio by equiva
lent purchases of certificates and bonds. The trouble with this
solution is that it would involve the System in open market purchases
at a time when there would exist independently a bull market for
Treasury certificates and bonds. To buy in such a market to main
tain the System portfolio would be unsound and might have serious
effects on prices. In view of this dilemma, he felt the logical
solution led inexorably to a policy in which the System would put
in no bids for bills as present holdings matured, and in which re
serve requirements would be reduced progressively to permit the
bills from the System account to be acquired by the market. Out
of this, he felt, would come a different pattern of interest rates
than now existed, one that would not be so much affected by Federal
Reserve purchases of securities, and one which would leave the Sys
tem in a more flexible position when it may be faced with rising
yields in the Government securities market at a time of business
revival. He suggested that if present holdings of bills of about
$4,000 millions were allowed to run off and reserves were reduced
to make it possible for the market to take them up, it might mean
a reduction in reserve requirements of as much as 6 percentage points
by the end of this calendar year.
Mr. Riefler further explained that he was not interested in

6/28/49 -19
lower short-term interest rates as such during the period immed
iately ahead. He was prepared to accept them, however, as an
inevitable consequence of bank reserve positions that would put
banks under some pressure as lenders. He felt that conditions
would change as business recession was succeeded by revival and
at that stage rates would rise. The System, if it were out of
the bill market at that time, could more easily follow policies
to move short-rates up.
In a comment on Mr. Riefler's remarks, Mr. Sproul said he
felt the System faced a problem of choices, that, regardless of
how it did it, the System would be the active agent in pushing in
terest rates downward, and that the question whether it was better
to reduce reserve requirements than to bid in the market for bills
was something that would have to be worked out in practice. He
vent on to say that he would prefer to roll over the present bill
holdings and see how the market responded rather than to adopt at
this moment a policy of reducing reserve requirements to enable
banks to take the bills.
Mr. Rouse stated that the Treasury might have a need for
cash financing in the immediate future, perhaps in July, that the
rate to be bid on bills would come into the picture very promptly,
and that he would like to have a clear understanding of the proced
ure to be followed.
Mr. Sproul suggested that the Committee have a general

6/28/49 -20
understanding that it would be the policy to maintain about $1,500
million of excess reserves in the market and that the way in which
that would be done would depend on developments after the $800 mil
lion of reserves was released at the end of June by expiration of
the supplemental requirements. No disagreement with this suggestion
was indicated by any of the members of the Committee.
Chairman McCabe again invited the members of the Committee
who were Presidents of Reserve Banks to express their informal
views as to action that should be taken with respect to reserve re
quirements in the light of the foregoing discussion, and each of
them indicated that he would favor letting the supplemental authority
expire without additional reductions at this time, Mr. McLarin
adding that he was glad to know that consideration was being given
to a possible further reduction, and, therefore, in view of the ap
parent intention of taking prompt action when considered advisable
he would not urge further reduction immediately.
Mr. Sproul commented that although he felt there was some
basis for reducing reserve requirements of central reserve city
banks at this time, he felt such action could wait until it could
be observed whether the reserves released to reserve and nonreserve
city banks would flow quickly into the money market.
At this time a memorandum from Messrs. Young and Smith dated
June 28, 1949, with respect to Treasury requirements for the fiscal
year 1950 was distributed. A copy of the memorandum has been placed

6/28/49 -21
in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Question was raised as to whether, if the Treasury should
need to obtain additional cash during July and August, the Com
mittee would wish to make a recommendation as to the means for ob
taining such funds.
Mr. Rouse stated that the Treasury would probably contem
plate the issuance of additional bills at least during July and
August, that it might need to raise as much as $1 1o/r2 $2 billion
over the near-term future, and that he would like to see an issue
of 4 to 5 year notes, maturing in March 1954.
Several members of the Committee expressed the view that
it would be desirable to recommend to the Treasury that it draw
down its cash balance during the next few weeks while the effects
of the changed policy were becoming apparent, and that when the
Treasury needed new money it be obtained through the issuance of
an intermediate term obligation, probably a 4 to 5 year note, at
whatever rate was indicated by the market at the time it was
issued.
Mr. Clayton suggested that the full Committee make no formal
recommendation to the Treasury at this time but that it authorize
the executive committee to make such recommendation to the Treas
ury as seemed desirable in the light of developments over the next
few weeks and of the view of the full Committee that new money
should be raised by the Treasury through the issue of intermediate

6/28/49 -22
securities of the type referred to in the foregoing discussion.
Mr. Clayton's suggestion was ap
proved unanimously.
During the discussion of the recommendation to be made on
Treasury financing, question was raised as to the date for the next
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee which had been tenta
tively set for August 29, 1949, at the meeting on May 3, 1949.
Chairman McCabe suggested that the date be left subject to call,
and this suggestion was approved.
Consideration was then given to the direction to be issued
to the executive committee to arrange for transactions in the Sys
tem open market account and to the question whether any changes in
the wording of the direction should be made because of the changed
policy adopted at this meeting. Reference was made particularly to
the part of the first sentence which directed the executive com
mittee to arrange for transactions "for the maintenance of stable
and orderly conditions in the Government security market," and Mr.
Sproul suggested that the words "stable and" be deleted. He pointed
out that, while the objective under the new policy was to maintain
orderly conditions, there might well be some decline in rates under
the new policy, and it was agreed that the change should be made.
In a discussion of the extent of authority to be given the
executive committee, it was suggested that the existing $3 billion
limit in the first paragraph of the direction and the $1.5 billion
limit in the second paragraph be continued.

6/28/49
-23-
Thereupon, upon motion duly
made and seconded, the following
direction to the executive commit
tee was approved unanimously, with
the understanding that the limita
tions contained in the direction
would include commitments for the
System open market account:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for such transactions for the System open market account,
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury
(including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of
maturing securities, and letting maturities run off with
out replacement), as may be necessary, in the light of
changing economic conditions and the general credit
situation of the country, for the practical administra
tion of the account, for the maintenance of orderly con
ditions in the Government security market, and for the
purpose of relating the supply of funds in the market to
the needs of commerce and business; provided that the
aggregate amount of securities held in the account at
the close of this date other than special short-term
certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time
for the temporary accomodation of the Treasury shall not
be increased or decreased by more than $3,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee,
to arrange for the purchase for the System open market
account direct from the Treasury of such amounts of special
short-term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the
Treasury; provided that the total amount of such certificates
held in the account at any one time shall not exceed
$1,500,000,000.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.