A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, March 1, 1949, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. McCabe, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Clayton
Mr. Draper
Mr. Earhart
Mr. Eccles
Mr. Gidney
Mr. Leach
Mr. McLarin
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Mr. John H. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open Market
Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Riefler, Assistant to the Chairman, Board
of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Smith, Economist, Government Finance Sec
tion, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Arthur Willis, Special Assistant, Securi
ties Department, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York
Mr. Young, alternate member of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Leedy and Gilbert, Presidents of the Fed
eral Reserve Banks of Kansas City and Dallas,
respectively
Mr. Irons, Vice President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas, and Mr. Raisty, Economist of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta

3/1/49 -2
The Secretary reported that advices of the election for a period
of one year commencing March 1, 1949, of members and alternate members
of the Federal Open Market Committee representing the Federal Reserve
Bnks had been received, that each newly elected member and alternate
member had executed the required oath of office, and that it was the
opinion of the Committee's counsel, on the basis of advices received,
that the following members and alternate members were legally qualified
to serve:
Allan Sproul, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, with L. R. Rounds, First Vice President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate member;
Hugh Leach, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Rich
mond, with Joseph A. Erickson, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston, as alternate member;
Ray M. Gidney, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland, with C. S. Young, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate member;
W. S. McLarin, Jr., President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta, with Chester C. Davis, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, as alternate member;
C. E. Earhart, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco, with J. N. Peyton, President of the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, as alternate member.
Upon motions duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous votes, the following
officers of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee were elected to serve until the
election of their successors at the first
meeting of the Committee after February 28,
1950, with the understanding that in the
event of the discontinuance of their
official connection with the Board of Gov
ernors or a Federal Reserve Bank, as the
case might be, they would cease to have any

3/1/49 -3
official connection with the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee. In connection with the elec
tion of Mr. Morrill, it was agreed unanimously
that the by-laws of the Federal Open Market
Committee, which provide that the Secretary of
the Board of Governors shall be Secretary of
the Committee, should not be changed but that
Mr. Morrill should continue to serve as Secre
tary notwithstanding the applicable provision
of the by-laws:
Thomas B. McCabe, Chairman
Allan Sproul, Vice Chairman
Chester Morrill, Secretary
S. R. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
George B. Vest, General Counsel
Woodlief Thomas, Economist
John H. Williams, Charles W. Williams*,
Donald S. Thompson, Earl L. Rauber,
and Oliver P. Wheeler, Associate
Economists
*Effective as of the date upon which he assumes
his duties as economist at the Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York was selected to execute
transactions for the System open market
account until the adjournment of the first
meeting of the Committee after February 28,1950.
Mr. Sproul stated that the board of directors of the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York had selected Mr. Rouse as Manager of the System
Open Market Account, subject to the selection of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York by the Federal Open Market Committee as the Bank to
execute transactions for the System account and his approval by the
Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the selection of Mr. Rouse
as Manager of the System Open Market Account
was approved.

3/1/49 -4
Upon motions duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous votes, the following
were selected to serve with the Chairman
of the Federal Open Market Committee (who
under the provisions of the by-laws is
also Chairman of the executive committee)
as members and alternate members of the
executive committee until the selection
of their successors at the first meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee
after February 28, 1950:
Members Alternate Members
Marriner S. Eccles Ernest G. Draper
James K. Vardaman, Jr. R. M. Evans
Lawrence Clayton (to serve
in the order named as
alternates for Messrs.
McCabe, Eccles, and
Vardaman)
Allan Sproul Ray M. Gidney
Hugh Leach W. S. McLarin, Jr. (to
serve in the order
named for Messrs.
Sproul and Leach)
Reference was made to the resolution adopted by the Federal Open
Market Committee on November 20, 1936, relating to the purchase and sale
of cable transfers and bills of exchange and bankers acceptances pay
able in foreign currencies. Mr. Sproul stated that, for reasons dis
cussed at previous meetings when the resolution was reviewed, it was
desirable that the authority remain in effect.
There was unanimous agreement that
no action should be taken at this time
to amend or terminate the resolution of
November 20, 1936.
An excerpt from the minutes of the meeting of the Committee on
November 30, 1937, was then referred to in which it was stated that,

3/1/49 -5
since securities acquired by Federal Reserve Banks in settlement of
claims account closed banks would be in such small amounts as to be
unimportant from the standpoint of credit control, the Committee
would interpose no objection to Federal Reserve Banks holding such
securities or to the sale of such securities whenever deemed advis
able by the holding bank.
Mr. Gidney expressed the view that, although authority for
such transactions had not been used recently, it was desirable to
continue it in effect.
It was agreed unanimously that no
action should be taken at this time to
amend or terminate the authority granted
at the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee on November 30, 1937.
Attention was then called to the authority granted to Federal
Reserve Banks by the executive committee of the Federal Open Market
Committee at its meeting on January 20, 1948, pursuant to action taken
by the Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting on December 9,
1947, with respect to repurchase agreements covering short-term Treas
ury obligations with dealers in United States Government securities
qualified to transact business with the System open market account.
There was a brief discussion, follow
ing which it was agreed unanimously that
no action should be taken at this time to
amend or terminate the authority.
During a review of developments since the last meeting of the
Committee, Chairman McCabe referred to the letter sent by the executive
committee to Secretary of the Treasury Snyder under date of February 4,

3/1/49
1949, and at his request Mr. Carpenter read portions of Secretary
Snyder's reply of February 9, 1949, which was as follows:
"Reference is made to your letter of February 4, 1949,
summarizing the views of the Executive Committee of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee with respect to the problems of
credit policy and debt management developed during discus
sions of the Committee on January 26, 1949.
"I have given careful consideration to the views of the
Committee suggesting the desirability of refunding the cer
tificates maturing March 1 into a 1-3/8% one-year certificate
or a 13-month 1-3/8% note. In the light of conditions exist
ing at this time I find myself unable to agree that the cer
tificate maturing on March 1 should be refunded into a 1-3/8%
security, and I feel that it is too early to decide what
should be done in the refinancing of the certificate maturing
April 1.
"It is noted that the Committee suggests that the pre
sent System policy with respect to bids for bills and purchases
and sales of bills be continued. As you know, I have had some
apprehension concerning the gradual rise in the bill rate, but
understand that it will be the policy of the Federal Reserve
to exercise a high degree of caution so as to enable the Treas
ury to continue the refinancing of the floating debt at the
current one-year rate of 1-1/4% until such time as a different
rate can be mutually agreed upon.
"With respect to a program for the redemption of maturing
Treasury bills during the latter part of March and early April,
I am in general agreement that Treasury bills be redeemed as
the Treasury balance and market conditions permit, but I would
prefer to continue the present policy of considering Treasury
bills on a week-to-week basis and making our decisions accord
ingly.
"It seems to me we should permit more development in the
present factors affecting debt management before making any
substantial changes in our refunding operations or to move to
higher levels for the one-year-rate. The April 1 maturity of
certificates amounts to only $1 billion, or thereabouts, and
there is no further maturity until June 1. In a few months
we can better judge the course of events with particular ref
erence to the legislative program which might be enacted, in
cluding the action which the Congress may take in connection
with the President's recommendation for increased taxes. We
will then have a much better base upon which to plan our
operations covering the period from June through the balance
of the year.

3/1/49
"In line with these views, I am reluctant at the pre
sent time to use the cash balance to retire any of the Sys
tem's holdings of certificates maturing on March 1, and
would prefer to have the System exchange its holdings of
this maturity."
Mr. Sproul expressed the view that the last sentence of the
third paragraph of Secretary Snyder's letter was not correct in that
there was no commitment on the part of the System to maintain the
1-1/4 per cent rate until a different rate was agreed upon, and that,
while the Committee would not undertake to change the market rate
without full discussion with the Treasury, that point should be made
clear to Secretary Snyder.
It was agreed unanimously that
this matter should be discussed with
Secretary Snyder the next time Messrs.
McCabe and Sproul met with him.
In a discussion of the sale of long-term issues from the Sys
tem account since the previous meeting of the Committee, Mr. Rouse
referred particularly to the discussion at the meeting of the execu
tive committee on January 26, 1949, and expressed the view that prices
of restricted issues perhaps had risen a little too rapidly in recent
weeks, that there might well have been somewhat larger sales from the
System account in relation to demand, that there had been somewhat
larger sales during the last two weeks, and that in the absence of ob
jection such sales would be continued in order to keep prices from
rising too rapidly. Because of the small System holdings of long-term
bank eligible issues, he said, it would be necessary to try to have
that segment of the market take care of itself.

3/1/49 -8
It was the view of the members of the Committee that the
procedure of selling securities as followed in recent weeks should
be continued and that it would be desirable if the yield on the
long-term ineligible issues could be kept from declining below
2.40 per cent.
Mr. Rouse discussed the probable effects of Treasury pay
ments into the market and withdrawals of funds from the market
during the next few weeks, and there was a review of the policy
followed in the past of using war loan balances in such a manner
as to keep some pressure on member bank reserve accounts. He also
reported his discussions with Mr. Bartelt, Fiscal Assistant Secre
tary of the Treasury, with respect to the use of war loan balances
and stated that a program had been agreed upon for the next few
weeks which would largely neutralize Treasury operations in the
money market.
In this connection, there were distributed copies of a
memorandum from Messrs. Thomas and Smith prepared under date of
February 24, 1949, with respect to the Treasury cash position and
the refunding program in relation to System policies. A copy of
the memorandum has been placed in the Federal Open Market Committee
files.
Mr. Rouse also discussed the program for retirement of
maturing Treasury securities during the next several weeks, stat
ing that the Treasury had agreed to the retirement of $400 million

3/1/49 -9
of the System's holdings of March 1 certificates and $600 million
of market held bills in the last half of March and early April,
and that these retirements would about exhaust the funds available
for debt retirement during the calendar year.
Mr. Sproul said that at the meeting of the executive com
mittee yesterday morning reference was made to the discussion at
the meeting on November 30, 1948, of a possible program for the
conversion of long-term Treasury debt into issues which would be
so held that System support would not be necessary. He outlined
the reasons why representatives of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee and the Treasury had not met to consider the matter as con
templated at the earlier meeting of the Committee and stated that
probably the matter should be taken up directly with Secretary
Snyder. He also said that the executive committee agreed to rec
ommend to the full Committee that members of the staff prepare a
study of this matter which could be considered by the executive
committee and recommended to the full Committee, after which, de
pending on the conclusions reached, it could be taken up with the
Treasury at top policy level if at such time it seemed desirable.
Following a brief discussion, it was
agreed unanimously that the recommendation
of the executive committee should be car
ried out.
Reference was then made to the proposal made at the meeting
on October 4, 1948, that a study be made of the advisability of
the Treasury refunding some of the long-term securities held by

3/1/49 -10
the System account with special short-term issues at a lower in
terest rate, which was also discussed at the meeting on January 4,
1949. It was stated that the committee appointed for the purpose
would complete its study of the question if it seemed desirable to
do so, but that the executive committee at its meeting on January
4 had agreed that the matter should be presented to the full Com
mittee for discussion of the question whether further action should
be taken.
It was the consensus of the mem
bers present that there was no need
for further study of the matter at
this time.
In this connection, Mr. Rouse stated that Mr. Bartelt,
Fiscal Assistant Secretary, called him a month or six weeks ago
to inquire whether, if the Treasury should so desire, the System
would be willing to sell approximately $500 million of long-term
bonds from the System account, and if so at what price. His re
sponse, he said, was that he did not think the System would be
willing to make such sales except at current market prices and
that, if Mr. Bartelt felt the proposal should be pursued further,
it should be presented to the executive committee or the full Com
mittee. He added that nothing further had been heard from Mr.
Bartelt on the matter.
In the ensuing discussion, Mr. Eccles suggested that con
sideration might be given to selling from the System account at
the average cost of the securities sold.

3/l/49 -11
Turning to a discussion of open market policy and rec
ommendations to be made to the Treasury, Chairman McCabe called
on the Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks who were in atten
dance for their comments. Some of the Presidents expressed the
view that the Committee should continue to press for an increase
in the short-term rate while others felt that, in view of the
fact that the Treasury was not likely to act favorably at this
time on such a recommendation and in view of the uncertainties in
the business outlook and the possible misinterpretation of such
action, it would be preferable not to increase the rate at the
present time. One of the Presidents would not recommend such an
increase in connection with the April refunding, but would do so
in connection with the June financing. Another suggested that
holders of maturing savings bonds should be permitted to reinvest
the proceeds of such bonds in new savings bonds bearing a higher
rate of interest.
Following these comments Mr. Sproul said that the Com
mittee should consider open market policy in the framework of the
general credit policy of the System and in the light of changing
business and credit conditions. He outlined three possibilities
with respect to the economic trend, (1) the present situation
might be a temporary hesitation with inflationary pressures being
resumed later in the spring, (2) a healthy readjustment, or (3)
the beginning of a downward spiral of deflation. While his own
view was that the second possibility was the most likely, he recog-

3/1/49 -12
nized that a condition of balance could not be maintained for a long
time; however, he felt that open market policy should attempt to sus
tain that balance as long as possible. He added that for the past
period the policy of open market operations and Treasury debt manage
ment had been to exercise some restraint on credit expansion and that
now consideration should be given to a change from a policy of re
straint and mild pressure on the market to a policy of as near neu
trality in the money market as it would be possible to achieve. In
stead of trying to get a large redemption of bills each week, he said,
and thereby force sales of bills to the System account, the System
should try to achieve a greater exchange of bills so that banks
would not be forced to sell bills. In the past it had been thought
that if the Treasury were willing to move the rate on one year cer
tificates of indebtedness to 1-3/8 or 1-1/2 per cent, the discount
rate of the Federal Reserve Banks should be increased to 1-3/4 per
cent. He now felt that if the Treasury should move the rate to 1-3/8
or 1-1/2 per cent, the discount rate should not be increased. He
added that the objective of an increase in the short-term rate on
Treasury obligations would not now be to combat inflation, but to
improve the interest rate structure so as to facilitate later Treas
ury refundings, and to avoid the appearance of more of less per
manently pegged rates at both ends of the rate pattern. On the other
hand, a further increase in the discount rate, because it is more
a sign or a symbol, he said, would be interpreted as an indication

/l/ -13
3 49
of an anti-inflationary policy which would be difficult to justify.
Consideration should also be given, he said,, to what should be
done in the field of consumer instalment credit and margin require
ments and the entire credit policy of the System should be con
sistent. He went on to say that a policy of neutrality in the mone
tary and credit field would leave the System free to move in either
tirection depending upon developments.
With respect to a change in the certificate rate he felt
that the Committee should take the position that it would be de
sirable to increase the short-term rate in connection with the April
refunding to 1-3/8 per cent. While he saw some justification for
the position that the increase should not be made in April but should
be deferred until the June refunding, he thought the Committee should
make a firm recommendation that the rate be increased at the earlier
date.
Mr. Eccles questioned whether an increase in the short-term
rate would be interpreted as being consistent with a policy of
neutrality and thought that it would be regarded by the market and
the Treasury as indicating a policy of continued restraint. He
also said that it would have been very helpful if the rate could have
been increased further before the downturn occurred in the economy
and that it was probably too late now to get an increase. He agreed,,
however, that it would be desirable to put the increase into effect
if the Treasury were willing to do so.

3/1/49 -14
This point was discussed, and Mr. Sproul suggested that this
might be the last chance for an increase in the short-term rate and
if so the System should urge it. He thought that, as long as credit
was still available at low rates and there was no increase in the dis
count rate, it would be possible to explain an increase in the Treas
ury borrowing rate in terms of debt management policy and preparation
for the refunding of the large maturities of Government securities in
the next four years.
During the discussion, Mr. Thomas suggested that the Committee
might follow a policy of maintaining the bill rate at about the pre
sent level which would shift more bills into the market from the Sys
tem account and would make bills more flexible and responsive to mar
ket conditions.
Mr. Riefler was of the opinion that it would be a mistake to
increase the short-term rate at this time as it would be interpreted as
an anti-inflationary step. He favored a policy of encouraging the sale
of certificates to the System account and of bills from the account to
the market. This, he said, would permit policy in the short-term area
of the market to be effected by small minor moves in bills rather than
by what had come to be regarded as a major move in the form of an in
crease of 1/8 per cent in the certificate rate.
Mr. John H. Williams was in agreement with the views expressed
by Mr. Sproul.
Several members of the Committee expressed agreement with Mr.
Sproul's position.

3/1/49 -15
Mr. Clayton stated that, while a good case could be made for
an increase in the short-term rate from the standpoint of monetary
and credit policy, he was convinced that, in view of the cessation
of credit expansion and the growing opinion that the economy might be
facing a depression, there would be no favorable response to a pro
posal to increase the short-term rate.
Mr. Eccles stated that in connection with the June refunding
consideration might be given to an offering at rates which would per
mit the new issues to be sold at a premium so that they would not de
cline below par if, at a subsequent date, the short-term rate were in
creased.
Chairman McCabe suggested that, when he and Mr. Sproul met with
Secretary Snyder again, they take the position that had been taken once
or twice before that the Committee would not urge an increase in the
short-term rate as strongly as it had at other times in the past, but
that in view of the refunding problem facing the Treasury over the
next four years and in the interest of effective debt management gen
erally it was believed that an increase in the short-term rate would
be advisable for the reasons expressed in the recent past.
In commenting on the refunding program, Mr. Rouse suggested
that the members of the Committee keep an open mind as to the types of
securities that might be offered in the June financing for the reason
that a number of things might happen to change the decision on that
point before the date arrived when that decision would have to be made.
Mr. Clayton suggested that the Treasury be advised that in

3/1/49 -16
the past the Committee had urged an increase in the short-term
rate on the grounds that it would be an anti-inflationary meas
ure, that it would assist in refunding the public debt, and that
it would help in bringing about a more natural interest rate struc
ture, and that, while the first reason was not now applicable, it
would be of real assistance to the Treasury in its refunding pro
gram if a better interest rate structure could be brought about.
After some further discussion, the
suggestions made by Chairman McCabe and
Mr. Clayton were approved unanimously.
In taking this action, it was also
agreed unanimously that the suggestion
made by Mr. Sproul with respect to Sys
tem bids for, and purchases and sales
of, Treasury bills would be carried out
under the authority of the general di
rections issued by the Federal Open
Market Committee and its executive com
mittee.
During a discussion of the direction to be issued to the
executive committee to arrange for transactions for the System open
market account, Mr. Rouse suggested that, while the policies of
the Committee as discussed at this meeting could be carried out
under the existing direction, consideration be given to changing
the direction so as to make it clear that present policies are be
ing carried out in the light of changing economic conditions. It
was agreed that the change should be made, and that the amended
direction should provide for the same limitations on transactions
in the account as were contained in the direction issued at the

3/1/49 -17
meeting on November 30, 1949.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following direction to the
executive committee was approved, with the
understanding that the limitations con
tained in the direction would include com
mitments for the System open market account:
The executive committee is directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to
arrange for such transactions for the System open market
account, either in the open market or directly with the
Treasury (including purchases, sales, exchanges, re
placement of maturing securities, and letting maturi
ties run off without replacement), as may be necessary,
in the light of changing economic conditions and the
general credit situation of the country, for the prac
tical administration of the account, for the mainte
nance of stable and orderly conditions in the Govern
ment security market, and for the purpose of relating
the supply of funds in the market to the needs of com
merce and business; provided that the aggregate amount
of securities held in the account at the close of this
date other than special short-term certificates of in
debtedness purchased from time to time for the tempor
ary accommodation of the Treasury shall not be increased
or decreased by more than $2,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, un
til otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Com
mittee, to arrange for the purchase for the System open
market account direct from the Treasury of such amounts
of special short-term certificates of indebtedness as
may be necessary from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total
amount of such certificates held in the account at any
one time shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
It was tentatively agreed that the next meeting of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee would be held during the week of May 2,
1949.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.

3/1/49 -18-
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.