A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D. C., on Friday, August 5, 1949, at 10:10 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. McCabe, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Clayton
Mr. Draper
Mr. Earhart
Mr. Eccles
Mr. Gidney
Mr. Leach
Mr. McLarin
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Thompson and Williams, Associate
Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Riefler, Assistant to the Chairman,
Board of Governors
Mr. Leonard, Director of the Division of
Bank Operations, Board of Governors
Mr. Young, Associate Director of the Divi
sion of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Miller, Assistant Vice President, Fed
eral Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Smith, Economist, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Raisty, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on June 28, 1949, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the action of the
executive committee of the Federal Open

8/5/49 -2
Market Committee, as set forth in the
minutes of the meeting of the executive
committee held on June 28, 1949, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Rouse then read the important sections of a report of
open market operations prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, covering the period June 28 to August 2, 1949, inclusive. He
also presented a supplemental report covering commitments executed
on behalf of the System account on August 3 and 4, 1949. In submit
ting these reports, Mr. Rouse called attention to the fact that lead
ing banks in the country in their current publications had interpreted
the action of the Federal Open Market Committee on June 28 as the
termination of the policy of maintaining a fixed pattern of rates
for Government securities and of the close relationship of System
open market policies to Treasury financing policies that had existed
during and since the war and as an important forward step.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System account for the period June
28 to August 4, 1949, inclusive, were ap
proved, ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Morrill stated that recently, because of the absence of
members and alternate members of the executive committee of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee, it had been necessary to call on Mr.
Szymczak, who was not an alternate member of the committee, in connec
tion with consideration of some of the problems coming before the com
mittee even though he did not have a vote, and that Mr. Szymczak had
suggested that consideration be given by the Federal Open Market

8/5/49 -3
Committee, either at this meeting or at the organization meeting in
March of next year, to the desirability of amending the by-laws so
that every member of the Federal Open Market Committee would be a
principal or alternate member of the executive committee. Mr. Mor
rill also said that, if this suggestion were approved, Section 1 of
Article III of the by-laws might be amended to read as follows:
"ARTICLE III. EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
"Section 1. How constituted - The Committee at its
first meeting after March 1 of each calendar year shall
select from its own members an Executive Committee of
five members, including the Chairman of the Committee who
shall be Chairman of the Executive Committee. The Execu
tive Committee shall consist of three members of the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and two repre
sentatives of the Federal Reserve banks. At any duly
called meeting, a majority of the Executive Committee shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Four
alternates to serve in the absence of members of the Board
and three to serve in the absence of representatives of
the Federal Reserve banks shall be selected at the same
time and in the same manner as members of the Executive
Committee and they shall serve during such absences in the
order prescribed at the time of their selection."
Inasmuch as the by-laws provided
that they could be amended at any meeting
of the Committee by a vote of the majority
of the members of the entire Committee,
upon motion duly made and seconded, it was
voted unanimously to adopt the amendment
as set forth above, effective immediately.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, Mr.
Szymczak was elected to serve until the
selection of his successor at the first
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee after February 28, 1950, as the fourth
alternate for Messrs. McCabe, Eccles, and
Vardaman as members of the executive

8/5/49 -4
committee, and Mr. Earhart was selected
to serve until the selection of his suc
cessor at the first meeting of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee after February
28, 19.0, as the third alternate for
Messrs. Sproul and Leach as members of
the executive committee.
Chairman McCabe reviewed important developments since the
meeting of the Committee on June 28, 1949, and the reception and
effect of the announcement following that meeting. He also said that
he and Mr. Sproul had not conferred with the Secretary of the Treas
ury since that meeting and, therefore, had not had an opportunity to
discuss the problem of refunding of issues of Government securities
maturing during the balance of this year, but that in preparation
for this meeting there had been several discussions by members of
the Board and the staff, including a conference in Washington last
week attended by Mr. Rouse and members of the Board's staff, for
the purpose of discussing the problem of reserve requirements of
member banks and their relationship to open market operations and
other instruments of credit control, so that the Federal Open Market
Committee would be in a position to determine what action should be
taken with respect to open market policy at this meeting.
In that connection, he stated that at a meeting of the Board
yesterday the members present were of the opinion that, if the Fed
deral Open Market Committee should be willing to act to allow the
System's holding of Treasury securities to go into the market in
amounts sufficient to absorb the reserves that would be released by

8/5/49 -5
a reduction in reserve requirements, the Board should reduce reserve
requirements by 2 percent of demand deposits of all member banks,
to become effective for central reserve and reserve cities at the
rate of 1/2 percentage point each on August 11, August 18, August
25, and September 1, 1949, and for nonreserve city banks at the rate
of 1 percentage point each on August 1 and August 16, 1949.
The Chairman also said that, in the discussions of the ef
fect of this reduction on the Government securities market, the sug
gestion had been made, having in mind that maturing certificates
might be refunded at 1-1/8 percent, that the range of yields at
which bills should be purchased and sold by the System account might
be in the neighborhood of .95 to 1.05, with the exact range to be de
termined from time to time by the executive committee to meet chang
ing conditions, it being understood that, as the yield moves away
from the average of the range, purchases or sales, as the case may
be, would be made in increasing amounts. It had also been suggested,
Chairman McCabe said, that a desirable range for certificate yields
might be from 1.08 to 1.12.
He made the further statement that it was the view of the
Board that action to reduce the discount rates now in effect at the
Federal Reserve Banks might well be deferred until shortly after the
first of September when the matter could be considered again.
There was a general discussion of the reasons that might be
advanced for and against a reduction in reserve requirements at this

8/5/49 -6
time. It was the unanimous view that developments since the meeting
on June 28 had clearly demonstrated that it was not possible to keep
a stated amount of excess reserves in the market, in addition to op
erating requirements as determined by the market, without substan
tially lowering short-term rates, and that a reduction in reserve re
quirements should not be made for that purpose. It was agreed that
a reduction was not necessary for the purpose of affecting the level
of interest rates in the market as that could be brought about by
open market transactions, that for the purposes of present policy
the existing multiple credit factor of bank reserves need not be in
creased, and that changes in reserve requirements should not be used
to effect short-term credit policies but should be reserved to meet
fundamental changes in the economy and the financial situation.
There was also agreement that a reduction should be made only with
the understanding that the reserves thus released would be absorbed
by allowing securities in the System account to go into the market
so that there would be no material decline in interest rates as the
result of the reduction. It was pointed out that money rates had
been at a low level during and since the war, that the action of the
Committee on June 28, 1949, had resulted in a reduction of approxi
mately one-eighth of 1 percent in short-term rates, and that there
was no need, in carrying out the System's policy of monetary ease,
to allow short-term rates to go lower.
Some members of the Committee questioned whether a reduction

8/5/49 -7
could be justified at the present time. It was suggested that a
period of freedom from frequent changes would be welcomed, even
though no bank would object to a reduction in its requirements, and
that such action could well be deferred until some future date when
it would meet a real need for funds. Others felt that a reduction
should be made now in order to emphasize the reversal of our anti
inflationary policy which had led to increases in reserve require
ments last year, to bring reserve requirements to a level from which
they could be raised in the event of a return of inflationary con
ditions, to offset the decline in banks' earnings that would result
from lower interest rates, to relieve the System account of the
necessity of bidding each week to replace the System's holdings of
maturing bills and thereby work toward a freer bill market, to
take advantage of the present favorable conditions, and (as an inci
dental reason not associated with credit policy) to place member
banks on a more favorable competitive basis with nonmembers which
are subject to lower reserve requirements.
During the discussion, Chairman McCabe referred to a letter
which he received from Mr. Rounds, First Vice President of the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of New York, under date of July 26, 1949, with
respect to the present low prices of bank stocks in relation to
book values and suggested that all members of the Committee read the
letter.
It was agreed that as long as the condition of declining

8/5/49 -8
economic activity continued the System should see to it that a con
dition of monetary ease and low money rates was maintained as a
means of encouraging business activity, and that, because of the im
portance of the American economy in the world picture and the danger
to the rest of the world of a serious depression in this country,
every effort should be made to prevent such a condition from concur
ring. On the other hand, it was felt that the decline of approxi
mately one-eighth of 1 percent in short-term rates since the June
28 action of the Committee was an important indication of the ef
fectiveness of the easy money policy now being followed by the Com
mittee and that it would be desirable to maintain yields at about
the present level with a view to a rate of 1-1/8 percent on the next
issue of certificates.
Mr. Gidney felt that, regardless of whether a reduction of
reserve requirements was made, the Federal Reserve Banks should
undertake to get member banks to utilize more fully their existing
excess reserves in order to improve their earnings. He felt that
this could be done without affecting existing market rates in any
way or bringing about a tight money market. He also felt that steps
should be taken by the System to obtain more complete information
relative to earnings of nonmember banks than is now available to
the System and which he believed would show that the earning record
for member banks is much more favorable in comparison with nonmem
ber banks than it has been represented or is generally supposed to be.

8/5/49 -9
Reference was made during the discussion to a staff memo
randum on the framework for System credit operations under peace
time conditions. A draft of the memorandum had been sent to all
members of the Federal Open Market Committee on July 29, 1949, and
copies of a revision of the memorandum, prepared in the light of
comments made in connection with the earlier draft, were distri
buted at this meeting.
Mr. Sproul in commenting upon the memorandum said that he
did not think it possible to have a free bill market while the
rest of the market is being controlled and that the entire market
was interrelated. He said the fact that we are working with rates
in all sections of the market, as a measure of central bank influ
ence, was demonstrated by the reaction of the market following the
action of the Committee on June 28. Be also expressed the view
that, as long as present conditions continued, the System should
not lose contact with the bill market; that, while there should
be flexibility in that market and a willingness on the part of the
System to buy and sell bills at a range of rates, it was not de
sirable for the System to divorce itself from contact with any part
of the market. Mr. Eccles agreed with Mr. Sproul's view on this
point.
Messrs. Leach, Gidney, and Earhart felt that statements in
the memorandum implied a departure from the long-established System
policy under which member banks obtain advances from the Federal

8/5/49 -10
Reserve Banks for temporary periods and on a day-to-day basis in
order to meet unforeseen or seasonal needs and that it contemplated
a policy under which the banks hereafter would be permitted to use
the rediscount privilege only in very unusual cases and as a last
resort. They felt that it would be very disturbing to member banks
if such a change in policy were advocated or adopted and this be
came known because the banks had been told repeatedly that the Fed
eral Reserve Banks would take care of their reasonable credit needs
both for ordinary operations and in times of difficulty, and that
any departure from this policy would be contrary to the intent of
the Federal Reserve Act and would have a seriously adverse effect
upon the attractive ness of membership in the Federal Reserve Sys
tem.
Messrs. Thomas and Riefler in commenting on the above state
ments made it clear that this was not the intention of the memoran
dum and that it was believed that the differences indicated by the
statements were differences of interpretation rather than of prin
ciple. It was agreed that the questions raised by the statements
should be discussed at a later point in the meeting.
Mr. Rouse inquired whether consideration had been given to
reducing reserve requirements on time deposits as well as on demand
deposits, and suggested that, if the reduction was to be made in
recognition of a fundamental change in the situation and as a step
to get back to a point from which the System could again increase

8/5/49 -11
reserve requirements to meet inflationary conditions, it would ap
pear to be logical to effect some reduction in reserve requirements
on time deposits which were now at the ma imum, authorized by the
law. This point was discussed and there was general agreement that
it should have consideration by the Board of Governors.
During a discussion of discount rates in relation to short
term rates it was the consensus that there was no need for a re
duction in discount rates at the Federal Reserve Banks at this time
but that such action might be taken in September as a further in
dication of the System's policy of maintaining easy money market
conditions. In his comment on this point Mr. Earhart called atten
tion to the fact that developments over the past several years
have tended to influence banks to adjust their reserves by trans
actions in the New York market rather than through the local Fed
eral Reserve Bank, that in the earlier period the local banks not
only rediscounted with the Federal Reserve Banks for the purpose
of obtaining needed reserves, but that there was also a local banker's
acceptance market and the Federal Reserve Banks financed the dealers
in acceptances through repurchase agreements and the banks bought
and sold acceptances as a means of adjusting their reserves.
Mr. Rouse stated that he had talked with Mr. Bartelt this
morning regarding new money borrowings of the Treasury, that be
cause of the unusually large sales of tax savings notes it would not
be necessary for the Treasury to borrow any additional new funds

8/5/49 -12
until December, but that apparently the Treasury had decided to
increase the weekly offerings of Treasury bills to build up Treasury
balances. He also said that Mr. Bartelt had stated that no use
would be made of the $1 billion of free gold held by the Treasury
without consultation with representatives of the System.
He made the further statement that if reserve requirements
were reduced along the lines discussed it would be necessary in
the interest of an orderly market for the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York to sell bills, certificates, notes and bonds, that during
this period there probably would be a tendency on the part of the
banks, at least the money market banks, to over-invest, which after
the transition period would result in a tighter condition in the
market, and that the System's buying rate would be the effective
rate on bills. He added that with the increase in weekly offerings
of Treasury bills it might be necessary for the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, as fiscal agent of the Treasury, to arrange with the
dealers to see that there were sufficient bids to cover the offerings.
Referring to the earlier discussion of a change in discount
rates at the Federal Reserve Banks, Mr. Rouse suggested that if the
discount rate were not to be reduced at this time consideration be
given to amending the authority granted to the Federal Reserve Banks
by the executive committee on January 20, 1948, pursuant to action
by the full Committee on December 9, 1947, to authorize the Federal
Reserve Banks to enter into repurchase agreements with dealers in

8/5/49 -13
United States Government securities (other than dealer banks), who are
qualified to transact business with the System open market account,
at rates slightly below the discount rate on advances under sections
13 and 13a of the Federal Reserve Act, so that these dealers could
carry short-term securities during the current period if the bank
lending rates to dealers should get out of line in relationship to
market rates on short-term Government issues.
Turning to the range at which bills should be purchased and
sold for System account Mr. Rouse suggested that there should be sme
leeway in the operation of the range, as it would be necessary for
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to do some experimenting in the
interest of effective operation. He raised the question also whether,
as we moved toward a period during the fall of increased currency
circulation, increased business borrowing, and increased need for
reserves arising from Treasury deficit financing, it would be the
policy of the System to allow the influence of these factors to be
reflected in the market. In the discussion of this latter point it
was suggested that the answer to Mr. Rouse's question would have to
depend on the situation at the time.
Further reference was made to the dates upon which the proposed
reduction of reserve requirements (which if it included a reduction
of 1 per cent of time deposits would total approximately $1.8 billion)
should be made effective, and it was agreed that the timing should be
such as to have as little market effect as possible and so that the

-14
8/5/49
released reserves could be absorbed as much as possible by allowing
the System's holdings of maturing bills to run off. During the
discussion, the members of the Committee indicated that if the Board
of Governors should act to reduce reserve requirements by the amount
proposed they would favor action to reduce the System's holdings of
securities to absorb the released reserves so that the reduction would
not result in a further lowering of short-term rates. The members of
the Board of Governors stated that action to reduce reserve require
ments would be taken this afternoon.
With respect to the rates at which the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York would buy and sell Treasury bills, it was agreed unanimously
that the Bank should sell securities vigorously until the transition to
the lower reserve requirements had been made. During the discussion
Mr. Miller stated that a desire on the part of the Committee for
flexibility within an agreed range would determine the policy with
respect to purchases and sales within the range. He pointed out that
substantial sales as the rate moved up or down would reduce the
flexibility of the market and would make it possible for banks and
others to invest their surplus funds without as great a risk of having
to sell at a loss. On the other hand, he said, if the market were
allowed to move freely within the range the greatest degree of
flexibility would be obtained. Mr. Miller added that conditions might
be such that the System might wish to ease the market, in which case
it might be desirable to buy bills at something less than the maximum

8/5/49 .15.
of the range, which would also affect the flexibility of the market.
If the objective, he said, was to discourage banks from maintaining
a fully invested position, sales and purchases of bills should be
made largely at the maximum and minimum of the range.
Consideration was also given to the question raised by Mr.
Rouse as to the desirability of allowing the market to go below or
above the outside limits of the range and then operating vigorously
in the market to bring the rate back within the range.
All of the various aspects of operations under an agreed
upon range within which bills would be purchased and sold were con
sidered. In connection with a comment by Mr. Eccles that in the
present period of recession the System's operations should be in
short-term securities only, Mr. Rouse expressed the view that the
System holdings of bonds should not become static as had been the case
for a long period in the thirties, that it would be desirable to make
some change in the System's total holdings for the sake of change,
and that there would be ample opportunity through shifts of issues
to bring about such a change without altering materially the total
holdings in the System account. He also suggested that occasion might
arise in which it would be easier to increase or decrease bank
reserves through bond sales or purchases than to effect the operation
through short-term securities.
The consensus was reached that the suggestion that under
certain conditions the bill market be allowed to move two or three

-16-
points above or below an agreed upon range with the understanding
that it would be promptly brought back within the range through market
operations should not be followed and that all purchases and sales of
bills should be within the authorized range.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote the following under
standing with respect to operations in
Treasury bills and certificates was
approved:
"Having in mind the desirability of rates in the short
term market which would call for the refunding of maturing
October certificates at 1-1/8 per cent, the range of yields
at which bills would be purchased and sold for the System
account should be in the neighborhood of .94 to 1.06 with
the exact range to be determined from time to time by the
executive committee to meet changing conditions, it being
understood that as the yield moved from the average
toward the maximum or minimum of the range purchases or
sales, as the case might be, would be made in increasing
amounts. It was also agreed that a desirable range for
certificate yields would be 1.06-1.12 for the time being."
This action was taken with the
understanding that pending action by
the executive committee all bill
transactions would be within the
range of .94-1.06.
Mr. Rouse stated that he understood what was intended to be
accomplished by the above understanding and that the New York Bank
would do its best to carry it out, but that the situation in which it
would operate would be a difficult one.
There was a further discussion of the suggestion by Mr. Rouse
that the Federal Reserve Banks be authorized to enter into repurchase
agreements on Government securities at less than the discount rate

8/5/49 -17
with nonbank dealers pending a decision to reduce the discount rate
at Federal Reserve Banks. He stated that while it was not expected
that the authority for such agreements would be used immediately it
would be desirable to have it available for use in the case of need.
In response to an inquiry he suggested that the Committee authorize
the agreements at a rate of 1-3/8 percent.
There was a question whether the Committee should act to
approve the repurchase arrangement at this time or whether the executive
committee should be authorized to approve it if a need therefor should
arise. There was agreement, however, that the full Committee should
act at this meeting to grant the authority.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, it was voted unanimously to
authorize each Federal Reserve Bank
temporarily, until such time as action
was taken to reduce the discount rates
now in effect at the Federal Reserve
Banks under sections 13 and 13a of the
Federal Reserve Act, to enter into
repurchase agreements with nonbank
dealers in United States Government
securities who are qualified to trans
act business with the System open market
account, provided that (1) such agreements
(a) are at rates not below 1-3/8 percent,
(b) are for periods of not to exceed 15
calendar days, (c) cover only short-term
Government securities selling at a yield
of not more than the issuing rate for
one-year Treasury obligations, (d) are
used only in periods of strain, with
care and discrimination, as a means of
last resort in the special types of
situations and conditions reviewed in
Mr. Rouse's memorandum of January 2, 1948,
which was considered at the meeting of the
executive committee on January 20, 1948,
and (e) that reports of such transactions

-18
8/5/49
shall be made to the Manager of the
System Open Market Account to be in
cluded in the weekly report of open
market operations which is sent to
the Federal Open Market Committee,
and (2) in the event Government
securities covered by such an agree
ment are not repurchased by the
dealer pursuant to the agreement
or a renewal thereof, the securities
will be sold in the market or
transferred to the System open
market account.
In taking this action it was
understood that after the effective
date of action reducing the existing
discount rates at the Federal Reserve
Banks under sections 13 and 13a of
the Federal Reserve Act, the exist
ing authority with respect to re
purchase agreements with dealers
would again apply.
At this point Chairman McCabe left the meeting to keep another
important appointment,
At Mr. Thomas' suggestion copies of memoranda relating to (1)
economic situation and prospects, and (2) rates on savings notes, were
distributed. The latter memorandum recommended that the Committee take
the position in its advice to the Treasury that no change in the rates
on savings notes is advisable for the time being.
In connection with the second memorandum, Mr. Rouse stated that
he had suggested to Mr. Bartelt that, while the sales of tax savings
notes had increased very materially because of the attractive rate, no
change should be made in the rates on the notes for the reason that
there would be a substantial Treasury deficit and they afforded a means

8/5/49 -19
of financing from nonbank sources at a rate which was attractive to
the Treasury. Mr. Rouse added that since he first talked with Mr.
Bartelt the latter had indicated a desire to make no changes in the
rates on savings notes and that the matter might be discussed with the
American Bankers Asociation Committee on Government Borrowings later
in the month and with representatives of the savings banks and
insurance companies if the Treasury should meet with them.
Mr. Young summarized the information contained in the memo
randum on the economic situation and prospects and his statement was
followed by a brief comment by Mr. Williams on the British exchange
situation and the problem of devaluation of the British pound.
There was unanimous agreement
among the members of the Committee
that in discussions with the Treasury
the recommendation should be made that
the rates on tax savings notes should
not be changed for the time being.
The question what comments or recommendations should be made
to the Treasury with respect to September financing was considered in
the light of the action of the Committee at the meeting on June 28,
1949,a t which time it authorized the executive committee to make
such recommendations to the Treasury as seemed desirable in the light
of developments over the next few weeks and of the view of the full
Committee that new money should be raised by the Treasury through the
issuance of an intermediate security, probably a four- or five-year
note.

8/5/49 -20
It was the consensus that the issuance of an intermediate
security for the September refunding would still be desirable although
there was considerable doubt whether the Treasury would be willing to
follow that course. It was understood that the executive committee
would consider the matter further and make its recommendations to
the Treasury in the light of the comments at this meeting.
Mr. Sproul stated that it was too early to reach any de
dision [ast icth] is time with respect to the refunding of the October
and December maturities.
Reference was then made to the study being made by members
of the staff of the program of long-term debt management and copies
of a further memorandum prepared by Messrs. Rouse, Thomas, and
Riefler on this subject under date of August 4, 1949, were distributed.
Mr. Riefler reviewed the memorandum and the reasons for the
recommendations contained therein (1) that the Federal Open Market
Committee, in its discussions with the Treasury on future financing,
take the position that fully marketable issues be confined to
maturties of ten years or less, and (2) that the executive committee
be authorized to explore with the Treasury and outside the feasibility
of a long-term tap issue ineligible for ownership by banks, such an
instrument to be shiftable but with limited marketability and either
of the G type or of the instalment retirement type now under analysis
by the staff committee.

8/5/49 -21
In the discussion of the first recommendation Mr. Eccles
stated that bank eligible securities should have a maturity of
less than ten years and Mr. Riefler stated that the recommendation
contemplated that ten years would be an absolute maximum.
After a brief discussion, upon
motion duly made and seconded, the
recommendations contained in the
memorandum were approved unanimously
with the understanding that the Open
Market Committee was not making any
commitment with respect to the securi
ties contemplated in the second recom
mendation but was approving the recom
mendation as a basis for discussion.
In accordance with the action at a previous meeting of the
Committee there were on the agenda for further consideration at
this meeting the questions (1) whether savings bonds, particularly
series E bonds, should be made eligible as collateral for bank
loans, and (2) whether further inducements should be provided to
holders of E bonds to reinvest in savings bonds. Because of the
pressure of time it was agreed that these subjects should be con
tinued on the agenda for a later meeting.
Further reference was made to the revised memorandum on the
framework for System credit operations under peacetime conditions,
and approval was given to a suggestion by Mr. Thomas that the memo
randum be discussed at a meeting of System economists to be held
during the latter part of September, and that comments be prepared
on the criticisms made of the memorandum at this meeting which would

8/5/49 -22
be sent to the members of the Committee and other Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks with the understanding that the memorandum would
be considered at the next meeting of the full Committee. It was
understood that in the meantime if any of the members of the Committee
had any suggestions or comments with respect to the memorandum they
would send them in.
Mr. Rouse stated that, in view of the proposed action by the
Board of Governors to reduce reserve requirements of member banks by
approximately $1.8 billion, the direction issued by the Committee to
the executive committee covering operations in the System account
should renew the authority of the executive committee to reduce the
securities in the account by $3 billion pending another meeting of
the Committee.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the following direction
to the executive committee was approved
unanimously with the understanding that
the limitations contained in the direction
would include commitments for the System
open market account:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for such transactions for the System open market account,
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury
(including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of
maturing securities, and letting maturities run off with
out replacement), as may be necessary, in the light of
changing economic conditions and the general credit
situation of the country, for the practical administra
tion of the account, for the maintenance of orderly con
ditions in the Government security market, and for the
purpose of relating the supply of funds in the market
to the needs of commerce and business; provided
that the aggregate amount of securities held in

-23-
the account at the close of this date other than special
short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Trea
sury shall not be increased or decreased by more than
$3,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee,
to arrange for the purchase for the System open market
account direct from the Treasury of such amounts of
special short-term certificates of indebtedness as may
be necessary from time to time for the temporary accom
modation of the Treasury; provided that the total amount
of such certificates held in the account at any one time
shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
There was unanimous agreement that the next meeting of the
Committee should be subject to call of the Chairman, it being under
stood that it might be desirable to have another meeting before the
meeting of the Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks which is to
take place in San Francisco during the early part of November.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.