A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, May 3, 1949, at 10:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. McCabe, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Clayton
Mr. Draper
Mr. Earhart
Mr. Eccles
Mr. Gidney
Mr. Leach
Mr. McLarin
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Messrs. Thompson, Wheeler, and John H.
Williams, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board
of Governors
Mr. Riefler, Assistant to the Chairman,
Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board
of Governors
Mr. Ralph A. Young, Associate Director,
Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Smith, Economist, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Arthur Willis, Special Assistant,
Securities Department, Federal Re
serve Bank of New York
Messrs. Erickson, C. S. Young, Davis, and
Peyton, alternate members of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee
Messrs. Williams, Leedy, and Gilbert, Pres
idents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Philadelphia, Kansas City, and

Dallas, respectively
Messrs. Demming, Assistant Vice Pre
sident of the Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis, and Raisty, Economist,
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meetings of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on February 28 and March 1,
1949, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the
minutes of the meetings of the executive
committee held on February 28 and March
1, 1949, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
A report of open market operations prepared by the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York covering the period from March 1, 1949, to
April 28, 1949, inclusive, was then read and discussed by Mr. Rouse.
He also presented a supplementary report covering commitments exe
cuted on April 29 and May 2, 1949. Copies of both reports have been
placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System account for the period Feb
ruary 28, 1949, through May 2, 1949, in
clusive, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Before this meeting, there had been brought to the attention of
each member of the Committee a report of examination of the System open
market account as of January 28, 1949, made in connection with the

5/3/49 -3
regular examination of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and sub
mitted by the examiner in charge for the Board of Governors. The
report took no exception to the handling of the account and stated
that the accounting procedures, records, and system of internal con
trols maintained and the degree of care exercised by the New York
Bank in connection with the account continued to be regarded as satis
factory.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the report was
received and ordered filed.
Before this meeting a memorandum of current economic conditions
and the economic outlook for 1949, prepared by the staff of the Board's
Division of Research and Statistics, was distributed to the members of
the Committee. Mr. Ralph A. Young, Associate Director of the Board's
Division of Research and Statistics, commented on the situation out
lined in the memorandum stating that since the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee on February 28, 1949, economic developments had
shown a sufficiently broad and consistent downward movement to justify
the expectation of continuing moderate recession as most likely for
the remainder of this year, which would mean that inflation had been
succeeded by a more or less extended period of decline. He added that
to date the decline in employment, production, and prices from the high
level reached last year had been relatively moderate and that the
situation was one that was changing rapidly and would require continu
ing reviews of current tendencies. A copy of the memorandum has been

5/3/49 -4
placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Mr. John H. Williams stated that he felt there was more of a
fear of depression than an actual experiencing of one, that unemploy
ment was astonishingly small and reductions in prices were disappoint
ingly slow, that such declines in production as had taken place recently
had been from extremely high levels, and that the decreases thus far
could not be regarded as returning the economy to normal. He expressed
the opinion that the real adjustment from the postwar inflation was
ahead, but that he could not see anything to be alarmed about in the
situation thus far. With respect to Federal Reserve policy, he stated
that the System had not had a tight money policy, that any effort to
ease money conditions to counter the recession would be starting from
an already easy situation, and that he felt the System was likely
to be frozen into a low-interest rate situation, about which it might
not be able to do anything.
Mr. Thompson discussed increases that had taken place recently
in productivity per manhour at industrial plants in the Fourth Fed
eral Reserve District by means of weeding out less efficient employees,
rearrangement and improvement in scheduling of production processes,
and shutting down of some higher cost plants.
Mr. Raisty stated that some reductions in output had taken
place in manufacturing plants in the Sixth Federal Reserve District
but that the District as a whole had not been hurt materially by the
decline to date.

5/3/49
Mr. Riefler suggested there was danger in becoming too com
placent about the decline, that when one considered the past ten
years of rising prices and wages which set in motion the dynamics of
inflation and the adjustments that would still have to take place,
it would not be surprising if the index of industrial production
should decline substantially further before the stage was set for a
period of expansion.
Chairman McCabe reported briefly on developments since the
last meeting of the Committee.
Reference was then made to a memorandum prepared by Messrs.
Young, Smith, and Youngdahl of the Board staff with respect to Treas
ury cash requirements and bank reserves, and to two memoranda sub
mitted by Messrs. Riefler and Rouse on the subjects (1) June refunding
and possible new money borrowing, and (2) relative roles of market
able and full marketable issues in longer-range debt management and
monetary operations. Copies of these memoranda had been handed to
the members of the Committee before this meeting and copies have been
placed in the files of the Committee.
Mr. Riefler stated that the last of the three memoranda above
referred to was an interim report of the staff group appointed by the
Committee to study and make a report on a program for conversion of
long-term Treasury debt. He reviewed the experience with the various
types of securities issued by the Treasury during and after the war
and restated the suggestions contained in the memorandum with respect

5/3/49 -6
to future financing.
There followed a discussion of the interim report, the issues
that might be used in future financing, and the problems presented by
the present policy of supporting both the short- and long-term rates.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
it was understood that the staff Committee
would continue to work on the problem of a
longer term refunding program so that when
the time came to make a recommendation to
the Treasury the Committee would be prepared
to do so.
Preliminary to a discussion of recommendations to be made to
the Treasury with respect to refunding of the June maturities, Mr.
Rouse commented on the suggestions contained in the memorandum on June
refunding and Chairman McCabe presented the recommendation of the
executive committee on this subject as agreed upon at the separate meet
ing of that committee.
During the ensuing discussion it was
agreed unanimously that, since a further
increase in the short-term rate does not
appear to be likely at this time, the
Committee should adopt the suggestion of
the executive committee and that, in their
conversations with representatives of the
Treasury, Messrs. McCabe and Sproul should
recommend that the June 1 certificate matur
ity and the June 15 2 percent bond maturity
be refunded into a new issue of Treasury
notes due in 4 or 5 years to be priced at
the market and offered at par.
It was recognized that if later there
should be a further increase in the short
term rate the new issue might sell below par.
However, it was suggested that such a change
might not come soon enough to have such an

5/3/49 -7
effect but that in any event notes and cer
tificates had sold below par before and there
would be no real objection to the new issue
going below par. The new issue would reduce
the total of certificate maturities and would
have a maturity date beyond the period in
which the greater part of the 2 per cent bonds
matured. It was expected that it would be
made clear to the Treasury that the recommenda
tion that the note be issued would not carry
with it any commitment to support the issue at
par or above except during the period imedi
ately following its issue.
It was suggested, however, that it might
be desirable for the July refunding also to be
in the form of a 4 or 5 year note depending on
what is done with the June maturities and sub
sequent market developments and that in the
discussion which Messrs. McCabe and Sproul
would have with representatives of the Treas
ury it might be desirable to recommend that
at the same time the Treasury undertake to
raise about $1 billion of new money to meet
its cash requirements. It was felt, however,
that this suggestion should not be urged to the
point of jeopardizing the proposed June refund
ing.
Turning to the question of subsequent re
funding, it was agreed unanimously to authorize
the executive committee, pending another meet
ing of the full Committee, to make such recom
mendations with respect to the July, September,
and October financing as might appear to the
executive committee to be desirable in the light
of the action to be recommended to the Treasury
in connection with the June maturities.
At this time Chairman McCabe withdrew from the meeting to keep
another appointment.
Mr. Sproul then raised the question of the use of war loan
balances and this subject was discussed in the light of the situation
presented in the memorandum on Treasury cash requirements and bank

5/3/49 -8
reserves.
It was agreed unanimously that the scope
of discretion in the use of war loan balances
to affect the money market was greatly limited
by the disappearance of the cash surplus of
the Treasury and that the present program of
consultation with the Treasury, which contem
plated the use of available balances at least
to neutralize the effect of Treasury opera
tions in the money market, should be continued.
In a discussion of System bids for, and purchases and sales
of, Treasury bills, Mr. Rouse stated that the objective had been
generally to keep a neutral position and that, while for short periods
recently it had been difficult to carry out that objective and rate
policy simultaneously, he would suggest that it be continued fairly
closely on a day to day basis with the idea, however, of putting no
restraint on bank reserves, except in the event of a rate decline.
It was agreed unanimously that Mr.
Rouse's suggestion should be carried out.
In a discussion of the authority to be given to the executive
committee to direct transactions for the System open market account,
Mr. Rouse suggested that, since another meeting of the Committee might
not be held until late in August or early September, and in view of
prospective market developments during that period, it would be desir
able for the executive committee to have authority to increase and de
crease the account by as much as $3 billion.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following direction to the
executive committee was approved unani
mously, with the understanding that the

5/3/49 -9
limitations contained in the direction
would include commitments for the System
open market account:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise di
rected by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for
such transactions for the System open market account, either
in the open market or directly with the Treasury (including
purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing securi
ties, end letting maturities run off without replacement), as
may be necessary, in the light of changing economic conditions
and the general credit situation of the country, for the
practical administration of the account, for the maintenance
of stable and orderly conditions in the Government security
market, and for the purpose of relating the supply of funds
in the market to the needs of commerce and business; provided
that the aggregate amount of securities held in the account
at the close of this date other than special short-term
certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time
for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury shall not
be increased or decreased by more than $3,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for the purchase for the System open market account direct from
the Treasury of such amounts of special short-term certificates
of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the
total amount of such certificates held in the account at any
one time shall not exceed $1,500,000,000.
It was tentatively agreed that the next meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee would be held during the week beginning August
29, 1949.
Thereupon, the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.