A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in tne offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
Systemi n Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, December 13, 1949, at
10:05 a.m.
PRSENT: Mr. McCabe, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Draper
Mr. Earhart
Mr. Eccles
Mr. Gidney
Mr. Leach
Mr. McLarin
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Rauber, C. W. Williams, and John H.
WilliamsA, ssociate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open Market
Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board of Gov
ernors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Youngdahl, Chief, Government Finance
Section, Board of Governors
Messrs. Erickson, Young, Peyton, and Gilbert,
alternte members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Williams and Leedy, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and
Kansas City, respectively
Mr. Roelse, Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
Upon motion duly made and seconded and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
August 5, 1949, were approved.

12/13/49 -2
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the executive
comittee of the Federal 0pen Market Committee,
as set forth in the minutes of the meetings
of the executive committee held on August 5,
August 19, September 11, and November 18, 1949,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the action of the members
of the Federal Open Market Committee on
Novmber 21,9 49, approving an increase to
1.10-1.16 in the range at which Treasury
certificates could be purchased and sold for
the System account was approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
A report of operations in the System open market account cover
intgh e period August 5, 1949, to December 8, 1949, inclusive, prepared
tahte Federal Reserve Bank of New York, was then read in part and dis
cussed by Mr. Rouse, together with a supplementary report covering com
mitments executed for the System account for the period December 9 to
12, 1949, inclusive.
Upon notion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account for the period August 5, 1949,
to December 12, 1949, inclusive, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
At Chairman McCabe's request, Mr. Sproul reported on develop
mentss ince the meeting of the Federal Open Markt Committee on August
5, 1949, stating that until the meeting of the executive committee on
November 15, 1949, operations in the System account were carried on
under the policy approved on August 5 of making credit somewhat easy
at low rates. By mid-November, however, the business and credit sit-

12/13/49 -3
uation had changed sufficiently to warrant a change in open market
policy so as to bring some restraint on the availability of credit,
and,w ith the approval of all members of the committee and within
the framework of the policy of the June 28 statement, a course was
adopted which was designed to place mild restrictions on the avail
ability of bank reserves through open market operations. This took
the form of increases in the range of rates within which Treasury
bills and certificates were purchased for the System account, and
contemplated a possible increase in the one-year certificate rate to
1 1/4 per cent, if subsequent developments seemed to indicate the
desirability of such an increase. In this connection, Ar. Sproul read
the letter of November 22, 1949, which was sent to the Secretary of the
Treasury following the meeting of the executive committee on November
18, 1949.
The next development, Mr. Sproul said, was a telephone call to
Chairman McCabe on November 28 from the Secretary of the Treasury, who
had been out of the country at the time of the November 18 meeting and
who had not received the letter of November 22 until November 26. At
that time the rates on 90-day bills and 9-10 month certificates had come
together at about 1.11-1.12. The Secretary informed Chairman McCabe
that he was thinking of announcing both the December and January financ
ing at once, the December issue to be a two and a half year 1 1/4 per
cent note and the January refunding to be a one-year 1 1/8 per cent

12/13/49 -4
certificate. After reviewing the conversations which he and Chair
man McCabe had with the Secretary of the Treasury on November 28,
29, and 30, Mr. Sproul stated that the terms of the December and
January financing were announced by the Secretary on November 30.
He said that the Treasury had accepted substantially the Committee's
recommendtion on the December financing, with a 4 1/4 year 1 3/8
per cent note but had nullified that acceptance so far as market
rates were concerned by announcing that the January refunding would
be done with a 1 1/8 per cent certificate, despite the urging of
Chairman McCabe and Mr. Sproul that the announcement be deferred until
the matter could be more fully discussed and the market reaction to
the December refunding could be observed.
Mr. Sproul added that these developments brought into sharp
focus the difficulties faced in determining open market policies and
general credit policies. The question might be posed, he said, as to
whether we can even be sufficiently certain that an increase of 1/8
per cent in the short-term rate is of such importance in restraining
an expanding business and credit situation as to justify the risk of
our causing the failure of a large Treasury refunding operation.
Feeling that that risk should not be taken under present conditions,
the members of the executive committee on November 30, 1949, informally
agreed that rates on the longest bills and certificates should be held
at their then existing levels and not allowed to increase further,

12/13/49 -5
pending this meeting of the full Committee.
In a further comment on the discussions with the Secretary
of the Treasury, Chairman McCabe stated that it was unfortunate that
the meeting of the executive committee on November 18 came during the
absence of the Secretary of the Treasury from the country when he was
not available for a conference during which he could have been informed
currently of the discussions of the executive committee and the reasons
for the actions that were taken.
Chairman McCabe then called upon Mr. Thomas who made a state
ment on recent economic developments and their relationship to Federal
Reserve policies. Mr. Thomas said that recent expansion in economic
activity and prospects for further expansion supported the steps taken
by the Committee late in November toward a somewhat firmer policy with
respect to interest rates. He felt that the likelihood of a higher
level of economic activity during the next few months, and possibly
throughout 1950, accompanying substantial deficits in governmental
budgets (Federal and other), presented the System with a situation
different from any previously faced except in war periods, that under
these conditions the advisability of continuing to keep down money
rates would be questionable, and that greater flexibility in rates
was needed in order that policies could respond to changes in the
economic situation. Mr. Thomas indicted that currently the problem
was to prevent rates from rising in view of the announced Treasury

12/13/49 -6..
refunding, while in January the money markets were likely to be ex
tremely easy for temporary reasons. The problem before the Committee
then would be whether, in view of the economic situation, to permit
rates to decline accordingly. If it should be desired to absorb
reserves, this could be done (1) by selling bills and certificates,
either at declining rates or at present rates, (2) by permitting bill
holdings to mature without replacement, or (3) by selling restricted
bonds.
In connection with Mr. Thomas' statement, there was distributed
a memorandum dated December 12, 1949, on the Current Economic Situation
and Outlook, prepared by the Division of Research and Statistics of the
Board of Governors, a copy of which has been placed in the files of the
Federal Open Market Committee.
During Mr. Thomas' statement, Mr. Davis joined the meeting.
Reference was made to the action at the meeting on August 5,
1949, authorizing the Federal Reserve Banks to enter into repurchase
agreements covering short-tern Government securities with nonbank dealers
at a rate not below 1 3/8 per cent pending a decision to reduce the dis
count rate at Federal Reserve Banks from the existing level of 1 1/2 per
cent, and to the understanding that, if the discount rates were reduced
under sections 13 and 13a of the Federal Reserve Act, the authority
granted at the meeting of the executive committee on January 20, 1948,

12/13/49 -7
pursuant to the authorization of the full Committee at a meeting on
December 9, 1947, with respect to repurchase agreements with dealers
would again apply. During September it was decided that for the time
being the discount rates in effect at the Federal Reserve Banks should
not be changed and the question before the Committee at this meeting was
whether any change should be made in the authority granted to the Fed
eral Reserve Banks on August 5 with respect to repurchase agreements.
Mr. Rouse stated that the authority had been of material assist
ance in handling situations which arose in August, September, and early
October, that it had operated to keep rates on bank loans to dealers
lower than they otherwise would have been which had made it possible for
dealers to carry their positions in short-term issues without too great
a loss, that the authority had not been used in recent weeks, but that
if present discount and certificate rates continued in effect such
standby authority would be useful.
It was agreed unanimously that
no change would be made at this time in
the authority granted on August 5, 1949.
Chairman McCabe requested a discussion of the policy with re
spect to sales of long-term restricted bonds from the System account.
Mr. Sproul stated that the alternatives were (1) to allow funds coming
into the long-term market to have their full effect on the rate structure
which would mean the System would do little, if any, selling of long-term
bonds, (2) to decide that long-term rates are low enough and to prevent

12/13/49 -8
further decline in long-term yields by market sales, or (3) to determine
this question in the light of general credit policy, in which case, if a
restrictive credit policy were desired, we would sell restricted bonds
in the market when the opportunity was presented, thus absorbing re
serves without providing the banks with a short-term asset. He sug
gested that the full Committee grant the executive committee relatively
full discretion to follow any one or all of these alternatives, depending
upon the situation as it developed in the next few weeks.
This suggestion was discussed in the light of the effect on the
market of the Treasury decision to refund the January maturities with a
1 1/8 per cent one-year certificate, the tendency of the long-term issues
to move to higher levels as a result of that decision as well as other
factors, and an increased demand for bonds which would come into the
market during the next 30 to 45 days for investment purposes.
In that connection, Mr. Sproul stated that the recent policy of
the committee had been to purchase short-term securities so as to provide
reserves to banks to meet increased demands for loans, rising currency
circulation, and other factors; that during the same period the market
demand for long-term issues had been light, and it had seemed undesirable
to try to sell restricted issues from the System account which would have
taken funds out of the market. He also said that during the rest of
December it would be necessary to continue to supply the market with re
serves but that the market for long-terms could be expected to broaden

12/13/49 -9
somewhat and might afford an opportunity to sell restricted issues from
the System account without conflicting with the System's credit policy
or the requirements of an orderly market in Government securities.
Unless, he said, the System should wish to reverse its present mildly
restrictive policy, it would be necessary in January to sell a very sub
stantial amount of securities to absorb funds coming into the market and
it would be in order to use all the means at the disposal of the Com
mittee to accomplish such absorption including the sale of long bonds
from the System account.
He went on to say that while there were some "doubtful spots" in
the indications as to which way the economy would move next year, he
felt that for the time being the System should follow a policy of
neutrality or mild restraint which would suggest the opportunity to take
funds out of the market by the sale of long-terms as well as other market
issues.
There was agreement with the analysis presented by Mr. Sproul and
it was understood that in carrying out the general direction to be issued
by the Federal Open Market Committee today the executive committee would
have the discretion suggested by Mr. Sproul which it would exercise in
the light of the discussion at this meeting.
Referring again to the decision of the Treasury to refund the
January maturities with a 1 1/8 per cent certificate, Chairman McCabe
stated that he felt that the obligation of the Federal Open Market Com-

12/13/49 -10
mittee to support that rate was only a temporary one and that when the
refunding operation was out of the way the executive committee should
consider the course to be followed thereafter.
There was agreement that the policy to be followed after the
turn of the year would depend on the economic and credit situation and
outlook, that in future discussions with the Treasury there should be a
more complete exploration of the importance of small changes in interest
rates, and that every effort should be made to persuade the Treasury to
concur that such changes were important as part of System credit policy
and that they had substantial psychological value and a marked effect on
the willingness of lenders to lend.
In a brief consideration of the status of discussions with re
spect to a long-range financing program, Mr. Thomas stated that the System
Committee on Banking and Credit Policy was meeting this afternoon to dis
cuss the "framework" memorandum presented at the meeting of the Committee
on August 5, 1949. It was also stated that at the meeting of the execu
tive committee on November 18, 1949, it was agreed that the System Re
search Advisory Committee should continue to study the problem of long
term debt management, and that the members of the staff who had worked
on the problem should prepare a memorandum containing all the sugges
tions that had been made by the Federal Reserve staff on the subject
without any implication of approval of any of these suggestions, with
the understanding that when the memorandum was prepared it would be sub-

12/13/49 -11
mitted to Messrs. Bartelt and Haas of the Treasury Department with the
statement that the memorandum did not in any way commit the Open Market
Committee, the Board of Governors, the Federal Reserve Banks, or their
staffs, but was submitted by the staff as a means of presenting to the
staff of the Treasury for consideration the various suggestions that had
been made in connection with the problem.
Reference was then made to a memorandum prepared in the Board's
offices under date of December 12, 1949, with respect to the question
whether Treasury savings bonds should be made eligible collateral for
bank loans and to a memorandum dated December 8, 1949, prepared at the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, relating to the question of recommend
ing additional inducements to holders of maturing savings bonds to rein
vest the proceeds of such bonds in new savings bonds. Both memoranda
were distributed and copies have been placed in the files of the Federal
Open Market Committee. After a brief discussion, during which no con
clusions were reached, Chairman McCabe suggested that the two topics be
given further consideration at the joint meeting of the Board and the
Presidents to be held tomorrow.
Mr. Vardaman withdrew during the foregoing discussion to keep
another appointment.
On the question of Government fiscal policy, Chairman McCabe ex
pressed the opinion that every effort should be made to reduce Federal
expenditures, that the tax structure should be revised to eliminate in-

12/13/49 -12
equities and place it on a basis which would be in harmony with present
day conditions, and that tax rates in the revised structure should be at
levels which in times like the present would permit of a balanced budget
or produce a surplus for debt retirement. While he realized that
such a program would be a difficult one in an election year, he felt it
was important that the Federal Reserve should urge its adoption at every
opportunity. He also said that in connection with the preparation of
the President's messages to the Congress, he (Chairman McCabe) undoubtedly
would be questioned on these points and that if the Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks had any other views he would like to have them
before the Presidents left Washington. In the ensuing discussion no
different views were expressed and it was understood that the Presidents
and the Board would give some thought to the subject and be prepared to
discuss it at the joint meeting of the Presidents and the Board tomorrow.
Consideration was then given to the policy to be followed in the
interim before the next meeting of the executive committee with respect
to the replacement of maturing Treasury bills. Mr. Sproul referred to
the understanding at the meeting of the executive committee on November
18, 1949, that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York should be guided in
the redemption or replacement of System bill holdings by what would be
required in the light of current conditions in the money market to carry
out the general credit policy of the Federal Open Market Committee.
After a discussion, at his suggestion, no change was made in this under-

12/13/49 -13
standing.
In a discussion of the policy to be followed by the Committee,
there was agreement that the policy of mild restraint should be con
tinued within the limits imposed by the necessity of supporting a 1 1/8
per cent one-year rate in connection with the January refunding operation.
It was also agreed that, as soon as the refunding was out of the way, the
executive committee should consider whether the situation was then such
as to call for some further increase in the short-term rate, and, if so,
the matter should be discussed with the Treasury with a view to permitting
the rate to increase prior to the February refunding. In line with the
decision to prevent the rates on bills and certificates from rising above
1 1/8 per cent until after the January refunding was out of the way, there
was also agreement that the upper limits of the ranges at which Treasury
bills and certificates would be purchased and sold for the System account
should be fixed for the time being at 1.12.
Subject to the foregoing limitation,
the executive committee was authorized
to determine from time to time the exact
ranges at which bills and certificates
would be purchased by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York for the System open
market account. In taking this action
it was understood that if, following the
January financing, there should be agree
ment among the members of the executive
committee, after consultation with the
Treasury, that the short-term rate should
be increased to 1 1/4 per cent on one
year obligations, the upper limits of
the ranges on bills and certificates could
be increased to not to exceed 1.24.

12/13/49 -14-
In connection with the general direction to be issued to the
executive committee with respect to the execution of transactions for
the System account, it was suggested that no change be made in the
wording of the direction, but that the limitation contained in the first
paragraph be set at $2 billion and in the second paragraph at $1 billion.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the following direction
to the executive committee was approved
unanimously with the understanding that
the limitations contained in the direction
would include commitments for the System
open market account:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for such transactions for the System open market account,
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury
(including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of
maturing securities, and letting maturities run off with
out replacement), as may be necessary, in the light of
changing economic conditions and the general credit sit
uation of the country, for the practical administration of
the account, for the maintenance of orderly conditions in the
Government security market, and for the purpose of relating
the supply of funds in the market to the needs of commerce
and business; provided that the aggregate amount of securities
held in the account at the close of this date other than
special short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the
Treasury shall not be increased or decreased by more than
$2,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for the purchase for the System open market account direct
from the Treasury of such amounts of special short-term cer
tificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to
time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided
that the total amount of such certificates held in the account
at any one time shall not exceed $1,000,000,000.

12/13/49 -15
It was agreed that the next meetings of the Committee would
be held on Tuesday, February 28, and Wednesday, March 1, 1950, with
the understanding that actions at the meeting on February 28 would be
confined to routine matters, including the ratification of previous
actions and transactions for the System account and that discussions
of questions of policy would be deferred until the meeting on March 1.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.