A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D. C., on Monday, November 27, 1950, at 10:10 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. McCabe, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Eccles
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Evans
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Powell
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. C. S. Young
Mr. Gilbert (alternate for Mr. Davis)
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Mr. J. M. Peterson, Associate Economist
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board
of Governors
Mr. Riefler, Assistant to the Chairman,
Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary,
Board of Governors
Mr. Ralph A. Young, Director, Division
of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Wurts, Assistant Vice President,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Youngdahl, Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. R. F. Leach, Economist, Board
of Governors
Mr. Arthur Willis, Special Assistant,
Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Williams and Leedy, alternate members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Leach, McLarin, and Earhart, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively

11/27/50
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meetings of the Federal Open Market
Committee held on September 28 and October
11 and 30, 1950, were approved,
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the
minutes of the meetings of the executive
committee held on September 27 and 28 and
October 5 and 11, 1950, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Wurts presented and commented upon a report of open
market operations prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
covering the period from October 11 to November 21, 1950, inclusive,
and a supplementary report covering commitments executed during
the period November 22 to 26, 1950, inclusive. Copies of both
reports were distributed to the members of the Committee and have
been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System account for the period
October 10 to November 26, 1950, in
clusive, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Chairman McCabe stated that the most important action taken
by the Committee since the meeting when all of the Presidents were in
attendance was the decision at the meeting on October 30, 1950, to
send a letter to Secretary of the Treasury Snyder in which the
Committee stated that it was in complete agreement that under present

11/27/50 -3
conditions it was necessary to protect the 2-1/2 per cent rate (par)
on the longest term Treasury bonds now outstanding and stated that
for the present the Committee would endeavor to maintain an orderly
and flexible market with a maximum of 1-1/2 per cent per annum for
any securities maturing within one year. He went on to say that at
a meeting of the executive committee on November 17, 1950, approval
was given to a letter to the Secretary of the Treasury, in response
to a request from him, giving the views of the executive committee on
the December and January refunding operations of the Treasury, and that
the letter had been included in the draft of minutes of that meeting a
copy of which had been sent to the Presidents of all of the Federal
Reserve Banks. Chairman McCabe also said that he delivered the letter
to Secretary of the Treasury Snyder at noon on Monday, November 20,
1950, at which time he discussed the suggestions of the committee for
refunding securities maturing in December and January along the lines
stated in the letter.
Continuing, Chairman McCabe said that he received a telephone
call from Secretary Snyder on Wednesday, November 22, at which time
the Secretary stated that he had in mind offering a five-year 1-3/4
per cent note and asked for the reaction to that proposal, to which he
(Chairman McCabe) responded that he would like to check the matter again
and call back. After talking with Mr. Sproul and Mr. Thomas, Chairman
McCabe said, he called Secretary Snyder's office and left word (the
Secretary not being available) that he felt the proposed refunding

11/27/50 -4
was very satisfactory. The Treasury subsequently announced a
refunding issue of five-year 1-3/4 per cent notes.
Chairman McCabe then called upon Mr. Thomas who stated that
recent economic developments and prospects had been in line with
previous expectations, that there was still no evidence of a general
abatement of inflationary pressures, that production was being
maintained at levels close to capacity, that consumer demands were
continuing at a high level, and that it was apparent that demand for
goods must be reduced when production of consumer goods is curtailed
in the near future. He also said that defense expenditures were be
ginning to increase and that bank credit expansion has also continued,
although there has been some slackening in expansion of consumer and
real estate credit. Real estate and consumer credit loans directly and
indirectly accounted for approximately half the increase of $6.5
billion in bank credit since June, and the remainder was mostly in the
form of business loans. Continued substantial expansion in business
credit has been in large part to cover fabricators' needs for material,
some of which represented speculative activity. Mr. Thomas then
presented the results of a spot check made through the Federal Reserve
Banks pursuant to a request of the Board of Governors on November 14,
stating that the most striking result was the increase in loans to
dealers and processors of agricultural commodities, which aggregated
$1,233 million or 60 per cent of the total increase covered by the

11/27/50 -5
survey, and from which it was concluded that speculative motives were an
important factor in the loan expansion which, in turn, contributed to
price rise. ost of the remaining increase was in loans to retailers
and wholesalers and to finance companies.
Mr. Thomas stated that the price rise had been resumed in nearly
all groups of commodities after some slackening during October in prices
of farm products and foods. Wages were also gradually rising, average
weekly hours of work had increased slightly, and, in general, the
labor market was tight with military and defense demands strong. It
was still a question, he felt, whether consumer buying would slacken
more rapidly than defense demands would increase, but whatever
slackening in consumer buying took place would probably be relatively
slight and short-lived. In sum, prospective consumer demand appeared
likely to exceed probable supplies during the next year, Government
expenditures would increase, and Mr. Thomas expected that deficits would
begin to show in the second quarter of 1951, although the surplus of
receipts during the first quarter would more than offset the probable
deficit during the second quarter of the year, and new Treasury
borrowing was unlikely until midsummer of 1951.
The most important problem for the Federal Reserve, Mr. Thomas
said, continued to be the question of restraint on credit expansion.
If credit expansion continued, it would be a definite sign of an
excessive demand for credit. The ordinary seasonal pattern would call
for a decline in bank loans of at least $1.5 billion during the first

11/27/50 -6
two months of 1951. Possible measures of restraint included voluntary
action by lenders, which, however, Mr. Thomas felt was unlikely to have
much effect in holding down credit expansion in view of competitive
pressures. The higher interest rates recently established had had
some effect and might be expected to have more effect in restraining
some lenders and borrowers, although such effects would be limited if
rates had to be rigidly pegged at their present level. If further
credit expansion continued it might become necessary for the Committee
to face the issue of a further rise in the short-term rate. Meanwhile,
fluctuation in rates might be encouraged and a wider spread between
System buying and selling rates on short-term issues might be desirable.
Bank liquidity had been reduced somewhat by the recent increase in
loans and sale of short-term securities by banks, Mr. Thomas said,
and would be reduced further by the new Treasury refunding. An in
crease in reserve requirements could be used to make another cut in
bank liquidity. Mr. Thomas felt that a decrease in the liquidity of
banks was a step in the right direction in terms of monetary policy
at this time.
With respect to demand for Government securities by nonbank
investors, Mr. Thomas felt that on the whole purchases of securities
from the banks by corporations, which have recently been substantial,
were a helpful influence in exerting restraint on bank credit expansion.
It would also be desirable to promote sales of savings bonds to in
dividuals, particularly as large personal and business savings become

11/27/50 -7
available during the next year. The question was, he said, to what
extent such savings could be attracted into Government securities
in view of the outlook for inflationary pressures.
Mr. Gidney, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland,
joined the meeting at the conclusion of Mr. Thomas' report.
There ensued a general discussion of the further actions that
might be taken by the System in the period of continuing inflationary
pressures that would exist in the months ahead, including the initiation
of voluntary agreements by financing institutions to limit nonessential
credit, a further increase in the short-term rate, an increase in member
bank reserve requirements, and recommendations that might be made to
the Congress as to additional powers in a period when the opportunities
of the System to use the traditional methods of credit control were
limited by its decision for the time being to support the long-term
Government securities market. There was also a discussion of why
action was not taken by the Board last October or earlier in November
to increase reserve requirements, and the opinion was expressed that
there was no reason why consideration should not again be given to
a further increase in the short-term rate and in reserve requirements
of member banks after the current refunding operation was out of the
way.
During the discussion, Mr. Sproul made a statement in which
he expressed the view that credit was only one of the factors in
the rise of prices and that while credit and the rise in prices were

11/27/50 -8
certainly interrelated, the one could not be said to be definitely and
mechanically the cause of the other. A sound fiscal policy is also
required, he said, and if wages and other costs rise without relation
to increased productivity, credit policy and fiscal policy together,
will not be enough. While it was necessary to go ahead with credit
measures, he said, the System should not lose sight of the other
factors and thus acquire or create a false sense of what could be
accomplished by credit restrictions. As to the effectiveness of
credit measures, Mr. Sproul felt there was a real chance through making
bank reserves less readily available, which means continued flexibility
in the short-term interest rate, to restore some of the effectiveness
of the central bank in the market. He said that after the present
Treasury refunding was out of the way consideration should be given
to some further rise in the short-term rate.
Mr. Eccles responded that not only had the supply of credit
increased but also its velocity had moved upward in recent months,
that he had favored permitting the short-term interest rate to
increase but felt that by itself it was very unimportant in curbing
credit expansion since Federal Reserve funds had been made readily
available through support of the long-term bond market, that reserve
requirements of member banks should have been increased within the
limits of the present authority of the Board, and that the System
should be prepared to call the attention of Congress and the public

11/27/50 -9
to the fact that the System had used all its powers short of letting
the long-term bonds to go below par and that, since it was unable to
use the traditional methods for restricting credit so long as it
supported long-term bonds at par, it was necessary that additional
authority be provided in the form of the special reserve plan or
something along that line if the System was to carry out its
responsibilities in the credit field.
Mr. Sproul stated that he had less regard for changes in
reserve requirements than was indicated by Mr. Eccles, and more regard
for the effectiveness of small changes in interest rates, an effective
ness which he said could not be measured statistically but lies within
the realm of judgment and opinion. He agreed that we must look
toward unfreezing the long end of the rate pattern as well as the short
end; the hope and expectation here must be that the outstanding 2-1/2
per cent restricted bonds, which are now only 17 years to call date,
will soon take care of themselves. Be added that the moves thus far
made toward greater flexibility represented a major accomplishment
and should be pursued whenever the credit situation warranted. The
System should continue to make use of general credit controls, he
said, supplemented by such selective credit controls as Regulation W
and X, and after the System had exhausted such moves would be the time
to consider an increase in reserve requirements. Mr. Sproul also said
he thought the present Treasury savings bonds would not retain existing

11/27/50 -10
holders and attract new holders and he said that the requirements of
a long range rearmament program, under present conditions, demands
a new product and an invigorated sales organization.
Chairman McCabe stated that the Treasury had taken a very
adamant position against any increase in reserve requirements at this
time, that for reasons which he stated he felt the System had gone about
as far as it could go at present in taking independent action in
permitting the short-term rate to rise to 1-1/2 per cent, that after the
present Treasury refunding was out of the way there was the possibility
of a further increase in the short-term rate without letting the
restricted bonds go below par, and that he did not feel that the delay
in increasing reserve requirements obviated the question being taken
up in January.
Mr. Eccles agreed with Chairman McCabe as to the difficulties
of the situation but said that he did not believe inflation was going
to be controlled by actions that had been or were likely to be taken in
the credit field, that this would lead to direct controls, and that he
felt such controls would be a mistake because they would not prevent
inflation but would only delay its effect. He reiterated the view that
the System should be prepared to present the matter to Congress and
that the Congress should decide whether the System was to use the tra
ditional methods of restricting credit with the accompanying effects
on prices of long-term Government securities, whether as an alternative

11/27/50 -11
it should be given additional authority over reserves of member banks,
or whether inflation should be permitted to continue unrestrained.
During the discussion, Chairman McCabe referred to the
possibility of action in the field of voluntary agreements by
financing institutions to limit the growth of credit, and he re
viewed the discussions with Attorney-General McGrath and with the
Federal Advisory Council on the subject.
There followed a brief discussion of recommendations that
might be made to the Treasury with respect to its 1951 financing
program and there was agreement with Chairman McCabe's suggestion
that it would be premature to discuss this matter with the Treasury
at the present time.
In connection with a possible program for refunding maturing
savings bonds, Mr. Thomas stated that a memorandum being prepared by
the staff would be completed shortly. There was a discussion of the
problem of refunding such securities, of the recommendation made by
the Committee on Government Borrowing of the American Bankers
Association, and of the procedure which might be followed in pre
senting the recommendations of the Federal Open Market Committee to
the Treasury. It was understood that the memorandum referred to by
Mr. Thomas would be distributed to the members of the Committee as
soon as it was available after which the matter would be given further
consideration by the Federal Open Market Committee.

11/27/50 -12
Reference was also made to a memorandum on suggested policy
on Treasury savings notes prepared in the Board's offices prior to
the meeting of the executive committee on November 17 and distributed
to members of the Federal Open Market Committee under date of
November 24, 1950. The memorandum, a copy of which has been placed
in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee, concluded, for
the reasons outlined, that the present series of Treasury savings
notes should be continued for at least the next six to nine months
unless net cash redemptions of present issues should become
excessive or cash needs of the Treasury should change sharply from
what the present military program suggested. There was general
agreement among the members of the Committee with this conclusion.
Mr. Sproul suggested that the general direction of the full
Committee to the executive committee to arrange for transactions
in the System account be changed by reducing the limitation in the
first paragraph from $4 billion to $3 billion.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the following direction
to the executive committee was approved
unanimously with the understanding that
the limitation contained in the direction
would include commitments for the System
open market account:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Mrket Committee, to arrange
for such transactions for the System open market account,
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury
(including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of
maturing securities, and letting maturities run off without

11/27/50 -13
replacement), as may be necessary, in the light
of current and prospective economic conditions and
the general credit situation of the country, with
a view to exercising restraint upon inflationary
developments, to maintaining orderly conditions in
the Government security market, to relating the
supply of funds in the market to the needs of
commerce and business, and to the practical ad
ministration of the account; provided that the
aggregate amount of securities held in the account
at the close of this date other than special short
term certificates of indebtedness purchased from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of
the Treasury shall not be increased or decreased
by more than $3,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed,
until otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market
Committee, to arrange for the purchase for the
System open market account direct from the
Treasury of such amounts of special short-term
certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary
from time to time for the temporary accommodation
of the Treasury; provided that the total amount
of such certificates held in the account at any
one time shall not exceed $1,000,000,000.
Following a discussion of the rates at which short-term
securities should be purchased and sold for the System account, there
was unanimous agreement that the understanding reached at the meet
ing of the Committee on October 11 on this point would continue in
effect with the further understanding that, in accordance with the
letter sent to the Treasury following the meeting on October 30,
1950, the executive committee for the time being would not permit
the rate on any securities maturing within one year to rise above
1-1/2 per cent.
There were then distributed copies of a memorandum from Mr.

11/27/50 -14
Thomas dated November 24, 1950, transmitting two memoranda on the
"Cost of Raising Reserve Funds Through Bill Operations", one prepared
in the offices of the Board of Governors and one prepared at the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York. Mr. Thomas stated that the two memoranda
were in general agreement that substantial fluctuations should be
permitted to develop in the bill rate in accordance with changing
market circumstances as a means of reinforcing restrictive credit
measures.
In a discussion of the memoranda, Mr. Sproul suggested that
the full Committee indicate to the executive committee its general
approval of the idea of a wider spread between the buying and selling
rates on Treasury bills, leaving it to the executive committee to
fix the effective buying and selling rates.
Mr. Sproul's suggestion was
approved unanimously.
It was unanimously understood that the understanding with
respect to the replacement of maturing Treasury bill holdings should
be continued unchanged and that the executive committee should be guided
by what would be required in the light of current conditions in the
money market to carry out the general credit policy of the Federal
Open Market Committee.
Reference was made to the discussion at the meeting of the
executive committee on November 17, 1950, and the understanding reached
at that time of the circumstances under which the price of the longest-

11/27/50 -15
term restricted bonds should be permitted to decline to slightly
above par. In the light of that discussion, it was agreed unanimously
that the present understanding with respect to transactions in long
term securities for the System account should be continued, i.e., that
the longest-term restricted bond would not be allowed to decline beyond
a point slightly above par, and that an orderly market would be
maintained.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would
be subject to call by the Chairman.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.