A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D. C., on Thursday, September 28, 1950, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. McCabe, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Davis
Mr. Eccles
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Evans
Mr. Norton
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Powell
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. C. S. Young
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Langum, Peterson, Stead, and John
H. Williams, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market
Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Riefler, Assistant to the Chairman,
Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board
of Governors
Mr. Ralph A. Young, Director, Division
of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Youngdahl, Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. R. F. Leach, Economist, Board of
Governors
Mr. Arthur illis, Special Assistant,
Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Williams, Gidney, Gilbert, and Leedy,
alternate members of the Federal Open
Market Committee

9/28/50 -2
Messrs, Leach, McLarin, and Earhart, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Townsend, Solicitor, Board of Governors
Chairman McCabe stated that it had not been possible to ar
range for a conference with Secretary of the Treasury Snyder before
this meeting, as suggested at the meeting of the executive committee
yesterday, but that he and Mr. Sproul had an appointment with Mr.
Snyder for 11:30 this morning.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meet
ing of the Federal Open Market Committee held
on August 18, 1950, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the action of the members
of the Committee on August 22, 1950, increas
ing from $2 to $4 billion the limitation con
tained in the first paragraph of the direc
tion issued to the executive committee on Aug
ust 18, 1950, authorizing transactions for the
System account was approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the execu
tive committee of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee as set forth in the minutes of the meet
ing of the executive committee held on August
18, 1950, were approved, ratified, and con
firmed.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report of open market operations prepared at the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York covering the period from August 18 to

9/28/50 -3
September 21, 1950, inclusive. Mr. Rouse presented a supplementary
report covering commitments executed on September 22 through 26, in
clusive, and commented briefly on both reports. Copies of the re
ports have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account for the period August 18 to
September 26, 1950, inclusive, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Chairman McCabe said that there had been no meeting with the
Secretary of the Treasury since he and Mr. Sproul called to inform
him of the action taken by the Committee on August 18, and that he had
had no telephone communication with any Treasury representative, rela
tive to the action taken at that time, since Secretary Snyder informed
him by telephone later in the afternoon of August 18 of his decision
with respect to the refunding of the Treasury securities maturing in
September and October.
Chairman McCabe went on to say that the executive committee had
a full discussion of open market policy at its meeting yesterday and,
although it had not adopted any formal recommendations to be made to
the full Committee, that there appeared to be general agreement that
the Committee had a grave responsibility in the light of the further
rapid expansion of bank credit in recent weeks, that it was quite ob
vious that appeals of supervisory agencies and bankers associations
for restraint in granting credit had had little effect, and that it

9/28/50 -4
was felt that serious consideration should be given to allowing the
short-term interest rate to rise further to continue to carry out
the policy adopted at the meeting on August 18, 1950, in an effort
to restrain, if possible, the selling of Government securities to
the System.
In his comments, Chairman McCabe referred to the report of
open market operations submitted by Mr. Rouse and discussed earlier
at this meeting and to memoranda prepared in the Board's offices
under date of September 21, 1950, with respect to an increase in re
serve requirements and the outlook for Treasury cash requirements,
copies of which had been distributed to all members of the Committee
before this meeting.
At Chairman McCabe's request, the members of the Committee
and the Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks who were not members
of the Committee expressed their views as to whether action should
be taken to permit a further increase in the short-term rate and
.hether the Board of Governors should use its authority to increase
reserve requirements of member banks. There was general agreement
that there should be a further increase in the short-term rate to
continue to carry out the policy adopted ty the Federal Open Market
Committee on August 18, 1950. With respect to the question whether
the Board of Governors should increase reserve requirements of member
banks as an additional or alternative means of placing restraint on

9/28/50 -5
credit expansion, all of the Presidents of the Reserve Banks expressed
the view that an increase should not be made at this time. Several of
the Presidents felt that, if the Board decided that such an increase
;,ere desirable in dealing with the current inflationary situation,
action should be deferred until after the results of the increase in
the short-term rate and other System actions could be observed.
Messrs. Eccles, Szymczak, Vardaman, and Powell thought that
the increase should be made effective very promptly after the short
term rate had been allowed to rise. Mr. Evans was of the opinion
that it should precede an increase in the short-term rate, which he
felt would be of little value in restraining credit expansion.
The members of the Committee who commented on the long-term
rate felt that the 2-1/2 per cent rate on Government bonds would
have to be held during the present emergency. Several of the Presi
dents felt that System policy should not be held indefinitely to the
2-1/2 per cent rate.
During the foregoing discussion Messrs. McCabe and Sproul
withdrew to keep their appointment with Secretary of the Treasury
Snyder.
The members of the staff of the Board's Division of Research
and Statistics made an oral and visual presentation by charts of eco
nomic developments since the invasion of South Korea commenced on June
25, 1950, and a memorandum dated September 27, 1950, on the current

9/28/59 -6
economic situation and outlook was distributed. A copy of the memo
randum has been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee.
Mr. Thomas made a statement on problems of Federal Reserve
policy in which he said that economic developments and prospects
continued to be dangerously inflationary, that pressures so far were
due primarily to private spending and investment rather than to an ac
tual increase in Government spending, and that inflationary pressures
were likely to increase for a while as private activities and increases
in Government spending added to incomes and there were reductions in
supplies of certain products for civilian use. Mr. Thomas said that
measures to prevent inflation, such as the increase in income taxes
effective October 1, 1950, allocations and inventory controls, con
sumer credit controls, and real estate credit restrictions, were not
yet effective, and that general credit restraint through the open mar
ket policy adopted August 18, 1950, had been frustrated through the
necessity of supporting Treasury refunding operations, the System hav
ing supplied a substantial amount of reserves which would provide for
further credit expansion since that date, in addition to having sup
plied reserves to meet an outflow of gold and an increase in demand
for currency. There had, however, been some adjustment in the rate
structure since August 18, and now that it was no longer necessary
to support Treasury refunding and since there probably would be no

9/28/50 -7
need for new Treasury funds until next summer, Mr. Thomas felt that
an additional small increase in short-term rates could be permitted.
A small rise in rates could have a restraining effect, Mr. Thomas
said, the important thing being that the economy worked through the
marginal borrower and it was necessary to affect only a small per
centage of loans in order to make System policy effective. Mr. Thomas
ent on to suggest that the System permit an increase in rates on 12
and 13-month Treasury issues as a means of encouraging market pur
chases which would widen the spread between the bill rate and the
12-month rate, absorb some of the reserves in the market, and permit
adjustments in the System's holdings of securities. It might be nec
essary for the System to purchase some long-term bonds, but the amount
of such purchases should be kept small. Other possible measures in
cluded an increase in reserve requirements which would be more effect
ive if it was preceded or accompanied by an increase in the short-term
rate, adoption of a Treasury financing policy which would reduce the
supply of short-term securities in the market, and, in the event in
stitutional and other investors should sell large amounts of long
term bonds for the purpose of making loans of an inflationary charac
ter, consideration of abandonment of par support for long-term Treas
ury bonds.
The meeting then recessed and reconvened at 2:10 p.m. with
the same attendance as at the beginning of the morning session.

9/28/50
Chairman McCabe said that he and Mr. Sproul met with Secretary
of the Treasury Snyder at 11:30 this morning and that Mr. Haas, Di
rector of the Technical Staff of the Treasury, and Mr. Bartelt, Fiscal
Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, were also present. He then made
a statement substantially as follows:
We told the Secretary that we had tried to see him at
9:30 this morning before the Committee met, that the Commit
tee was now in session, and that we would like to have the
benefit of any views that he might have on how we could curb
inflationary forces, particularly as they were operating in
the banking field. We pointed out the expansion in bank
credit and said that had given us very much concern and that
we needed his counsel as to how the expansion could be
curbed. He immediately asked if we would give him any
thought we had in mind on what might be done, so we men
tioned an increase in reserve requirements, and the pos
sibility of restricting bank reserves by being reluctant
buyers of securities and allowing a moderate further in
crease in short-term rates. During the course of the
conversation he took up each of these points.
On reserve requirements, he was quite emphatic in
ruling that out as not being particularly effective at
this time. On the question of an increase in the short
term rate, he questioned us at great length as to what
effect we thought that would have. There was a big
question in his mind whether the recent increase of 1/8
per cent had had any value whatever, or whether it, plus
other things taking place, had simply resulted in keep
ing the market upset. Both the Secretary and Mr. Bartelt
brought up the cost to the Government of an increase in
the short-term rate, asking in different ways what proof
we had of the effectiveness of the increase. He seemed
pretty emphatic that any further increase in the short
term rate would be a step of a very doubtful character.
Then we asked the Secretary if he could suggest
anything else that possibly could be done to curtail
bank credit. He mentioned the American Bankers Associ
ation 1948 voluntary campaign and suggested we might
get the new President of the association and other of
ficials to put on a strong campaign to restrain credit.
We talked of other controls, such as on consumer credit

9/28/50 -9-
and real estate credit, and he expressed hope that these
controls might be effective.
We pointed out the desirability of discussions of
this character and expressed the hope that we could have
them more frequently, that there should be a meeting of
minds, and that we should try to settle these questions
in this way. There was some discussion also of the rela
tive responsibilities of the Treasury and the Federal Re
serve and he indicated that he thought it highly desir
able at some time for this whole question of responsibility
to be reviewed by the proper authorities because condi
tions had changed so materially since action by the Congress
creating the Federal Open Market Committee as now consti
tuted. At the time of that action, he said, we did not
have a public debt of anything like the present magnitude,
and in view of the problems involved in the handling of
the debt, he felt there should be a review of the Congres
sional authority and the responsibilities of the agencies
should be re-defined. We spent considerable time discussing
the long-term rate and brought out that we did not want to
carry the short-term rate up to a point that would affect
the 2-1/2 per cent rate.
At the end, the Secretary said that he would like to
have a couple more days to think about the matter and that
he would get in touch with us and give us the benefit of
his views. Mr. Sproul and I discussed this afterwards and
felt that he had given us a clear indication of his views
both on reserve requirements and the short-term rate, We
felt that we should report back to this Committee and per
haps we should see him later today and tell him the action
of the Committee or we could give him a couple of days in
which to express his point of view.
In a further comment on the conversation, Mr. Sproul stated
that the Secretary was unequivocal in indicating that an increase
in reserve requirements would be useless and ineffective at this
time and would simply shift earning assets from commercial banks to
Federal Reserve Banks, and that the increase in the short-term rate
had gone too far already. Mr. Sproul also said that Secretary Snyder
made the statement that the Treasury considered that cooperation

9/28/50 -10
in these matters was a two-way street and that the Treasury had gone
along with the Committee when it did not agree and felt the Committee
was wrong, and that he thought the Treasury should have its way some
of the time.
There followed an extensive discussion of the report by Chair
man McCabe and Mr. Sproul and of the possible courses of action that
might be taken by the Committee.
During the discussion Chairman McCabe stated that if the Com
mittee felt the short-term rate should be permitted to increase fur
ther as a restraining influence it could either authorize him and Mr.
Sproul to call on Secretary Snyder again today and tell him the decision
arrived at after having considered his views, or it could authorize
the executive committee to proceed to carry out the policy at a time
that was agreed upon by the executive committee after hearing from
Secretary Snyder again. Chairman McCabe expressed the view that, for
reasons which he stated, it would be preferable to wait a couple of
days before permitting the short-term rate to rise further in order
to give time to hear from Secretary Snyder. He also said that if
the decision of the Committee was at complete variance with the views
of the Secretary of the Treasury the matter would probably go to the
President of the United States, that in his judgment the President
would not be likely to take a position against the views of the Secre
tary of the Treasury, and that the System would then have to decide
what its course of action should be.

9/28/50 -11
Mr. Evans said that he thought the Committee could delay ac
tion a few days until it had heard from the Secretary of the Treasury
and that if the Secretary was opposed to the action which the Commit
tee felt should be taken he should be requested to state his views in
writing.
Mr. Szymczak felt that the Comittee would be in a better posi
tion in its relations with the Secretary of the Treasury if no action
were taken until it had heard from him again.
Mr. Sproul felt that time was of the essence and that delay
would be unfortunate if not damaging to the results the Committee hoped
to accomplish, that it had gotten the Secretary's reaction to the Com
mittee's views and knew beyond any reasonable doubt that there was going
to be no change in his attitude on either the short-term rate or an
increase in reserve requirements, and that it would be better for
the Federal Open Market Committee to decide now what it was going to
do and take the action today. Failure to take action today, he said,
would run the risk not only of still further delay but of added pres
sure not to take the action at all even though it was the judgment
of the Committee that it was necessary if it was to discharge its re
sponsibilities properly. Mr. Sproul felt that the question should not
go to the President of the United States as he should not be called
upon to decide questions of this kind, and that the members of the
Board and the Federal Open Market Committee could not avoid their re
sponsibility for making decisions.

9/28/50 -12
Mr. Eccles said that, if the Committee could not get agree
ment with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Committee must decide
upon a course of action in the light of its responsibilities under
the Federal Reserve Act and take action, going to Congress later if
necessary. He went on to say that he would like to see action taken
by the full Committee today authorizing the executive committee to per
nit an increase in the short-term rate with the understanding that the
executive committee would defer action until it had given the Secretary
of the Treasury opportunity to express his views in a few days, as he
had indicated he would do.
Mr. Vardaman said that he welcomed intercession of the Presi
dent in time of war, that he thought the Committee should give the
Secretary of the Treasury time, and that if it could not get agreement
.ith him it should go to the President and if he could give a good
reason for delaying action the Committee should delay and go to the
Congress in November.
There was also a discussion of the effect of an increase in
the short-term rate on the price of the longest term restricted Treas
ury bonds and it was agreed that, for the reasons discussed, the Sys
tem should not at this time permit the longest term restricted Treas
ury bonds to go below par even though a policy of supporting such
bonds at or slightly above par meant that use of traditional central
banking methods for putting restraint on bank credit expansion could
have only a limited effect.

9/28/50
Mr. Davis stated that the picture had not been changed by the
introduction of any new factors since the meeting of the Committee on
August 18, 1950, that in his judgment the Committee should go ahead
with the policy adopted at that time, and that this called for a fur
ther increase no in the short-term interest rate and, when in the
judgment of the Board of Governors it was timely, an increase in re
serve requirements of member banks. He thought that the Committee
ought to state its position and give the executive committee authority
to act. He felt there could still be a short delay in carrying out
the action, but that there was no reason why the Committee should re
cede from the policy adopted August 18.
Mr. Davis moved that, in accordance with the pol
icy announced by the Federal Open Market Committee and
the Board of Governors on August 18, 1950, it be under
stood that (after the conference which Chairman McCabe
and Mr. Sproul are to have with the Secretary of the
Treasury early next week at which they will advise
the Secretary of the views as expressed at this meet
ing, and in the absence of the submission of any new
information by the Secretary of the Treasury which
in the judgment of the executive committee would call
for further consideration by the members of the full
Committee) (1) the executive committee, acting under
the general direction issued at this meeting, will
take such action as may be necessary over such period
as may be desirable to allow the market yields for
Treasury securities on a one year basis to move up
to the highest point, not exceeding the Federal Re
serve Bank discount rate of 1-3/4 per cent, which
ill not result in such pressure on the longest term
restricted bond as would cause continuing purchases
in substantial amounts of such bonds for the System
account, (2) the longest term restricted bond would
not be allowed to decline beyond a point slightly
above par, and (3) an orderly market would be maintained;

9/28/50 -14-
That it be further understood that the fore
going motion is predicated on the understanding
that as promptly as practicable in the discretion
of the Board of Governors after short-term rates
were increased in accordance with number (1) above
(but not necessarily waiting until such increase
reached the highest authorized point) the Board
would announce an increase in reserve requirements
of all member banks by two percentage points on denand de
posits to be effective at such times as the Board
determined to be advisable; and
That it be further understood that (1) a state
ment would be prepared setting forth fully the rea
sons for the Committee's views in a form satisfactory
to the executive committee and the Board of Gover
nors and suitable for the policy record, which could
be furnished to the Secretary of the Treasury follow
ing the conference with him next week, and (2) a meet
ing of the executive committee would be held early
next week.
Mr. Davis' motion was put by the
Chair and carried unanimously,
Reference was then made to the general direction to be issued
to the executive committee to arrange for transactions in the System
account and it was suggested that the direction be in the same terms
and amounts as the existing direction.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the following direction
to the executive committee was approved
unanimously with the understanding that
the limitations contained in the direc
tion would include commitments for the
System open market account:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for such transactions for the System open market account,
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury (in
cluding purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing
securities, and letting maturities run off without replace
ment), as may be necessary, in the light of current and

9/28/50
prospective economic conditions and the general credit
situation of the country, with a view to exercising re
straint upon inflationary developments, to maintaining
orderly conditions in the Government security market, to
relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs
of commerce and business, and to the practical adminis
tration of the account; provided that the aggregate amount
of securities held in the account at the close of this date
other than special short-term certificates of indebtedness
purchased from time to time for the temporary accommodation
of the Treasury shall not be increased or decreased by more
than $4,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until oth
erwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to ar
range for the purchase for the System open market account
direct from the Treasury of such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treas
ury; provided that the total amount of such certificates
held in the account at any one time shall not exceed
$1,000,000,000.
In a discussion of the policy to be followed in the replacement
of System maturing bill holdings, it was understood that the executive
committee should be guided by what would be required in the light of
current conditions in the money market to carry out the general credit
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee.
It was also understood that, acting under the general direc
tion of the full Committee in carrying out the understanding referred
to in clause (2) of the first paragraph of Mr. Davis' motion, i.e.,
that the longest term restricted bond would not be allowed to decline
in an orderly market beyond a point slightly above par, the executive
committee would be authorized to permit the market price of the long
est term restricted bond to decline to between 4/32 and 8/32 above par.

9/28/50 -16
The time of the next meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee was tentatively set for November 27, 1950.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.