A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, February 28, 1950, at 9:40 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. McCabe, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Draper
Mr. Earhart
Mr. Eccles
Mr. Gidney
Mr. Leach
Mr. McLarin
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Thompson, C. W. Williams, and
John H. Williams, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Riefler, Assistant to the Chairman,
Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board
of Governors
Mr. Young, Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Youngdahl, Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Arthur Willis, Special Assistant,
Securities Department, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
Messrs. Erickson, Young, Davis, and Peyton,
alternate members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Williams, Gilbert, and Leedy, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Kansas City, respectively

2/28/50 -2
Mr. Stead, Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
December 13, 1949, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the execu
tive committee of the Federal Open Market
Committee as set forth in the minutes of the
meetings of the executive committee held on
December 13, 1949, and January 6 and February
6, 1950, were approved, ratified, and con
firmed.
Before this meeting there had been sent to each member of
the Committee a report, prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, of operations in the System open market account covering
the period December 13, 1949, to February 21, 1950, inclusive. At
this meeting Mr. Rouse presented a supplementary report covering
commitments executed during the period February 23 to 27, 1950,
inclusive.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account for the period December 13,
1949, to February 27, 1950, inclusive, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Chairman McCabe reviewed discussions with the Secretary of
the Treasury subsequent to the meeting of the executive committee
held on February 6, 1950, and other developments leading up to the
announcement by the Treasury of the terms of the refunding of
securities maturing during March and April 1950.

2/28/50 -3
Chairman McCabe also said that while the Committee on
Government Borrowing of the American Bankers Association was in
Washington for the purpose of discussing the March and April financ
ing and making recommendations to the Treasury thereon, he (Chairman
McCabe) met with the Committee at its urgent invitation to discuss
the financing. After commenting on the questions which he had con
sidered as to the advisability of accepting the invitation and its
possible implications, as well as the nature of the discussion at
the meeting, he asked for the opinion of the other members of the
Federal Open Market Committee as to whether he should continue to
meet with the Committee when it came to Washington. He stated
that while there were some advantages in talking with the Committee,
such an arrangement could be the cause of difficulties in the
future. He added that he had met with the Committee on this
occasion only because some of the members urged that he do so.
During a discussion of the matter, it was pointed out that
the Treasury's presentation to the members of the Committee did
not attempt to cover the business and credit situation, that the
Board's staff was better equipped than any other group in Washington
to review current economic and credit conditions, and that the
Committee should have that background for its discussions of
Treasury financing. It was suggested that the Committee might be
invited to the Board's offices for such a presentation during which

2/28/50 -4
the financing could be discussed in general terms without disclosing
any conclusions that might have been reached by the executive
committee or the Federal Open Market Committee. The further comment
was made that the recent Treasury presentation to the Committee
created the impression that any funds raised in new financing this
year would have to come from banks as it appeared that there was
no substantial amount of nonbank funds available for investment in
Government securities, while the staff of the Board and the Federal
Open Market Committee felt that substantial amounts of nonbank
funds could be attracted if the right kind of securities were
offered by the Treasury.
At the conclusion of the discussion, no objection was expressed
to further meetings by Chairman McCabe with the Committee if he felt it
advisable, and it was understood that he would give further considera
tion to the procedure that should be followed in this connection in
the future.
At this point Chairman McCabe and Mr. Vest withdrew from the
meeting for the purpose of completing the statement to be made by
Chairman McCabe tomorrow morning before the Senate Banking and
Currency Committee on the bank holding company bill.
Mr. Sproul then called upon Mr. Thomas for a report on the
economic situation.
In his remarks, Mr. Thomas referred to the following memoranda

2/28/50 -5
sent to members of the Committee before this meeting, copies of which
have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee:
(a) Current Economic Trends and Prospects, prepared in the Division
of Research and Statistics of the Board under date of February 24,
1950, (b) Outlook for bank reserves and Treasury cash requirements
dated February 21, 1950, and (c) New Treasury Financing in 1950,
prepared by an ad hoc research committee of the System Research
Advisory Committee under date of February 23, 1950. Mr. Thomas
stated that developments in 1949 had lessened the major fears of
inflation and depression, that the principal postwar readjustments
had been almost completed, that the economy was now closer to
"normalcy" than at any time since prewar and probably since the
1920's, and that the prospects for 1950 were on the whole for
continuation of economic activity at moderately high levels with
some uncertainties and the likelihood of some decreases toward the
end of the year. Mr. Thomas also referred to some of the problems
that might develop, perhaps in the latter part of 1950, when the
backlog of demands on the part of business and consumers that were
now in the picture were satisfied, including eventual termination
of the unusual demands for automobiles and housing and a smaller
export balance when foreign aid was reduced or ended. Mr. Thomas
pointed out that the prospective Federal cash deficit would probably
exceed $7 billion for the calendar year 1950 and that nearly

2/28/50 -6
$2 billion would be needed to cover cash redemptions of maturing
marketable securities. About $2 billion might be met by drawing
down the cash balance of the Treasury and over $2 billion might be
raised from sale of savings bonds and notes in excess of redemptions.
Additional new financing would need to be around $5 billion. Since
new corporate security issues and the increase in mortgages would
probably be somewhat less than in 1949 and the volume of lendable
funds larger, nonbank investors should be able to absorb all of the
additional borrowing by the Treasury. He also stated that demand
for bank credit would probably increase somewhat, apart from any
increase in holdings of Government securities by banks, with a
resulting expansion in bank deposits.
Mr. Thomas indicated that under the circumstances the
appropriate Federal Reserve policy would seem to be one of neutrality
as to the supply of reserves, with easy money definitely not needed
and vigorous restrictive measures probably unnecessary, but with
changes in the demands for credit reflected in interest rates. The
situation called for debt management policies, he stated, which
would (a) continue to refund maturing Treasury issues into inter
mediate issues, (b) avoid increasing the outstanding supply of bills
or other short-term issues which would attract only bank funds and
particularly any that would require Federal Reserve support, (c)
move toward higher rates on short-term issues when necessary to

2/28/50 -7
discourage their sales to the Reserve System in connection with
shifts to longer-term securities, and (d) raise new money needed
by offering long-term nonmarketable issues attractive to nonbank
investors.
In response to a suggestion from Mr. Sproul, each of the
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks commented on conditions in
his district and, while there were variations in some districts,
their comments on regional conditions largely corroborated Mr.
Thomas' statement with respect to the national outlook.
There followed a discussion of the question whether the
present relatively high level of economic activity was being
maintained largely because of deficit financing by the Federal
Government and of what might be expected to sustain effective
demand if unemployment increased further, agricultural prices and
income declined further, and consumer credit ceased to expand.
Mr. Sproul then called on Mr. John H. Williams for a state
ment with respect to the recent trip which he made to Europe at
the request of the Organization of European Economic Cooperation
(OEEC) to assist in the preparation of the second interim report
of OEEC which had since been published and which was one of the
bases for the request for appropriations for the Economic
Cooperation Administration for the next fiscal year on which
hearings were being held in the Congress. A copy of Mr. Williams'

2/28/50 -8
statement has been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
Following Mr. Williams' statement, there was a discussion
of problems facing the United States between now and the end of the
ECA program in 1952, some of which are expected to continue after
that date.
At the conclusion of the discussion, the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.