A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Monday, October 30, 1950, at 12:05 p.m.
PRESENT: Mr. McCabe, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Davis
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Evans
Mr. Norton
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Powell
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. C. S. Young
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market
Account
Chairman McCabe reviewed a discussion in which he participated
with Secretary of the Treasury Snyder on Thursday, October 26, 1950,
and outlined the reasons why he felt it was desirable to address a
letter to Secretary Snyder stating in brief form the policy of the
Committee with respect to (1) the maintenance of the 2-1/2 per cent
rate on the longest term Government securities now outstanding and
(2) the rate on short-term securities on a one-year basis. He said
that a draft of such a letter had been prepared for consideration
by the Committee at this meeting.
Copies of the draft were distributed and in the ensuing dis
cussion a number of changes were suggested. During a recess for
luncheon a revised draft of the letter was written to include the
changes proposed during the earlier session and when the meeting

10/30/50
reconvened at 2:15 p.m. further changes were made.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the letter was approved as
follows, with the understanding that it
would be sent by messenger to Secretary
Snyder this afternoon.
"Since our meeting on Thursday, October 26, a meeting of
the Federal Open Market Committee has been held. The Committee
has been and is in complete agreement that under present con
ditions it is necessary to protect the 2-1/2 per cent rate (par)
on the longest term Treasury bonds no. outstanding. The Com
mittee's policies have been determined in accordance with that
conclusion.
"For the reasons outlined in my letter of October 16, 1950,
the Committee is convinced that continued flexibility in the
short-term money market is essential to carrying out an effec
tive credit policy. It believes, however, that for the present
the market yield on Government securities on a one-year basis
(now about 1-1/2 per cent) may have worked as high as is neces
sary in the light of present economic conditions and as high as
it can without having such an impact on the market for the
longest term Government securities as might interfere with our
policy of credit restraint. Accordingly, for the present, the
Committee will endeavor to maintain an orderly and flexible
market within a maximum of 1-1/2 per cent per annum for any
securities maturing within one year.
"If further inflationary or market forces should develop at
any time in the future which would make it necessary for the
Committee to reconsider these decisions, we would, of course,
feel it desirable and compelling to seek your counsel. In the
meantime, we should like to consult with you freely concerning
our mutual problems in the light of market developments and the
general credit situation.
Chairman McCabe raised the question whether any change should be
made in the understanding arrived at in the last meeting of the full
Committee with respect to the prices at which Government securities
would be purchased for the System open market account. The matter
was discussed in the light of the statement at the last meeting of the

10/30/50 -3
executive committee that the main purpose of System policy was to
avoid putting funds into the market, that purchases of bonds should
be for the purpose of supporting that objection, and that the timing
and volume of bond purchases would depend on market conditions and if
fe:.er funds would be put into the market by permitting a gradual de
cline in prices of the long-terms that course should be followed, but
that if after the short-term rate were increased or for any other rea
son offerings of bonds were heavy it would be desirable to let the
prices decline rapidly to between 4/32 and 8/32 above par,
Mr. Rouse outlined the reasons why he felt that no change should
be made in the present understanding and why the actions taken by the
New York Bank since the last meeting of the executive committee were
in accordance with that understanding.
Chairman McCabe inquired whether anything would be gained by
bringing about some slight movement up and down in the market prices
of long-term Government bonds, and Mr. Rouse said that, while such a
procedure might have some advantages, it might also result in the Sys
tem taking more bonds than otherwise would be the case. Mr. Sproul
added that, .ith the amount of institutional selling that was over
hanging the market because of prior commitment of funds and not because
of price factors, it might be unwise to lower current market prices
substantially, thus running the risk of causing a large volume of addi
tional sales by other holders who might become alarmed. While he
thought it might be feasible to bring about some slight movement up

10/30/50 -4
and down in the prices of long-terms he was not sure what the result
would be.
At the conclusion of the discussion of this point, it was
agreed that no change should be made in the existing understanding
or the procedure being followed in connection with it.
Mr. Rouse commented that the Treasury would soon be faced
with the task of refunding $2.6 billion of bonds maturing on Decem
ber 15, 1950, and $5.4 billion of certificates maturing on January 1,
1951, that it was possible that the Treasury might wish to refund
these maturities in one operation, and that it was important that
there be stability in market prices for a period of some three weeks
before the books were closed in order to insure the success of the
new offering.
In a discussion of whether the full Committee should meet to
discuss the recommendations to be made to the Treasury with respect
to the financing, it was suggested that since the American Bankers
Association Committee on Government Borrowing was to meet with the
Secretary of the Treasury on November 14 and 15, it would be desir
able for the executive committee to meet shortly thereafter for the
purpose of considering the recommendations to be made to the Treasury
with respect to the refunding with the understanding that, if neces
sary, the views of the executive committee could be checked with the
members of the full Committee by telephone.

10/30/50 -5
It was agreed unanimously that the ex
ecutive committee should meet upon call of
the Chairman for the purpose referred to.
It was also agreed unanimously that no
action should be taken at this meeting to
change the direction issued at the meeting
of the Committee on October 11, 1950, nor
the understandings reached at that meeting
as to the carrying out of this direction.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.