A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Wednesday, March 1, 1950, at 9:40 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Eccles
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Young
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Stead and John H. Williams,
Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager of the System
Open Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the
Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary,
Board of Governors
Mr. Young, Director of the Division
of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Youngdahl, Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Arthur illis, Special Assistant,
Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Williams, Gidney, Gilbert, and Leedy,
alternate members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Leach, McLarin, and Earhart, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively
The Secretary reported that advices of the election for a
period of one year commencing March 1, 1950, of members and alternate

3/1/50 -2
members of the Federal Open Market Committee representing the Federal
Reserve Banks had been received, that each newly elected member and
alternate member had executed the required oath of office, and that
it was the opinion of the Committee's counsel, on the basis of advices
received, that the following members and alternate members were
legally qualified to serve:
Allan Sproul, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, with L. R. Rounds, First Vice
President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, as alternate member;
Joseph A. Erickson, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston, with Alfred H. Williams, President
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, as
alternate member;
C. S. Young, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, with Ray M. Gidney, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate
member;
Chester C. Davis, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis, with R. Randle Gilbert, President of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, as alternate
member;
J. N. Peyton, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, with H. G. Leedy, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, as alternate
member.
Upon motions duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous votes, the following
officers of the Federal Open Market Committee
were elected to serve until the election of
their successors at the first meeting of the
Committee after February 28, 1951, with the
understanding that in the event of the dis
continuance of their official connection

3/1/50 -3
with the Board of Governors or a
Federal Reserve Bank, as the case might
be, they would cease to have any official
connection with the Federal Open Market
Committee. In connection with the
election of Mr. Morrill, it was agreed
unanimously that the by-laws of the
Federal Open Market Committee, which
provide that the Secretary of the Board
of Governors shall be Secretary of the
Committee, should not be changed but
that Mr. Morrill should continue to serve
as Secretary notwithstanding the applicable
provision of the by-laws:
Thomas B. McCabe, Chairman
Allan Sproul, Vice Chairman
Chester Morrill, Secretary
S. R. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
George B. Vest, General Counsel
Woodlief Thomas, Economist
John K. Langum, Alfred C. Neal,
J. Marvin Peterson, William H. Stead,
and John H. Williams, Associate
Economists
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York was selected to execute
transactions for the System open market
account until the adjournment of the first
meeting of the Committee after February 28,
1951.
Mr. Sproul stated that the board of directors of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York had selected Mr. Rouse as Manager of the
System Open Market Account, subject to the selection of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York by the Federal Open Market Committee as the
Bank to execute transactions for the System account and his approval
by the Federal Open Market Committee.

3/1/50
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the selection of
Mr. Rouse as Manager of the System Open
Market Account was approved.
Upon motions duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous votes, the following were
selected to serve with the Chairman of the
Federal Open Market Committee (who under
the provisions of the by-laws is also
Chairman of the executive committee) as
members and alternate members of the
executive committee until (except as noted
below) the selection of their successors
at the first meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee after February 28, 1951:
Members Alternate Members
Marriner S. Eccles *James K. Vardaman, Jr.
*James K. Vardaman, Jr. M. S. Szymczak
*Rudolph M. Evans E. G. Draper
Successor to Mr. Draper as a
member of the Board
Successor to Mr. Clayton as a
member of the Board
(To serve in the order named
as alternates for members
elected from the Board of
Governors)
Allan Sproul Joseph A. Erickson
C. S. Young Chester C. Davis
J. N. Peyton
(To serve in the order named
as alternates for Messrs.
Sproul and Young)
*Mr. Vardaman to serve as a regular member until Mr.
Evans is available for service, after which the latter
will serve as a regular member until the selection of
his successor at the first meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee after February 28, 1951.
Mr. Sproul referred to the resolution adopted by the Federal
Open Market Committee on November 20, 1936, authorizing each Federal

3/1/50 -5
Reserve Bank to purchase and sell, at home or abroad, cable transfers
and bills of exchange and bankers' acceptances payable in foreign
currencies, to the extent that such purchases and sales may be deemed
to be necessary or advisable in connection with the establishment,
maintenance, operation, increase, reduction, or discontinuance of
accounts of Federal Reserve Banks in foreign countries. He stated
that accounts were now maintained with the Bank of Canada ($22,150),
the Bank of England ($10,952), and the Bank of France ($42.79), and
that, for reasons discussed at previous meetings, it seemed desirable
that the authority to effect transactions of the type deferred to
be continued.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, it was agreed that no
action should be taken at this time to amend
or terminate the resolution of November 20,
1936.
Reference was then made to the action of the Committee on
November 30, 1937, by which it agreed that since securities acquired
by the Federal Reserve Banks in settlement of claims against closed
banks would be in such small amounts as to be unimportant from the
standpoint of credit control, the Federal Open Market Committee would
interpose no objection to a Federal Reserve Bank holding such securi
ties or to their sale whenever such sale was deemed advisable by the
holding bank. Mr. Gidney stated that the authority for holding and
selling such securities had done no harm and, conceivably, there
could be circumstances in which it might be useful.

3/1/50 -6
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, it was agreed that no
action should be taken at this time to amend
or terminate the authority granted at the
meeting on November 30, 1937.
There followed a discussion of the authority granted to the
Federal Reserve Banks by the Federal Open Market Committee with
respect to repurchase agreements covering short-term Treasury
obligations with nonbank dealers in United States Government securities
qualified to transact business with the System open market account,
Mr. Rouse stated that the authority had been used sparingly
during the past year but that it had been helpful in making adjust
ments in the market in August and in early October. He went on to
say it was one means of putting funds into the market in periods
of strain to help in carrying out the policies of the Committee and
that it might be particularly helpful in a period like the present
when the discount rate was considerably higher than short-term market
rates. He suggested that the authority be continued but that, instead
of relating the rate on such purchases to the discount rate, it be
related to the rate on short-term Government securities. To carry
out this suggestion, he proposed that the authority be amended to
provide for a rate at least 1/8 per cent above the average issuing
rate on the most recent issue of United States Treasury bills, and
that the authority be used with care and discrimination as a means
of providing the money market with sufficient Federal Reserve funds
to avoid undue strain on a day-to-day basis.

3/1/50 -7
Mr. Eccles raised the question whether the Federal Reserve
Banks should continue to be in the position of direct lenders to
nonbank dealers but stated that he would have no objection to con
tinuance of the authority if it was clearly understood that it was
to be used only in emergencies.
During a discussion of this question, Mr. Thomas expressed
the view that the authority was an important money-market instrument
which would enable dealers to absorb as much of the buying and selling
in the market as possible and to carry the necessary inventory of
securities to provide a market, leaving the System as only a residual
buyer, that it should be used more extensively than it had been as
a means of helping to provide the market with additional bank
reserves to meet shortages of a strictly temporary nature, and that
in his opinion the commercial banks would favor use of such authority
because it enabled securities dealers to perform their function more
effectively and reduced the necessity for banks to borrow from the
Federal Reserve Bank for temporary reserve adjustments.
In commenting on the manner in which the proposed arrangement
would operate, Mr. Rouse brought out that it would be used only in the
discretion of the Federal Reserve Banks, that it would be used pri
marily if not exclusively by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
and only under the conditions which he had outlined. In response to
a question, he also stated that he would expect that changes in the

3/1/50 -8
rate on such agreements would be in steps of 1/8 per cent, although
it was possible that changes of 1/16 per cent might be desirable
at times.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Banks
were authorized, in lieu of all similar
previous authorizations, to enter into re
purchase agreements with nonbank dealers
in United States Government securities who
are qualified to transact business with the
System open market account, provided that:
(1) such agreements (a) are at a rate at
least 1/8 per cent above the average issuing
rate on the most recent issue of United
States Treasury bills, (b) are for periods
of not to exceed 15 calendar days, (c)
cover only short-term Government securities
selling at a yield of not more than the
issuing rate for one-year Treasury obliga
tions, (d) are used with care and dis
crimination as a means of providing the money
market with sufficient Federal Reserve funds
as to avoid undue strain on a day-to-day
basis, (2) reports of such transactions shall
be made to the Manager of the System Open
Market Account to be included in the weekly
report of open market operations which is
sent to the Federal Open Market Committee,
and (3) in the event Government securities
covered by any such agreement are not re
purchased by the dealer pursuant to the
agreement or a renewal thereof, the securi
ties thus acquired by the Federal Reserve
Bank are sold in the market or transferred
to the System open market account.
This action was taken with the understand
ing that the authority would be reviewed at
the next meeting of the Committee.
In connection with the existing procedure for the allocation

3/1/50 -9
of securities in the System open market account adopted by the
executive committee of the Federal Open Market Committee on January
20, 1948, pursuant to the action of the full Committee on December
9, 1947, Mr. Rouse stated that there had been no criticism of the
procedure and that it was working very satisfactorily. He added
that the actual distribution among the twelve Federal Reserve Banks
of earnings from securities held in the System open market account
during the year 1949 turned out to be very close to the estimate
of expenses for the year made at the beginning of 1949.
In this connection, Mr. Rouse read the statement submitted
by Mr. Alfred H. Williams to the Joint Committee on the Economic
Report in November 1949 in response to a request by members of the
Committee for a statement of the procedure followed by the System
in allocating interest bearing securities in the System open market
account.
Mr. Sproul asked whether any of the Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks had suggestions as to a change in the procedure and
none of them indicated that he would modify it at this time.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, it was
agreed that no change should be made at
this time in the method of allocating
securities as set forth in the memorandum
approved at the meeting of the executive
committee on January 20, 1948.
Reference was made to the published terms on which the Federal

3/1/50 -10
Reserve Bank of New York transacts business with qualified dealers
in United States Government securities for the open market account
of the Federal Reserve System. Mr. Rouse said that the agreement
seemed to be working satisfactorily, that there had been no complaints
for some time from dealers who were unable to qualify under the
statement of terms, and that he had no changes to suggest. In
response to a question from Mr. Eccles, he also reviewed the cir
cumstances relative to whether certain dealers qualified for trans
acting business with the System account.
Following a discussion, upon motion
duly made and seconded, and by unanimous
vote, it was agreed that no change in the
statement of terms would be made at this
time.
With reference to the authority for distribution of the weekly
open market report prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
as agreed upon at the meeting on March 1, 1947, Mr. Davis suggested
that it be amended to provide that, in addition to those now receiving
the report, it be sent to the economists of the Federal Reserve Banks
which are not represented by their Presidents on the Federal Open
Market Committee.
Following a brief discussion, upon
motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the distribution of the
weekly report to the following was approved:
1. The members of the Board of Governors.
2. The Presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks.

3/1/50 -11
3. The Secretary, the Economist, and the Associate
Economists of the Federal Open Market Committee.
4. The Secretary of the Treasury.
5. The Under Secretary of the Treasury.
6. The Fiscal Assistant Secretary of the Treasury.
7. The Chief of the Division of Bank Operations of
the Board of Governors.
8. The officer in charge of research at each of the
Federal Reserve Banks which is not represented by
its President on the Federal Open Market Committee.
9. Mr. Rounds, alternate member of the Federal Open
Market Committee; the Assistant Vice President of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York working under
the Manager of the System Account; the Manager of
the Securities Department of the New York Bank;
the Manager of the Research Department of the New
York Bank; and the confidential files of the New
York Bank as agent for the Federal Open Market
Committee.
Reference was made to the memorandum prepared by the System
Research Advisory Committee on New Treasury Financing in 1950 and to
the memorandum prepared in the Board's Division of Research and
Statistics under date of February 21, 1949, on the outlook for bank
reserves and Treasury cash requirements, to which Mr. Thomas referred
in his report at the meeting of the Committee on February 28, 1950.
There followed a general discussion of the deficit financing
which the Government would have to undertake to meet requirements
during the last nine months of the current calendar year and of the
sources from which funds might be obtained.
In commenting on the outlook, Mr. Thomas expressed the view
that substantial amounts of funds could be obtained from nonbanking
sources, that the Treasury might wish to raise new money by increasing

3/1/50 -12
the weekly bill offering, but that additional funds would have to be
raised by other means in the last half of the year and the question
was how that should be done. Mr. Thomas also said that a 1 3/4 per
cent bond callable in eight years, which was recommended to the
Treasury by the American Bankers Association Committee on Government
Borrowing, would be taken almost entirely by the banks, and that the
question was what type of security could be issued to attract some
of the longer term savings which probably would become available
during the second quarter of this year and later. He then referred
to the suggestions presented in the memorandum on new Treasury
Financing in 1950 of a 2 1/2 per cent investment bond with an 18-year
maturity which would be nonmarketable but redeemable at a penalty,
and of an instalment retirement bond which would have a maturity of
28 years and would yield 2.52 per cent if held to maturity.
There was a discussion of the possible attractiveness of such
obligations to various classes of investors, during which Mr. Thomas
suggested that it would be desirable to authorize the staff to
discuss these proposals with Messrs. Bartelt, Fiscal Assistant Sec
retary of the Treasury, and Haas, Director of the Technical Staff of
the Treasury. In this connection, Mr. Sproul read the next to the
last paragraph of the letter from the executive committee to Secretary
of the Treasury Snyder dated February 9, 1950, commenting on the
Treasury's problem of raising new money to meet the Treasury deficit

3/1/50 -13
during the remainder of this calendar year and stating that the Open
Market Committee would be giving further consideration to this
important aspect of Treasury financing and would want to discuss it
with him when it had more specific proposals. Mr. Sproul suggested
that the Committee authorize the executive committee to proceed with
the development of proposals in line with the general statement con
tained in that letter and that, as proposed by Mr. Thomas, it also
authorize the discussion of the specific proposals in the memorandum
on New Treasury Financing in 1950 from the System Research Advisory
Committee with the members of the Treasury staff, with the under
standing that if other suggestions of a similar nature were developed
they would be included in the discussions.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, Mr. Sproul's
suggestion was approved.
In a consideration of the instructions to be issued to the
executive committee, reference was made to the understanding at the
meeting on December 13, 1949, that the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York should be guided in the redemption and replacement of System
maturing bill holdings by what would be required in the light of
current conditions in the money market to carry out the general credit
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee. Following a brief
discussion, it was agreed that no change should be made at this time
in that understanding.

3/1/50 -14
Mr. Sproul then referred to the action at the meeting on
December 13, 1949, at which the executive committee was authorized to
determine from time to time the exact ranges within which bills and
certificates would be purchased by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
for the System open market account, it being understood that the
upper limits of the ranges on bills and certificates could be increased
to not to exceed 1.24. He stated that it was understood that this
authority was to be exercised within the framework of the general
credit policy of the Federal Open Market Committee, and suggested that
it be reaffirmed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, this suggestion
was approved.
There followed a discussion of the understanding at the meet
ing on December 13, 1949, that, in the light of the discussion at that
meeting, the executive committee would have discretion with respect
to the sale of long-term restricted bonds from the System account.
Mr. Sproul stated that the executive committee had been operating
within the limits of that understanding, and reference was made to
an excerpt from the minutes of the meeting of the executive committee
on January 6, 1950, concerning the current understanding that
restricted bonds would be sold from the System account, whenever an
opportunity was presented, for the primary purpose of absorbing
reserves.

3/1/50 -15
During a discussion of the sales of long-term securities from
the System account since the last meeting of the Committee, Mr. Rouse
stated that the demand for these issues had not been large, that the
operation had to be handled carefully, that a further decline of prices
could take place without loss of confidence in the market, that sales
in the succeeding weeks would be in smaller amounts than during the
past six or seven weeks, and that it would help in bringing long-term
prices down if there could be some further rise in short-term rates.
It was suggested that in the interest of placing long-term
securities, to be offered by the Government in connection with new
financing, in the hands of nonbank investors it would be desirable for
long-term yields to move to a higher level. In a further discussion
of the securities that should be offered by the Treasury to finance
the Government deficit, Mr. Thomas raised the question as to previous
instructions that long-term securities should be sold for the purpose
of absorbing reserves. While there were additional reserves to absorb
after the turn of the year, he said, it was not likely that there
would be in future weeks and hence any sale of bonds by the System
would have to be offset by System purchases of short-term securities.
During the consideration of this point, Mr. Sproul suggested
that operating under the general direction issued by the Federal
Open Market Committee to the executive committee, and within the
limits imposed by the terms of Treasury financing and by the necessity

3/1/50 -16
of avoiding loss of confidence in the long-term Government securities
market, the executive committee should have authority to continue to
sell long-term securities from the System account unless and until
there was a change in the business and credit situation which made it
undesirable to pursue that policy.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, Mr. Sproul's sug
gestion was approved.
Mr. Sproul referred to the letter sent to the Treasury by the
Board of Governors under date of January 23, 1950, regarding the ex
tension of the limited authority of the Federal Reserve Banks to
purchase Government securities directly from the Treasury. He in
quired whether there had been any developments in connection with the
matter. Mr. Szymczak responded that the Treasury favored the ex
tension and presumably would propose the necessary legislation.
In the ensuing discussion the opinion was concurred in that
the continuation of the authority was desirable to meet wide fluctua
tions in Treasury balances with the Federal Reserve Banks and that the
authority probably would be used again during the March tax payment
period.
Consideration was then given to the general direction to be
issued to the executive committee to arrange for transactions in the
System account and it was agreed that the limits in the direction
issued at the meeting on December 13, 1949, should be continued and

3/1/50
that there should be no change in the form of the direction issued
at that time.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the following direction
to the executive committee was approved
unanimously with the understanding that
the limitations contained in the direction
would include commitments for the System
open market account:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for such transactions for the System open market account,
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury
(including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of
maturing securities, and letting maturities run off with
out replacement), as may be necessary, in the light of
changing economic conditions and the general credit
situation of the country, for the practical administra
tion of the account, for the maintenance of orderly
conditions in the Government security market, and for
the purpose of relating the supply of funds in the market
to the needs of commerce and business; provided that the
aggregate amount of securities held in the account at
the close of this date other than special short-term
certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time
for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury shall
not be increased or decreased by more than $2,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee,
to arrange for the purchase for the System open market
account direct from the Treasury of such amounts of
special short-term certificates of indebtedness as may
be necessary from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total
amount of such certificates held in the account at
any one time shall not exceed $1,000,000,000.
Attention was then called to a revised draft of a memorandum
on the framework of System credit operations which had been distributed
to the members of the Committee before this meeting and to the under-

3/1/50 -18-
standing at the meetings on August 5, 1949, and December 13, 1949,
that further study would be given to the matter.
Mr. Sproul suggested that the Committee authorize the
System Research Committee on Banking and Credit Policy to give
further study to the principles and practices of a flexible
monetary policy with a view to submitting other reports to the
Federal Open Market Committee on important aspects of this study,
and that it be understood that the members of the Federal Open
Market Committee and the Presidents of the Reserve Banks who were not
members of the Committee would read the revised memorandum furnished
them at this meeting and send any suggestions they might have to
the Secretary of the Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, this suggestion
was approved.
Reference was made to a memorandum dated February 23, 1950,
with respect to whether Treasury savings bonds should be made
eligible as collateral for bank loans. Copies of the memorandum had
been sent to the members of the Committee before this meeting and a
copy has been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Mr. Davis stated that the question had been discussed at the
Presidents' Conference on February 27, 1950, and that it was the
majority view of the Presidents that such bonds should not be made
eligible.

3/1/50 -19
In a discussion of reasons for and against such action, Mr. C.
S. Young stated that many banks were, in effect, holding such bonds
as collateral for loans and that he felt it would be desirable for the
Treasury to recognize this practice by authorizing it, that it would
avoid sales of bonds by owners to get funds for temporary purposes,
and that it might aid the sale of savings bonds by the Treasury.
Mr. Thomas stated that he understood from Mr. Bartelt, Fiscal
Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, that the Treasury would not
favor such action at this time.
Question was raised whether some action should be taken with
respect to the reporting by bank examiners of cases in which savings
bonds are, in effect, pledged as collateral for loans, but no con
clusions were reached.
During the ensuing discussion it was the consensus that no
action should be taken at this time to recommend to the Treasury
any change in the existing regulations which prohibit the acceptance
of savings bonds as collateral for loans.
Reference was then made to the progress report dated February
24, 1950, from the ad hoc committee on debt management on the problem
of savings bonds refunding, a copy of which had been sent to each
member of the Committee before this meeting and a copy of which has
been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee. It
was stated that this matter was to be discussed at the Fiscal Agency

3/1/50 -20
Conference called by the Treasury to meet in April 1950, at which
time primary consideration was to be given to the operating problems
that will be involved as savings bonds mature, and the suggestion had
been made that there might also be discussion, in the light of the
operating problems involved, of the policy that might be followed
with respect to inducements to reinvest the proceeds of maturing
bonds in new savings bonds.
In this connection, Mr. Davis stated that the operating
officers of the Federal Reserve Banks who attend the fiscal agency
conferences have no responsibility for policy on fiscal agency
matters, but that since the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
was acting as host for the forthcoming conference, the Presidents'
Conference had asked President Earhart to represent the Presidents
in any discussions involving questions of policy.
Under the circumstances, it was understood that further dis
cussion by the Federal Open Market Committee of the refunding of
maturing savings bonds would be postponed until a later meeting of
the Committee.
There was also an informal discussion of the part the Federal
Reserve Banks might be expected to play in future savings bond
campaigns and whether there should be any change in the existing
understanding with respect to the Federal Reserve Banks sponsoring
and paying the costs of dinners, etc., in connection with such campaigns.

3/1/50 -21
It was the consensus of the Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
that there should be no change in the existing understanding, and that
this would not prevent, for example, a Bank from providing a luncheon
in connection with a discussion meeting to which a State chairman
wishes to invite some of his key workers.
It was tentatively agreed that the next meeting of the
Committee would be held during the week beginning June 12, 1950.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Vice Chairman.