A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D. C., on Friday, August 18, 1950, at 11:10 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Davis
Mr. Draper
Mr. Eccles
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Evans
Mr. Peyton
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. C. S. Young
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Mr. John H. Williams, Associate Economist
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market
Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Riefler, Assistant to the Chairman
Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board
of Governors
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Ralph A. Young, Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Mr. John Wurts, Assistant Vice President,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Sproul stated that Chairman McCabe was returning from
Maine but that word had been received that his plane had been delayed
by weather conditions and that he had requested that the meeting
proceed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the

8/18/50
meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee held on June 13-14, 1950,
were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the
minutes of the meetings of the executive
committee held on June 14, July 10, and
July 21, 1950, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded
and by unanimous vote, the following
letter sent to the Secretary of the Treas
ury under date of July 31, 1950, with
the approval of the individual members
of the executive committee, was approved
and its sending was ratified and con
firmed:
"The executive committee of the Federal Open Market
Committee has given consideration to your letter of July 17,
1950, in reply to mine of July 12, 1950, which outlined the
serious problems now faced by the Federal Open Market Com
mittee in maintaining an orderly market for Treasury fi
nancing. My letter explained why, in our judgment, it was
urgent that the Treasury make an early announcement that
it had decided to raise funds by means of a long-term 2-1/2
per cent nonmarketable issue on a tap basis.
"The views expressed in your letter show concern that
no move be made in the Government security market which would
disturb confidence at this critical juncture. We share this
concern.
"We think it will greatly contribute to confidence in
the value of the dollar and hence in Government bonds to
offer such a tap issue. It would signalize the Government's
purpose to rely primarily on nonbank financing, thus avoiding
as far as possible resort to the highly inflationary process
of financing through the banking system. Experience has
shown that it is not technically difficult for the Treasury
to raise money by selling securities which are either bought
directly or indirectly by banks, provided the Federal Reserve
supplies banks with the necessary reserves. The market and

8/18/50
"the public are now fully educated to these technical
possibilities and they know that a procedure of this
sort feeds the fires of inflation,
"In our judgment, every development in the economic
situation and the international situation since our
letter of July 12 reemphasizes what we said at that time,
particularly in paragraph four. Tt seems more urgent
than ever that an early announcement be made of the offer
ing of the long-term bond of the type suggested. We think
it will give confidence to the market at this stage. It
will constitute notice both to the market and to the country
that the Government intends to back up its anti-inflationary
tax and other programs by financing its requirements as far
as possible with nonbank funds. There is no more effective
way to meet these requirements with a minimum of inflationary
impact on the economy and also with less repercussion on
the level of interest rates.
"After consulting the presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks last week, we are confident that funds will be avail
able for the purchase of such bonds in substantial amounts.
This is particularly true if the issue is continued on tap
over the period of emergency. As defense expenditures mount
and avenues of peacetime investment are cut back, investment
funds will pile up in the hands of institutional investors
who will welcome an outlet for these funds such as we have
suggested. If the Treasury makes provision to tap these
funds from day to day as they accrue, there will be less
pressure to undertake huge bond drives, which necessarily
involve a temporary congestion in the market as well as a
large amount of indirect bank financing. Inevitable public
discussion of the fiscal policies of the Government and
the absolute size and rate of increase of the debt during
drives do not make for confidence.
"We do not mean to imply that a tap nonmarketable
issue should be the sole medium of Treasury financing during
the emergency which lies ahead. We regard it, however, as
important to the maintenance of public confidence in the value
of money and as the instrument of Treasury financing par
ticularly appropriate to a situation in which normal invest
ment outlets are being curtailed.
"The period immediately ahead will be a critical one
due to the time which will inevitably be consumed in the leg
islative processes and in the creation of the administrative
organization needed to bring into operation the necessary con
trols. In the interval the stimulation of private spending,

"already out of hand, will be accelerated. The Presi
dent has stated in his Midyear Economic Report to the
Congress that we should rely in major degree upon fiscal
and credit measures, and that the more prompt and vig
orous we are with these general measures, the less need
there will be for comprehensive direct controls, We
share a joint responsibility to cooperate with respect
to credit and debt management policies and it is in these
t.o fields that positive and effective action can now
be taken to meet the international crisis and its economic
effects. The nation at large has received the President's
program in the same spirit with which it acclaimed the
President's vigorous reaction to the military crisis posed
by the invasion of Southern Korea. We are confident that
prompt purposeful action by the Treasury and the System
in furthering the same objectives would receive the same
wholehearted support.
"In our judgment, the problem of new financing for
the Treasury will not soon abate. We must face the long
run implications to the stability of the American econ
omy and the welfare of the American people of the methods
of financing we adopt in this critical period. Logic,
as well as the bitter experience of recent years, both
demonstrate hat it means to the ecomony to rely too
heavily on deficit financing through the banks. We believe
that you share with us the conviction that at this time,
when the needs of our country for defense are paramount,
the Government should seek to provide the needed funds
with a minimum of reliance on bank finance. The Govern
ment's main instruments to this end must be an adequate
tax program and a program of debt financing directed
primarily to tap nonbank funds.
"In view of the extremely important implications
for the future that underlie the initial policies to be
adopted in meeting the heavy financial requirements of the
defense program, we hope that ee may have a full discussion
of the subject with you at your earliest convenience."
Copies of a report of open market operations prepared at the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York covering the period June 12 to
August 15, 1950, inclusive, were then distributed. Mr. Rouse com
mented briefly on this report and also on a supplemental report

8/18/50 -5
covering commitments executed for the System account on August 16
and 17, 1950. Copies of both reports have been placed in the files
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Upon motion duly made and seconded
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System account for the period
June 12, 1950, to August 17, 1950, in
clusive, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Mr. Sproul referred to the letter sent to the Secretary of
the Treasury under date of July 12, 1950, to the Secretary's reply,
dated July 17, 1950, and to the additional letter to the Secretary
dated July 31, 1950, quoted above, stating that copies of these
letters had been furnished all members of the Committee and Presi
dents of Federal Reserve Banks who were not members of the Committee.
Mr. Sproul went on to say that the written record represented in
essence a continuing unwillingness on the part of the Treasury to
try to sop up available nonbank funds by issuing a long-term security
and also indicated a desire to sit tight and do nothing in terms of a
change in the existing rate structure. He then called upon Mr. Rouse
for a statement with respect to the meeting which Chairman McCabe
and Mr. Rouse had with Secretary of the Treasury Snyder on August 10,
1950, and Mr. Rouse made a statement substantially as follows:
Chairman McCabe and I met with Secretary Snyder
at 4 o'clock the afternoon of August 10. Mr. Haas,
Director of the Treasury's technical staff, was also
present. Chairman McCabe reviewed various aspects

8/18/50
of the developing inflation with the Secretary, illustrated
by up-to-date figures and charts. He also reviewed with
the Secretary some of the thinking at the Board with respect
to credit controls which tne Board may be called upon to
administer if the pending legislation becomes effective,
and he invited comment from the Secretary. With respect to
consumer credit, at first Secretary Snyder appeared to favor
a down payment greater than 33-1/3 per cent and a limita
tion of succeeding payments to 18 months. After further
discussion, including Chairman McCabe's report on his visit
with the President, he agreed that in the first instance it
might be wiser to make the initial regulation less restric
tive, tightening it up later if necessary.
Following this, Chairman McCabe inquired whether the
Treasury had come to any conclusion with respect to the
executive committee's recommendation for an announcement of
a long-term restricted tap issue. The Secretary replied
that they had given the matter earnest consideration; that
they had analyzed carefully our operations; had consulted
with various groups representative of the market; and had
concluded that on the basis of facts at their disposal which
the Treasury regards as most complete there were not suffi
cient nonbank investment funds available to assure a success
ful offering at the present time.
Following this, there ensued a spirited discussion as
to the correctness of this interpretation. It resulted in an
impasse. This was followed by the suggestion of the Secre
tary that it should be a factual matter and determinable, and
he suggested that the System avail itself of the data which
Mr. Haas had at his disposal. We agreed that this should be
done.
Secretary Snyder and Mr. Haas also had obviously been
irritated by the publicity given the staff memorandum sent
to the Joint Committee on the Economic Report at the latter's
request, and it prompted remarks by them to the effect that
periodic pressure on the short-term market frequently derived
from comment by the Federal Reserve, leading the market to
consider the possibility of increases in the short-term rate,
and so leading people to dispose of such securities in the
hope of avoiding possible losses later on.
The Secretary then remarked that he had attended a meet
ing of the National Security Council that afternoon and that at

8/18/50
this time there was no way of knowing what might come
out of the Korean situation, that even if that did not
increase the debt the management of the $257 billion debt
was still a heavy responsibility, and that the cost of
carrying the debt could not be treated lightly; and that
he saw no reason currently for any change in interest rates.
Again referring to pressure on short-term rates that has
developed from time to time, he stated that he sometimes
thought it might be wise to ask the Congress to put the
responsibility for handling the debt in the Federal Reserve
which had the money market tools, adding that, of course,
he realized the Congress wouldn't do that and the Federal
Reserve would not want to take that responsibility.
Chairman McCabe then reviewed the volume of our sales
and purchases, remarking that we had provided through our
purchases upwards of $400 million of reserves in the last
three months. He then asked the Secretary just how far he
thought the System could go in providing hot money. The
Secretary replied that it wasn't a question he should try
to answer but that he did not like hot money any better than
anyone else and that in the natural course of things reserves
needed tc be supplied to the market. The Secretary stated
that inasmuch as he had changed his plans and had postponed
his trip to Europe there would be time for further discussion.
By this time it was clear that the Treasury had no
intention now of making any new effort to absorb nonbank
money or of voluntarily agreeing to a change in short-term
rates.
In conclusion, Chairman McCabe remarked to the Secretary
that in the circumstances there was nothing further that he
could say except that he would report this conversation to
his committee.
During the meeting there was no discussion of the re
funding operation which the Treasury faces in connection with
its September and October maturities.
Mr. Sproul stated that, subsequent to the meeting with the Secre
taryo f the Treasury on August 10, it was suggested that members of the
OFpeedn eral Market Committee should see the slides prepared by the

8/18/50 -8
Treasury staff showing distribution of Treasury securities since the
beginning of this year and that a tentative appointment had been made
at the Treasury to present the slides to the Committee between 2 and
3 o'clock today.
Mr. Sproul then called upon Mr. Thomas, who stated that he
called Mr. Haas of the Treasury on the telephone on August 11 but was
informed he was out of the office that day, and that he talked with
Mr. Tickton, Assistant Director of the Treasury's Technical Staff. He
said that he explained to Mr. Tickton that he would like to arrange
for some of the members of the Board's staff to see the Treasury figures
of funds available for purchase of Government securities and to discuss
with the Treasury staff the sources, assumptions, and methods of deriva
tion used in making them up, so that there would be an opportunity to
analyze them before the Committee met. Mr. Tickton responded, Mr.
Thomas said, that the figures were all on work sheets and not in form
which he could make available at this time and that it would not be
possible to make them available that day because of pressure of work,
but that he would have Mr. Haas call next Monday. Mr. Thomas said that
he received a call from Mr. Haas at noon on Monday, August 14, at which
time he again asked that their figures underlying the slides showing
distribution of Treasury securities be made available for the Federal
Reserve staff to study before the Committee saw the slides, and that
Mr. Haas stated that, while he would be glad to show the slides to mem-

8/18/50 -9
bers of the Committee and the staff, he and his staff could not
spare the time for a discussion of the figures. Mr. Haas also said
that because of pressure of work he would not be able to make the
figures available for study before then, adding that he thought they
were the same as those Mr. Thomas had and simply showed that all avail
able nonbank funds had been absorbed by mortgages and other invest
ments and that the Government could not raise additional amounts with
out depressing those activities, which he felt was not desirable.
Mr. Thomas stated that memoranda covering his telephone talks with the
Treasury on August 11 and 14 had been placed in the files of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee.
Mr. Thomas went on to say that, in the absence of the Treasury
figures, the Board's staff had prepared a memorandum dated August 17,
1950, analyzing the ownership of Government securities, a copy of which
had been distributed to the members of the Committee before this meet
ing together with a memorandum dated August 17, 1950, on the current
economic situation and outlook. The estimates presented indicated
that, to meet the deficit and cash redemptions of maturing securities,
the Treasury might need to borrow as much as $2 billion in new money
during the last half of 1950, in addition to small net sales of savings
bonds and notes and withdrawals from the Treasury's cash balance. The
analysis of ownership of Government securities made by the Board's
staff, which used substantially the same data available to the

8/18/50 -10
Treasury Department, Mr. Thomas said, led to the conclusion that a
substantial volume of nonbank money would become available for in
vestment during the next few months, and that the additional funds
needed can and should be raised by offering long-term securities to
nonbank investors. Mr. Thomas emphasized that there should be no
need for the Treasury to borrow from banks.
There followed a discussion of the data presented in the mem
oranda referred to by Mr. Thomas on ownership of Government securities
and the current economic situation.
Mr. Sproul then made a statement substantially as follows:
The question today is what we are going to do in our
sphere of primary responsibility, not what we are going to
recommend to the Treasury that it do in its primary sphere.
It is not a question of the long-term bond issue or of re
funding the September-October maturities, but what are we
going to do about making further reserve funds available to
the banking system in a dangerously inflationary situation.
The increase in war expenditures will be gradual, no doubt,
and the Treasury may not need new funds for some time ex
cept what it will get from savings bonds and notes. Never
theless, inflationary pressures of higher income and antici
patory consumer and business spending and possible expansion
of private capital investment have been added to an already
buoyant situation. Bank loans are expanding rapidly despite
the exhortation of banker organizations and supervisory au
thorities. These trends may change later, particularly if
the Korean situation takes a turn for the better, but right
now the economy is in the grip of strong inflationary pres
sures. Over-all direct controls have been held to be un
necessary unless and until more of our economy is involved
in war and .ar preparations. Reliance is to be on fiscal
and credit measures. Fiscal measures, I think we all agree,
will be slow to bite and probably less than the situation re
quires. It is apparent that the Treasury is unwilling to
try for nonbank funds with a long-term issue, particularly

-11-
in advance of its actual need. Credit measures are both
particular and general. There will be a lag in the selec
tive measures being proposed before they become effective
and in any case they only cover a part of the problem,
General credit measures, to be effective, must be timely
and prompt. I think we all agree that drastic credit
measures are not in the picture. We can't do the whole
job with general credit measures but in view of our respon
sibility and the national program I think that general
credit measures should now be used. They would have the
added advantage of being quickly reversible if the situa
tion would change. We have marched up the hill several
times and then marched down again. This time I think we
should act on the basis of our unwillingness to continue
to supply reserves to the market by supporting the existing
rate structure and should advise the Treasury that this
is what we intend to do--not seek instructions. If we don't
act we will have failed to take the action required by the
economic situation and the national program for meeting the
present emergency. We will have exposed ourselves to a
worsening of the rate structure, which will intensify our
problems and our dangers, and will have given support to
the growing belief that effective steps to curb inflation
will be too little and too late, that the purchasing power
of the dollar is bound to decline further and drastically,
and that Government bonds are a poor investment and the
dollar in the form of cash a poor gamble. It seems to me
that our course is clear: we should move to an immediate
adjustment of market rates toward a 1-3/8 per cent basis
for one-year money and should advise the Treasury that this
is what we propose to do. If we allow ourselves to be
diverted from our main responsibility we will only expose
ourselves to further delay and frustration.
Mr. Evans stated that he doubted that an increase of 1/8 per
cent in the one-year rate for money would be sufficient, by itself,
that he felt a much broader program was needed, that this program
should include, in addition to a raise in discount rates, an increase
in reserve requirements of member banks, and that it should also in
clude a request to Congress for additional authority witn respect to

8/18/50 -12
reserves of member banks, perhaps something along the lines of the
special reserve plan previously discussed.
Mr. Sproul stated the Committee had expressed its views at
previous meetings and through the Chairman concerning a broad pro
gram for restraining the present situation, and that he was address
ing his remarks to the primary sphere of responsibility of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee without attempting to say that it covered
the entire program. He went on to say that so long as the present
level of short-term rates was maintained he felt it would be useless
to request additional authority from Congress and that higher reserve
requirements imposed upon member banks would be relatively ineffec
tive, His emphasis on discussic of a change in the rate structure
reflected the fact that such a change immediately involved relation
ships with the Treasury, and, if the Committee were committed to a
program of higher short-term interest rates, the other steps suggested
in an over-all program would seem to follow.
Mr. Eccles stated that he agreed with Mr. Sproul, that he
felt it was time the System, if it expected to survive as an agency
with any independence whatsoever, should exercise some independence,
that the country today was faced with the probability of an even
greater expansion in military expenditures then had been announced
and therefore with an increasing deficit, that while he felt an in
crease in taxes to meet the additional expenditures was essential it

8/18/50 -13
was also essential that credit expansion be curbed, especially
since it would take time for additional taxes to become effective,
and that such credit restraints should be applied on all fronts
selective controls in the consumer and housing fields, and general
restraints on the banking system as a whole. Mr. Eccles went on to
say that while he felt an increase in the short-term rate alone would
not stop acquisition of additional reserves by banks, it was desir
able to let the short-term rate go up in order to take the pressure
off the long-term rate, especially since the System was running out
of long-term bonds that it could make available to investors seeking
such securities. He felt it also would be desirable to increase
Reserve Bank discount rates and to consider an increase in reserve
requirements, and, if necessary, to request additional authority from
Congress to help the System to immobilize reserves of banks. Mr.
Eccles said that, before additional authority was requested from Con
gress, however, the System should use its present powers, including
authority under selective credit controls proposed in pending legis
lation.
Mr. Szymczak stated that he agreed with what had been said,
that he felt the first step to be taken was a change in open market
operations so as to get started on a program of greater flexibility
in the short-term rate structure. This, he said, should be tied to an
increase in the discount rate. After these steps had been taken, and

8/18/50 -14
perhaps after present authority to increase reserve requirements had
been used, it probably would be necessary to request Congress to give
additional authority to immobilize bank reserves,
Mr. Vardaman stated that he agreed with the proposal made by
Mr. Sproul but questioned how it would affect the Treasury's ability
to obtain new money during the next year. He also questioned whether
the action proposed would encourage the Treasury to issue a long-term
bond on a tap basis for nonbank investors along the lines previously
recommended by the Committee.
Mr. Sproul replied that the proposed action would not interfere
with the ability of the Government to finance itself under any cir
cumstances that might arise, that the only question would be one of
the method of financing and the cost, and that that would depend on
a number of factors. As to the issuance of a long-term bond, Mr.
Sproul felt the proposed action would not encourage or discourage the
Treasury from offering such a security.
Mr. Eccles then referred to the statement appearing in the
separate report by Senators Douglas, Fulbright, and Flanders of the
Senate Banking and Currency Committee, on the Defense Production Act
of 1950, which stated in part that:
"The primary method of dealing with inflation should
be the coordinated use of proper monetary, credit and fiscal
policies, which can actually prevent inflation. Higher taxes,
on personal and corporate incomes, and excess profits taxes
should be given an opportunity to work their effect, prefer
ably before the country is placed in the economic strait-jacket

8/18/50 -15
"of another OPA, or at least simultaneously with such
controls. Credit should be restrained by controls on
instalment buying, real estate credit, and general bank
credit; and these controls should be coordinated with
each other. The Treasury's debt-management policies
should be reexamined, especially in view of the new sit
uation, and they should be coordinated with the duties
of the Federal Reserve Board to restrain credit."
This statement, Mr. Eccles said, indicated the support of at least
some of the members of the Banking and Currency Committee for a pro
gram such as that proposed.
Mr. Sproul stated that the proposed action would be in accord
ance with and would support the Government's announced program in the
present situation and he quoted from the President's mid-year economic
report dated July 26, 1950, which said:
"First of all, for the immediate situation, we
should rely in major degree upon fiscal and credit
measures..... The more prompt and vigorous we are
with these general measures, the less need there will
be for all of the comprehensive direct controls which
involve the consideration of thousands of individual
situations and thus involve infinitely greater inter
ference with individual choice and initiative."
Mr. C. S. Young stated that he favored the proposed change
in open market operations which would permit the short-term rate to
rise above the present 1-1/4 per cent level and that he felt an in
crease in discount rates at the Federal Reserve Banks should accompany
that action.
Mr. Peyton stated that he favored both the proposed open market
action and the increase in the discount rate and that he also believed
that a whole series of procedures should be planned which the System

8/18/50 -16
might employ so as to present a full program if it became necessary
to request additional authority from Congress.
Mr. Davis felt that action should be taken today to change
open market operations along the lines suggested and that discount
rates of the Federal Reserve Banks should be increased promptly. He
also favored issuance of a statement which would show clearly why
such steps were being taken and how they were related to the other
powers the System has for future use, as well as a statement indicat
ing that if necessary the System would go to Congress to request ad
ditional powers.
Mr. Erickson felt that the first step should be a change in
open market operations along the lines suggested by Mr. Sproul and
that the other steps indicated should be taken as necessary.
Mr. John H. Williams stated that the basic question was how
far the Committee would be willing to see interest rates rise in order
to curb monetary inflation and that everything else proposed would be
ineffective unless there was a rise in interest rates. While, in view
of the large public debt, the extent to which rates might rise would
be limited, he said, the significance of an increase in the short-term
rate and especially in the discount rate would be recognized by many
persons. Mr. Williams agreed that monetary and credit policy were
secondary to a sound fiscal policy, but he emphasized the necessity for
a rise in interest rates as an essential part of the program,

8/18/50 -17
The discussion then turned to the question of timing of the
proposed actions and the kind of statement that might be issued if
these actions were taken.
At this point Mr. Sproul stated that word had been received
that Chairman McCabe was expected to reach Washington during the noon
hour and he raised the question whether the Committee wished to see
the slides prepared at the Treasury showing changes in the distribu
tion of the public debt and, if so, whether all members of the Com
mittee or only part of the Committee should go.
It was the consensus that the members of the Committee who
could arrange to do so should go to the Treasury at 2:00 p.m., and that
upon their return to the Board's building, at which time it was ex
pected Chairman McCabe would be present, the Committee would reconvene
for further consideration of actions to be taken.
The meeting then recessed.
Secretary's Note: In accordance with the
foregoing understanding, the members of
the Committee and of the staff went to the
Treasury between 2:00 and 3:00 p.m. to see
the slides and hear an explanation of their
significance, following which they returned
to the Board's building.
The meeting reconvened at 3:05 p.m., with the same attendance
as at the close of the morning session except that Chairman McCabe was
also present.
At Chairman McCabe's request, Mr. Sproul reviewed the discussion
and tentative conclusions at the morning session, stating that it appeared

8/18/50 -18
to be the feeling of all members of the Committee that open market
operations should be changed immediately with a view to breaking
through the 1-1/4 per cent one-year rate in the expectation that the
market would almost immediately adjust to a 1-3/8 per cent basis for
one-year Treasury securities, and that it was felt that this course
should be taken with the expectation that the Board of Governors would
approve an increase in the discount rates of the Federal Reserve
Banks. It was also the consensus, Mr. Sproul said, that if these
actions were taken the Secretary of the Treasury should be informed
of them today and that a brief statement announcing and commenting
upon the actions should be made public.
Chairman McCabe asked Mr. Thomas whether, after seeing the
Treasury presentation, he would alter the figures which he had pre
pared for the Committee or his conclusions as to the desirability of
the Treasury issuing a long-term tap bond, and Mr. Thomas stated that
the information presented on the slides did not change the situation
so far as he could see, that the question was partly one of interpreta
tion, and in his opinion the Treasury was not interpreting the figures
correctly. As to when the Treasury would need additional funds, Mr.
Thomas stated that it did not appear that any additional cash would
be required by the Treasury until the fourth quarter of the year,
and that, while it was only one element in the situation and not the
most important, he would still favor the issuance of a long-term tap
bond which would obtain a substantial amount of funds from nonbank

8/18/50 -19
investors from month to month and, with funds from sales of savings
bonds and notes, would provide the Treasury with the new money it
might need during the remainder of the year.
In response to a similar question from the Chairman, Mr.
Sproul stated that he felt there was nothing in the Treasury figures
to alter the views previously expressed by the members of the Com
mittee as to the situation or the course of action that should be
taken at this time.
Chairman McCabe then questioned the extent to which the
Committee discussed the possibility of letting the short-term rate
increase and at the same time providing the market with additional
reserves through the purchase of securities if that became necessary
to preserve orderly market conditions or to keep a Treasury financing
operation from failing.
In response, Mr. Sproul stated that the Committee had con
sidered the results of such action and felt it should permit the
short-term rate to go as high as 1-3/8 per cent immediately, with a
decision as to any further rise subject to further discussion of the
Committee. In the present market, he said, if the short-term rate
were to go through 1-1/4 per cent it would probably go to 1-3/8 per
cent immediately and at that point he felt the System would be in a
slightly less bad position than at present, in that the spread between
the long-term and short-term rates would be narrowed and some indica-

8/18/50 -20
tion would have been given that credit instruments were to be
used in the present situation. He also stated that the ability of
the System to withstand a downward pressure on yields in the long
term market was fast coming to an end with the reduction in its hold
ings of long-term bonds that might be sold to meet demand for that
type of investment.
Mr. Evans then raised the question as to the policy that would
be followed in connection with long-term bonds and how far the prices
of such securities would be permitted to decline.
In a discussion of this question, the view was expressed that
if the yield on short-term securities increased there might be a tem
porary lessening of demand for long-term securities with a resultant
decline in price.
Mr. Rouse stated that he felt such a decline in price might
take place and that he assumed that the operations would be guided by
the direction issued by the Committee on June 14, that if the price
of the longest restricted issue should decline to between 100-1/2 and
100-3/, the executive committee would direct only such operations as
were necessary to maintain orderly market conditions pending a meeting
of the full Comittee which would be called promptly to consider how
far any further decline that would be brought about by market condi
tions would be permitted to go.
Mr. Evans reiterated his view that an over-all program of

8/18/50 -21
restraint should be decided upon by the Committee, that he would be
in favor of the action proposed with respect to the short-term rate,
but that he felt the long-term bond rate should not be permitted to
increase above a yield of 2-1/2 per cent. He also stated that he
felt the System should increase the discount rate, that it should con
tinue to advocate the issuance of a long-term restricted tap issue
by the Treasury, that it should use its remaining power to raise
reserve requirements, and that it should request Congress to grant
additional powers for immobilizing reserves,
Mr. Peyton agreed with Mr. Evans on the necessity for having
such a program in mind and Mr. Sproul said that he felt there was
general agreement upon this necessity; that he had concentrated on
the first steps of such a program of credit restraint--open market
operations and the increase in the discount rate at the Federal Re
serve Banks--because these are actions which can and should be taken
immediately. Mr. Sproul also stated that it was his understanding
that the proposed statement to be issued by the Board of Governors and
the Connittee should emphasize the subordinate character of monetary
measures in dealing with the inflationary situation, but would say
that the System would use such powers as it has to restrain further
expansion of bank credit and ask for additional authority from the
Congress if needed.
Mr. Eccles agreed that a statement along the lines outlined

8/18/50 -22
by Mr. Sproul was as far as the Committee could go at this time.
Chairman McCabe asked whether any member of the Committee dif
fered with the views expressed as to the actions that should be taken
with respect to open market operations and the change in the discount
rate and there was no indication of disagreement. The Chairman then
stated that he and Mr. Sproul had a tentative appointment to see
Secretary Snyder at 4:30 p.m. today and that they would plan to keep
it, and he suggested that it might be desirable to have a copy of the
announcement to be released to show the Secretary at that time.
There followed a discussion of the timing of the proposed actions
and their announcement, as well as the form of statement to be re
leased. During the discussion Mr. Riefler read a draft of possible
statement which he had prepared during the meeting and a number of
suggestions were made for its revision.
A question was raised as to what the procedure should be if,
upon being informed of the policy adopted by the Committee, the Treasury
were to announce a refunding of securities maturing in September and
October with an offering at the 1-l/4 per cent certificate rate. It
was the consensus that, in such event, the System would not let the
Treasury financing fail, that it should purchase the new securities
offered to the extent necessary to assure that the issue would not
fail, and that so far as possible it should offset such purchases by
the sale of other securities to the extent necessary to prevent in-

8/18/50 -23
creases in bank reserves.
Mr. Sproul suggested that the Committee direct the executive
committee to arrange for transactions in the System open market
account, commencing on Monday, August 21, 1950, with a view to dis
continuing support of the one-year Treasury certificate rate at 1-1/4
per cent and to allowing the rate to adjust to 1-3/8 per cent as
rapidly as it would, assuming that the Board of Governors would act
immediately to approve an increase in the discount rate of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York and the other Federal Reserve Banks as
rapidly as they could take action and that, immediately following this
meeting, the Board of Governors and the Federal Open Market Committee
would issue a joint statement of the policies adopted with respect
to curbing further inflationary expansion of bank credit by use of
the existing powers of the Federal Reserve System and, if necessary,
requesting additional powers from the Congress.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
the foregoing suggestion was approved by
unanimous vote,
Thereupon a draft of statement along the lines discussed
earlier in the meeting, to be issued jointly by the Board of Governors
and the Federal Open Market Committee immediately following this
meeting, was discussed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
it was voted unanimously to approve the
statement with such perfecting changes as

8/18/50 -21-
would be satisfactory to Messrs.
McCabe, Sproul, and Eccles, and with
the understanding that it would also
be approved by the Board of Governors,
Secretary's Note: The statement, as
perfected by Messrs. McCabe, Sproul,
and Eccles, and thereupon approved by
the Board of Governors, was released to
the press at 6:10 p.m. on Friday, August
18, 1950, in the following form:
"The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
today approved an increase in the discount rate of the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of New York from 1-1/2 per cent to 1-3/4
per cent effective at the opening of business Monday, August
21.
"Within the past six weeks loans and holdings of cor
porate and municipal securities have expanded by $1-1/2
billion at banks in leading cities alone. Such an expansion
under present conditions is clearly excessive. In view of
this development and to support the Government's decision
to rely in major degree for the immediate future upon fiscal
and credit measures to curb inflation, the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Open Market
Committee are prepared to use all the means at their command
to restrain further expansion of bank credit consistent
with the policy of maintaining orderly conditions in the
Government securities market.
"The Board is also prepared to request the Congress for
additional authority should that prove necessary.
"Effective restraint of inflation must depend ultimately
on the willingness of the American people to tax themselves
adequately to meet the Government's needs on a pay-as-you-go
basis. Taxation alone, however, will not do the job.
Parallel and prompt restraint in the area of monetary and credit
policy is essential."
In order to carry out the change in policy adopted at this
meeting by the Committee, the wording of the first sentence of the gen
eral direction of the Committee to the executive committee to arrange
for transactions in the System account was changed to provide that
such transactions should be in the light of current and prospective

8/18/50 -25-
economic conditions and the general credit situation of the country,
with a view to exercising restraint upon inflationary developments,
to maintaining orderly conditions in the Government security market,
to relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs of commerce
and business, and to the practical administration of the account.
Mr. Rouse stated that he would not now recommend a change in the limits
contained in the existing direction.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the following direction to
the executive committee was approved
unanimously with the understanding that
the limitations contained in the direc
tion would include commitments for the
System open market account:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise di
rected by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for
such transactions for the System open market account, either
in the open market or directly with the Treasury (including
purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing securities,
and letting maturities run off without replacement), as may
be necessary, in the light of current and prospective economic
conditions and the general credit situation of the country,
with a view to exercising restraint upon inflationary develop
ments, to maintaining orderly conditions in the Government
security market, to relating the supply of funds in the market
to the needs of commerce and business, and to the practical
administration of the account; provided that the aggregate
amount of securities held in the account at the close of this
date other than special short-term certificates of indebtedness
purchased from time to time for the temporary accommodation
of the Treasury shall not be increased or decreased by more
than $2,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for the purchase for the System open market account direct from
the Treasury of such amounts of special short-term certificates
of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time for the

8/18/50 -26
temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided that
the total amount of such certificates held in the account
at any one time shall not exceed $1,000,000,000.
Reference was then made to the ranges within which bills
and certificates would be purchased and sold by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York for the System account and it was suggested that the
Federal Open Market Committee continue the existing authority to the
executive committee to determine from time to time the ranges within
which such purchases and sales would be made with an upper limit of
1.36 per cent for both bills and certificates and a lower limit in the
case of bills of 1.16 per cent and in the case of certificates of
1.20 per cent, the authority to be exercised within the framework of
the general credit policy of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and
seconded, the foregoing suggestion
was approved unanimously.
In connection with transactions in long-term securities, it
was agreed unanimously that the executive committee should continue
to arrange for such transactions with a view to maintaining orderly
market conditions and that, should the price of the longest restricted
issue decline to between 100-1/2 and 100-3/4, the executive committee
would direct only such operations as were necessary to maintain orderly
market conditions pending a meeting of the full Committee which would
be called promptly to consider how far any further decline that would
be brought about by market conditions would be permitted to go.

8/18/50 -27
It was also agreed that the existing understanding with
respect to the replacement of System maturing bill holdings should
be continued and that the executive committee would be guided by
what would be required in the light of current conditions in the money
market to carry out the general credit policy of the Federal Open
Market Committee.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee should be subject to call by the Chairman.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.