A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D, C., on Wednesday, October 11, 1950, at 10:10 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. M cCabe, Chairman
Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Davis
Mr. E ccles
Mr. E rickson
Mr. E vans
Mr. N orton
Mr. P eyton
Mr. P owell
Mr.
Szymczak
Mr. V ardaman
Mr. C. S. Young
Mr. Morrill, Secretary
Mr. Carpenter, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Langum, Neal, and Williams,
Associate Economists
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board
of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board
of Governors
Mr. Ralph A. Young, Director, Division
of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. John H. Wurts, Assistant Vice Presi
dent, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Youngdahl, Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Leach, Economist, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Wurts presented an oral report, and there were distribu
ted to the members of the Committee copies of a written report of
open market operations prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New

-2-
York covering the period from September 28 to October 9, 1950, inclu
sive. Mr. Wurts also presented and commented on a written supplemen
tary report covering commitments executed on October 10, 1950. Copies
of both reports have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System account for the period Sep
tember 27 to October 10, 1950, inclusive,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Messrs. Wurts and Leach commented briefly on the preliminary
results of the October offering of F and G bonds.
Chairman McCabe made a statement substantially as follows:
At the end of our interview with Secretary Snyder on
September 28, he told us he wanted a couple of days in
which to give us the benefit of his advice. We heard noth
ing further from him and finally on the following Wednes
day I telephoned him and made an engagement to see him
Thursday afternoon, October 5, at 4:30 p.m. prior to a
meeting of the executive committee later that day. I re
ported that conference to the executive committee as re
corded in the minutes of its meeting on October 5.
The chief thing which seemed to be concerning the
Secretary was the fear of the people engaged in E Bond
sales that the long-term bonds might go down in price
even to a point below par. This fear, he said, was hav
ing a detrimental effect on sales of E Bonds.
When he called me in accordance with his commitment
to give us his views not later than October 9, he expressed
himself very forcibly as being opposed to any change in
short-term rates at this time, and the possible effect
on the sale of savings bonds seemed to be his major rea
son for that position. He made that point as strongly
as he could, and in a subsequent telephone conversation
ne has re-emphasized it. He told me this morning on the
telephone that he had just returned from Pittsburgh where

10/11/50
he again heard that fear expressed rather strongly. He
said that he felt stronger than ever that we must do ev
erything possible to keep the market on an even keel dur
ing the E Bond campaign.
I called him this morning, told him the Open Mar
ket Committee was meeting today, and that I would try
to give the Committee his point of view. I also said
that, if he so desired, I was sure the Committee would
be very glad to have him come over here or we would go
over there and hear anything he had to say. I said I
just wanted to make sure the the Open Market Committee
had the full benefit of his point of view before it
acted. He said that if the Committee would like to
have him come over after having met and discussed the
matter he would be available. It will be for the Com
mittee to decide whether it wishes to hear directly
his point of view.
He wants to keep the market as steady as possible
chiefly for the reason that I have stated. Mr. Sproul
and I have told him of the various inflationary forces
that are operating in the economy and we emphasized as
strongly as we could the expansion of bank loans and
the reasons for our wanting to put some restraint on
the sale of Government securities by banks to the Fed
eral Reserve Banks.
Mr. Sproul stated that he and Chairman McCabe had emphasized
to Secretary Snyder that the thing that would determine the success of
the savings bond campaign more than the quotations on market bonds
.ould be the purchasing power of the savings bonds now coming to ma
turity, that is, the purchasing power of the dollar, and that this
point was strongly in the minds of the public and employers who had
a growing question whether they could urge their employees to purchase
E Bonds when they had doubts themselves as to the future value of the
dollar. Mr. Sproul also stated that the Secretary said he was not
talking so nuch about what the prospective purchasers were thinking or

10/11/50 -4
what the employers were thinking, but he was reflecting the con
versation of the persons on the savings bonds sales staff. Mr. Sproul
added that he and Chairman McCabe stressed that the most effective way
to assure the success of savings bonds sales was to give convincing
evidence of a will to restrain inflation.
Chairman McCabe referred to the decision of the executive
committee at its meeting on October 5 to delay putting into effect
the instructions approved by the full Committee at its meeting on
September 28 with respect to the short-term rate in view of the re
quest by Secretary Snyder that he be given until Monday of this week
to express his views. He said that he and Mr. Sproul had reported
fully the position of the Secretary of not favoring a change in the
short-term rate or an increase in reserve requirements, that every
effort had been made to give the Secretary ample time to express his
vie.s and for the Committee to give careful consideration to his posi
tion in an attempt to reconcile the different viewpoints that had
been advanced, and that the Secretary had not changed his position and
the members of the executive committee felt they had no choice in the
discharge of their responsibilities but to permit the short-term rate
to rise, and that the question before the Committee was what action
it would take in the circumstances and whether it wished to invite
the Secretary over or go to the Treasury for the purpose of hearing
directly what he had to say.

10/11/50 -5
The question whether the Secretary should be invited to meet
with the Committee was discussed at length and each of the members of
the Committee expressed his opinion. It was the consensus that, since
the Secretary's position had been fully reported to the Committee and
the views of the Committee had been given in detail to the Secretary
by Messrs. McCabe and Sproul and inasmuch as there would be some dis
advantages in departing from the established procedure for the exchange
of views with the Treasury which had worked very satisfactorily in the
past, Chairman McCabe should call Secretary Snyder and tell him that
his views had been presented to the Committee as fully as they could
but that the Committee would be quite willing to hear from him in
person so that he might amplify his position if he so desired.
Chairman McCabe and Mr. Sproul then left the room to call
Secretary Snyder and upon their return Chairman McCabe stated that
the Secretary said that, unless the Committee wanted to ask him some
specific question, he would prefer not to depart from the established
procedure.
Chairman McCabe then stated that the purpose of this meeting
was to consider further the decision made at the meeting of the Fed
eral Open Market Committee on September 28. He emphasized the im
portance of a careful review of that action in the light of the
strong feeling of the Secretary of the Treasury that the action should
not be taken. He expressed the opinion that the decision of the Committee

10/11/50 -6
as to how it should proceed was one of the most important decisions
it had been called upon to make. In that connection, he outlined
reasons why the System could not count on support of its decision
from bankers and stated that it would have to rely entirely on the
soundness of its action for its ultimate support.
At the Chairman's request, the motion made by Mr. Davis and
adopted at the meeting on September 28 was then read.
In response to a question whether there had been any change
in the economic situation since the last meeting of the Committee
which would have any bearing on its views, Mr. Thomas stated that
there had been no material change since September 28, that there
was always the likelihood in any situation like the present that
there would be a slackening of the upward pressures for a tempo
rary period, and that there might be a slackening or a lessening
of the inflationary pressures if the consumer credit regulation
were tightened and as the real estate regulation became effective.
He said that he felt inflationary forces were stronger today than
on August 18, 1950, when the Committee adopted its policy of re
straint, but that they were no stronger than had been expected at
that tine. The inportant thing, he felt, was that existing infla
tionary pressures did not represent any increase in Government ex
penditures, that increased pressure had come from anticipation by
the public of shortages of consumer goods which had caused them to
increase their spending of private funds including consumer credit

10/11/50 -7
and savings. This activity, he said, was resulting in an expansion
of incomes which would be added to the increased Government expendi
tures yet to come, and this expansion was creating the familiar re
sults of an inflationary spiral. He felt that the danger in the situ
ation was not that restrictions to be put into effect would be too
drastic, but rather that more would be needed than were available in
order to be adequate,
Chairman McCabe then called upon each member of the Commit
tee to express his views with respect to the action to be taken by
the Committee at this time. During their statements and the discus
sions that followed, all of the members indicated that, in the light
of current and prospective economic conditions and of the policy of
the Administration as announced in The Midyear Economic Report of
the President with respect to reliance on fiscal and credit measures
to restrain inflation, and having in mind the continuing expansion
of bank loans including further expansion during the period since
the action of the Committee on September 28, they saw no reason for
changing the instruction given to the executive committee at the
meeting of the Committee on September 28. It was also noted that
the only reason given by Secretary Snyder for not going ahead with
the more restrictive program was the fear that it might be unsettling
to the Government securities market and might interfere with the suc
cess of savings bond sales.

10/11/50
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the following direction
to the executive committee was approved
unanimously with the understanding that
the limitations contained in the direc
tion would include commitments for the
System open market account:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise di
rected by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for
such transactions for the System open market account, either
in the open market or directly with the Treasury (including
purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing securi
ties, and letting maturities run off without replacement),
as may be necessary, in the light of current and prospective
economic conditions and the general credit situation of the
country, with a view to exercising restraint upon inflationary
developments, to maintaining orderly conditions in the Govern
ment security market, to relating the supply of funds in the
market to the needs of commerce and business, and to the
practical administration of the account; provided that the
aggregate amount of securities held in the account at the
close of this date other than special snort-term certificates
of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury shall not be increased or de
creased by more than $4,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for the purchase for the System open market account direct
from the Treasury of such amounts of special short-term certi
ficates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time
for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided that
tne total amount of such certificates held in the account at
any one time shall not exceed $1,000,000,000.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, it
was voted unaninously that in accordance with
tne policy announced by the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee and the Board of Governors on
August 18, 1950, it be understood that (1) the
executive committee, acting under the general
direction issued at this meeting will take such
action as may be necessary over such period as
may be desirable to allow the market yields
for Treasury securities on a one-year basis to

10/11/50
move up to the highest point, not exceeding
the Federal Reserve Bank discount rate of 1-3/
per cent, which will not result in such pres
sure on the longest term restricted bond as
will cause continuing purchases in substantial
amounts of long-term bonds for the System ac
count, (2) the longest term restricted bond
will not be allowed to decline beyond a point
slightly above par, and (3) an orderly market
will be maintained;
That it be further understood that the
foregoing motion is predicated on the under
standing that as promptly as practicable in
the discretion of the Board of Governors af
ter short-term rates increased in accordance
with number (1) above (but not necessarily
waiting until such increase reached the high
est authorized point) the Board would announce
an increase in reserve requirements of all
member banks by two percentage points on de
mand deposits and one percentage point on time
deposits, to be effective at such times as
the Board determined to be advisable; and
That it be further understood that a
statement would be prepared setting forth
fully the reasons for the Committee's views
in a form satisfactory to the executive com
mittee and the Board of Governors and suit
able for the policy record.
With respect to the policy to be followed in replacement of
System maturing bill holdings, it was understood that the executive
committee should be guided by what would be required in the light of
current conditions in the money market to carry out the general cre
dit policy of the Federal Open Market Committee,
The Committee's Secretary raised the question whether it was
necessary for the Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Committee to con
tinue to sign the minutes of the meetings of the Committee since copies

10/11/50 -10
were sent to them as well as to other members of the Committee for
review and comment prior to approval at a subsequent meeting. It was
unanimously agreed that, effective following this meeting, it would
no longer be necessary for the Chairman to sign the minutes, that min
utes of future meetings would be signed only by the Secretary, and
tnat the existing procedure for submitting copies to the members of
the Committee for comment prior to approval would be continued.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.
Approved:
Chairman.