A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Wednesday, November 14, 1951, at 10:05 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Gidney
Mr. Gilbert
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Norton
Mr. Powell
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. A. H. Williams
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Bopp, Irons, Thompson, Tow, and
John H. Williams, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Riefler, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
Mr. R. A. Young, Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Youngdahl, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Ralph F. Leach, Economist, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Arthur Willis, Special Assistant, Securities
Department, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Hugh Leach, C. S. Young, Bryan, and Earhart,
alternate members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Erickson and Peyton, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston
and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Attebery, First Vice President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis

11/14/51
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of
the Federal Open Market Comittee held on
October 4, 1951, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the actions of the executive com
mittee of the Federal Open Market Committee as
set forth in the minutes of the meetings of the
executive committee held on September 25 and
October 4, 1951, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
A report of open market operations prepared at the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York covering the period October 4, 1951 to November 7,
1951, inclusive, had been sent to the members of the committee before
this meeting. Mr. Rouse presented a supplementary report covering com
mitments executed November 8-13, 1951, inclusive, and commented briefly
on both reports. Copies of the reports have been placed in the files
of the Federal Open Market Comittee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account for the period October 4, 1951
to November 13, 1951, inclusive, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Before this meeting there had been brought to the attention of
each member of the Comittee a report of examination of the System open
market account as of August 24, 1951, made in connection with the regular
examination of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and submitted by the
examiner in charge for the Board of Governors. The report took no exception
to the handling of the account and stated that the accounting procedures,
records, and system of internal control maintained and the degree of care

11/14/51 -3
exercised by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in connection with the
System open market account were reviewed and continued to be regarded as
satisfactory.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the report was re
ceived and ordered filed.
Mr. Thomas stated that the economic situation had not changed
greatly since the meeting of the Committee on October 4, 1951, and that the
situation was still one of equilibrium at a high level of activity. This
situation, he felt, was likely to continue during the next few months, but
longer-run prospects still pointed toward inflation, primarily because of
continued expansion of Government expenditures in connection with the defense
program. Mr. Thomas said that Government expenditures on a cash basis would
total approximately $58 billion in 1951, and were expected to equal or exceed
$80 billion in fiscal 1952 and to reach $84 billion in fiscal 1953, when
they should begin to level off. He estimated that during the fiscal year
1952 cash receipts would approximately equal expenditures, but that in the
calendar year 1952 and also in the fiscal year 1953, the deficit was likely
to be around $5 billion on a cash basis or $10 billion on a budget basis.
Mr. Thomas went on to say that the outlook was for private capital
expenditures to continue at a high level, although housing construction might
be expected to decline from recent levels depending on supplies of critical
materials and ability to find substitutes, as well as upon demand which would
be influenced by credit restraints. He felt that inflationary pressures dur
ing the next few months should be less than in the past year, although consumer

11/14/51 -4.
demands might be expected to continue in excess of current output re
sulting in some drawing down of inventories of durable consumer goods. In
comes probably would continue to grow, reflecting increased economic activity
and further advances in wage rates, and savings would have to be large if
further inflation were to be avoided, which raised the questions (1) how
to keep savings large, and (2) how to attract them into Government securities.
As to credit prospects, Mr. Thomas indicated that expansion in the
last half of 1951 was running less than in the corresponding period of 1950,
and that further growth in the money supply would depend on bank holdings
of Government securities and Treasury borrowing from nonbank investors. On
the whole, Mr. Thomas felt that savings institutions would have increased
funds to invest and smaller acquisitions of mortgages and hence might be buy
ing rather than selling Government securities; that corporations might also
add to their holdings of Government securities, although purchasing less dur
ing the next year than in the past; and that individuals would have large
savings. If funds could be attracted from institutions and individuals, very
little need for bank purchases of Government securities should develop. All
of this could be done and still provide adequate financing for business and
housing. In connection with Mr. Thomas' remarks, there was distributed a
memorandum, Projection of National Product and Income through 1952, pre
pared in the Board's offices under date of November 14, 1951.
In response to a question from Chairman Martin, Mr. John H.
Williams stated that the country had been having a serious inflation with a
balanced Federal budget and that it should not be concluded that further

11/14/51 -5
inflation from Government spending would necessarily be avoided by any par
ticular combination of taxes and suitable offerings of Treasury securities.
Mr. Williams said that he was coming to feel increasingly that the military
program might be too large and might be moving too rapidly.
Chairman Martin stated that, as reqested at the meeting of the
full Committee on October 4, the executive committee met yesterday afternoon
for the purpose of considering the memorandum prepared under date of
September 28, 1951 by the Research Committee on Government Finance on
how the defense bond program could be strengthened. The executive com
mittee was in general agreement with the study, Chairman Martin said, and
recommended that the report with minor revisions on pages 6 and 9 be sent
to Secretary of the Treasury Snyder with a letter which would state that
while the Committee felt that the problem was an important one and should
have prompt consideration, it had come to no final conclusion as to the
steps that should be taken and that it would be glad of an opportunity to
discuss the matter with Treasury representatives or to be helpful in any
other way that it could. The reason for emphasizing prompt consideration,
he said, would be that the Committee recognized that there were limitations
on when a new savings bond drive could be started, that the present drive
was just coming to an end, that the results of the drive had not been too
successful, and that it would take time to obtain funds and personnel and
otherwise to revitalize the savings bond program.
Chairman Martin went on to say that he had discussed the matter

11/14/51 -6
ith Secretary Snyder this morning, expressing to him in general the views
of the executive committee, and that, while Secretary Snyder was thoroughly
receptive to any ideas for improving the savings bond program, he emphasized
that he was in the "middle of the stream" at the moment, noting such prob
lems as going to Congress for the necessary funds to finance the program,
and the desirability of consulting with the savings bond field staff if
there were to be a change in the program in order to have the benefit of
their suggestions concerning both the type of bond and changes in sales
technique that might make it more effective.
Chairman Martin then asked for comments by all of the members of
the Committee and the other Presidents of Federal Reserve Banks who were
present as well as Mr. Attebery. Various ideas were expressed, including
the suggestion that although the savings bond program was a smaller part of
the total problem of Government financing, it was important not only in a
dollar sense but in terms of its psychological effect and as a means of
attracting funds of small investors that otherwise would go into inflationary
channels. It was suggested that a thorough effort should be made to work
out an effective program through collaboration with the business community
and otherwise. It was generally agreed that changes in savings bonds, par
ticularly in redemption schedules for early years but also in the over-all
yield, would be highly desirable in order to make the bonds more competitive
with other outlets for savings, and that a revitalized method of selling the
bonds was needed in the light of developments since the present series were
first issued in 1941. Differing views were offered as to whether savings

11/14/51 .7
bonds should be made eligible as collateral for loans, at least to a limited
extent, and as to the merits of marketable as compared with nonmarketable
bonds. With respect to the suggestion in the memorandum prepared by the
Research Committee on Government Finance that some form of tax exemption
for small holdings of savings bonds would make them more attractive, dif
ferent views were also expressed, some feeling that tax exemption was objec
tionable in principle while others felt that a program which would have a neg
ligible effect on tax revenues would be desirable if it served to make savings
bonds more attractive as a medium for investment of savings which were
accumulating at a rapid rate.
During the discussion Mr. Sproul commented that an attempt should
not be made to separate the savings bond program from the longer-term debt
management program, that both were necessary parts of a general program
designed to raise the funds needed to finance the Government, and that the
Federal Open Market Committee should now do the same thing for marketable
securities that it had done with respect to savings bonds, i.e., work out
a program for long-term market financing in terms of improving the debt
schedule and getting the needed funds in the next calendar year in the
way that would best fit the needs of sound debt management and credit policy.
He felt that a study should be made of that problem on the basis of which
suggestions could be made to the Treasury with respect to the debt manage
ment policies to be followed during the latter part of 1952.
At the conclusion of the discussion, Mr. Sproul suggested that
the recommendation of the executive committee as presented by Chairman

11/14/51 -8
Martin earlier in the meeting be adopted, i.e., that the memorandum pre
pared by the Research Committee on Government Finance, revised to include
changes suggested by Mr. Youngdahl at the meeting of the executive commit
tee, be transmitted to Secretary of the Treasury Snyder with a letter in a
form which he outlined.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, Mr. Sproul's suggestion was
approved with the understanding that the letter
should be sent in a form satisfactory to Messrs.
Martin and Sproul.
In connection with Mr. Sproul's proposal that a study be made of
the problem of long-term market financing, Chairman Martin suggested that
the Research Committee on Government Finance be asked to make this study
also, and that Mr. Thomas be requested to work with the Committee. Mr.
Sproul added a further suggestion that the Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks make inquiries in their respective districts as to the prospects for
available long-term funds and possible solutions of the problem of long
term market financing and that they send whatever information they might
be able to develop to the Committee on Government Finance for its use in
making the study.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, the
above suggestions were approved unanimously,
with the understanding that since the problem
of debt management was primarily a Treasury
responsibility, the Presidents in making their
inquiries would make it clear that the Federal
Open Market Committee was merely seeking the
best advice it could get in order to be as help
ful to the Treasury as possible in finding a solu
tion for this problem.

11/14/51 -9
Chairman Martin then referred to a memorandum on Treasury cash
requirements, prepared by Messrs. Thomas, Youngdahl, and Leach under date
of November 9, 1951, copies of which had been sent to all members of the
Committee before this meeting. He stated that the executive committee would
be glad to have comments from any member of the full Committee concerning
the recommendation that should be made to the Treasury as to the refunding
of approximately $1,100,000,000 of partially tax exempt bonds called for
payment on December 15, 1951.
No suggestions were offered, other than those contained in the
memorandum referred to above, and it was agreed unanimously to continue
the understanding at the last meeting of the Committee that the executive
committee would be authorized to submit recommendations to the Treasury
concerning both refunding and new financing needs.
Chairman Martin stated that toward the end of November a recom
mendation would be made to the Treasury, in the light of conditions exist
ing at the time, with respect to the December refunding.
It was agreed unanimously that there should
be no change in the present understanding that the
executive committee would determine, within the
limits of the general direction to be issued at
this meeting by the full Committee to the executive
committee, the basis upon which transactions should
be conducted for the System account in bills and
other short-term securities.
In a discussion of the basis upon which operations should be con
ducted in longer-term securities, Mr. Rouse referred to the existing under
standing of the executive committee that in conducting orderly market operations

11/14/51
10
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York would not permit the longest-term
restricted Treasury bonds to decline below 96-3/4. He also referred to the
understanding at the meeting of the full Committee on October 4, 1951, that
operations in longer-term securities should be conducted with a view to
maintaining orderly market conditions. It was his view that in the light
of existing conditions it should be the policy of the Committee to conduct
its operations on the basis of the accord reached with the Treasury last
March and that if long-term bonds should decline below 96-3/4 in response
to market influences they should be allowed to do so as long as the movement
was an orderly one.
There was unanimous agreement with
Mr. Rouse's statement and it was agreed that
the executive committee would be guided accord
ingly.
In a discussion of policy that might be applied to operations
after the turn of the year when there would be an easing of the money
market resulting from a substantial return flow of currency from circula
tion and other factors, it was the unanimous view of the Committee that
it would be appropriate for the executive committee to direct sales of
securities from the System account as freely as possible to withdraw
reserves from the market and at the same time to maintain an orderly
market.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following direction to the
executive committee was approved unanimously
with the understanding that the limitation
contained in the direction would include com
mitments for the System open market account:

ll/14/51 -11-
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for such transactions for the System open market account
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury
(including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of
maturing securities, and letting maturities run off with
out replacement), as may be necessary, in the light of
current and prospective economic conditions and the gen
eral credit situation of the country, with a view to
exercising restraint upon inflationary developments, to
maintaining orderly conditions in the Government security
market, to relating the supply of funds in the market to
the needs of commerce and business, and to the practical
administration of the account; provided that the aggregate
amount of securities held in the account at the close of
this date other than special short-term certificates of
indebtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury shall not be increased or
decreased by more than $2,000,000,000,
The executive committee is further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee,
to arrange for the purchase for the System open market
account direct from the Treasury of such amounts of
special short-term certificates of indebtedness as may
be necessary from time to time for the temporary accom
modation of the Treasury; provided that the total amount
of such certificates held in the account at any one time
shall not exceed $1,000,000,000.
Chairman Martin referred to the drafts of replies to two questions
addressed by the Subcommittee on General Credit Control and Debt Management
(Patman Subcommittee) of the Joint Committee on the Economic Report to the
Chairman of the Federal Open Market Committee, copies of which had been
distributed to the members of the Committee before this meeting, He stated
that he and Vice Chairman Sproul would be glad to have at this time, or to
have submitted in writing, any comments or suggestions which any of the
members of the Committee might wish to make in connection with the drafts
of replies.

11/14/51 -12
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
subject to call by the Chairman and that in the absence of unforeseen
developments a meeting would not be called until after the first of the
New Year.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.