A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Thursday, March 8, 1951, at 2:30 p.m.
PRESENT: Mr. McCabe, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Eccles
Mr. Evans
Mr. G idney
Mr. Gilbert
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Norton
Mr. Powell
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. A. H. Williams
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Bopp, Irons, Tow, and J. H. Williams,
Associate Economists
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Riefler, Assistant to the Chairman,
Board of Governors
Mr. R. A. Young, Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Youngdahl, Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Messrs. C. S. Young, Leach, and Earhart,
alternate members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Erickson, Johns, and Peyton,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of Boston, St. Louis, and
Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Clark, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Atlanta

3/8/51 -2
Chairman McCabe reviewed briefly the developments since the last
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, commenting particularly upon
developments in the open market since the announcement on March 4, 1951
that the Federal Reserve and the Treasury had reached full accord with re
spect to debt-management and monetary policies to be pursued in furthering
their common purpose to assure the successful financing of the Government's
requirements and, at the same time, to minimize monetization of the public
debt. In connection with his review, Chairman McCabe called upon Mr. Sproul
who made a statement concerning developments in the market today, which was
the first day in more than ten years on which the market for Government se
curities had been entirely without support from System open market operations.
The Chairman also stated that the decision to allow the market to stand en
tirely on its own today was reached after a discussion with Messrs. Martin,
Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, and Bartelt, Fiscal Assistant Secretary
of the Treasury, yesterday, that he felt it was a very wise decision, and
that he was hopeful that there had been established a new and better working
relationship between the Treasury and the Federal Reserve as a result of the
recent negotiations and joint announcement. He added that Messrs. Martin
and Bartelt were coming over to see him at 3:30 this afternoon for further
discussions concerning market developments.
Mr. Sproul then presented and commented upon a report prepared at
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York of operations in the System open market
account covering the period January 31, 1951 to March 1, 1951, inclusive,

3/8/51 -3
and on a supplementary report covering commitments executed from March 2
to March 7, 1951, inclusive. Copies of both reports have been placed in
the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions
in the System account for the period
January 31, 1951 to March 7, 1951, in
clusive, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Reference was made to the resolution adopted by the Federal
Open Market Committee on November 20, 1936, authorizing each Federal Re
serve Bank to purchase and sell, at home and abroad, cable transfers and
bills of exchange and bankers' acceptances payable in foreign currencies,
to the extent that such purchases and sales may be deemed to be necessary
or advisable in connection with the establishment, maintenance, operation,
increase, reduction, or discontinuance of accounts of Federal Reserve
Banks in foreign countries. Mr. Sproul stated that accounts were now
maintained with the Bank of Canada ($13,070), the Bank of England ($10,468),
and the Bank of France ($42.79), that the latter was maintained for the
purpose of keeping the account alive, that the others were used moderately,
and that for reasons which he stated and which had been discussed at pre
vious meetings, he would recommend that the authority contained within
the terms of the 1936 resolution be continued.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, it was agreed that
no action should be taken at this time to
amend or terminate the resolution of November
20, 1936.

3/8/51 -4
Mr. Gidney then referred to the action of the Committee on
November 30, 1937, by which it agreed that, since securities acquired by
the Federal Reserve Banks in settlement of claims against closed banks
would be in such small amounts as to be unimportant from the standpoint
of credit control, the Federal Open Market Committee would interpose no
objection to a Federal Reserve Bank holding such securities or to their
sale whenever such sale was deemed advisable by the holding bank. He
stated that with the expanded loan activities of banks there may be
greater need for this authority than in recent years and that he would
recommend its continuance.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, it was agreed that
no action should be taken at this time to
amend or terminate the authority granted
at the meeting of November 30, 1937.
Mr. Sproul then referred to the authority granted to the Federal
Reserve Banks by the Federal Open Market Committee on March 1, 1950, with
respect to repurchase agreements covering short-term Treasury obligations
with nonbank dealers in United States Government securities qualified to
transact business with the System open market account, stating that the
authority had been used infrequently and within the spirit and letter of
the Committee authorization, that it was useful as a supplementary market
instrument, and that it might be of greater use in a period such as that
immediately ahead.
In this connection, reference was made to the action of the Com-

3/8/51 -5.
mittee at the meeting on February 8, 1951 under which the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York was authorized, notwithstanding the provision in (1)(a)
of the authorization approved March 1, 1950, to enter into repurchase
agreements at a differential of less than 1/8 per cent from the average
issuing rate on United States Treasury bills, so that the agreements could
be made at 1-1/2 per cent with a view to encouraging dealers to take posi
tions in bills which they could resell readily in the present market and
which it would not be necessary for the System account to purchase.
Mr. Thomas commented that the authority might be very useful in
helping to develop a freer market, particularly if a situation developed
where the money market was tight and dealers had to take in bills.
Following a discussion, upon motion
duly made and seconded, it was agreed
unanimously that no change should be made
in the authorization approved at the meet
ing on March 1, 1950, except that the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York would
continue to be authorized, until otherwise
instructed by the Committee, to enter into
repurchase agreements at a differential of
less than 1/8 per cent in accordance with
the authorization approved at the meeting
of the Committee on February 8, 1951.
Mr. Sproul referred to the existing procedure for the allocation
of securities in the System open market account approved at the meeting
of the full Committee on December 9, 1947, and discussed further at the
meeting of the executive committee on January 20, 1948, which was continued
unchanged at the meeting on March 1, 1950. Mr. Sproul stated that the

3/8/51 -6
requirement in the second paragraph of the procedure authorized on
December 9, 1947, that there be a periodic readjustment in the alloca
tion of the System account in order to maintain a 35 per cent minimum
reserve ratio at each Reserve Bank, was resulting in considerable book
keeping because the ratios of several Reserve Banks were fluctuating around
the 33 per cent figure, and he suggested that this figure be lowered to
30 per cent.
Following a discussion, upon motion
duly made and seconded, and by unanimous
vote, approval was given to a telegram to
all Federal Reserve Banks in the following
form:
At meeting of Federal Open Market Committee March 8, 1951,
it was voted unanimously to continue the present method of
allocating securities in the System Open Market Account except
that the minimum reserve ratio to be maintained, as specified
in paragraph two of the allocation procedure set forth on
pages 15 and 16 of the minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on December 9, 1947, and as ampli
fied in the memorandum approved at the executive committee
meeting of January 20, 1948, was reduced from 35 per cent
to 30 per cent.
There was a discussion of the published terms on which the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York transacts business with qualified dealers
in United States Government securities for the System open market account.
Mr. Sproul stated that from time to time non-qualified dealers had questioned
the arrangement, that these questions arose only during periods when the
System was actively supporting the market and was the principal purchaser
of a particular issue or issues of securities, that this problem should

3/8/51 -7
tend to disappear with the freer market now anticipated, and that since
the existing terms had worked well in the past he felt it would be desirable
to continue them.
Chairman McCabe suggested the desirability of having a formal re
port submitted to the Federal Open Market Committee on this matter inasmuch
as the most recent study submitted had been made in 1948, and Mr. Sproul
responded that he felt it would be appropriate to ask the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York to make such a report to the executive committee at an
early meeting of that committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, it was agreed that no change in
the statement of terms would be made at this time,
with the understanding that the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York would submit a report with re
spect to the arrangement for consideration at an
early meeting of the executive committee.
Following a brief discussion, upon motion
duly made and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the distribution of the weekly report of open
market operations prepared by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York was approved as follows:
1. The members of the Board of Governors.
2. The Presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve
Banks.
3. The Secretary, the Economist, and the
Associate Economists of the Federal Open
Market Committee.
4. The Secretary of the Treasury.
5. The Under Secretary of the Treasury.
6. The Fiscal Assistant Secretary of the Treas
ury.
7. The Chief of the Division of Bank Operations
of the Board of Governors.

3/8/51 -8
8. The officer in charge of research at each of
the Federal Reserve Banks which is not rep
resented by its President on the Federal
Open Market Committee.
9. Mr. Rounds, alternate member of the Federal
Open Market Committee; the Assistant Vice
President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York working under the Manager of the
System Account; the Manager of the Securities
Department of the New York Bank; the Vice
President in charge, and the Manager, of the
Research Department of the New York Bank;
and the confidential files of the New York
Bank as agent for the Federal Open Market
Committee.
In a discussion of the general direction to be issued to the exec
utive committee, it was suggested that the authorization in the first para
graph be reduced from $3 billion to $2 billion.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following direction to the exec
utive committee was approved unanimously, with
the understanding that the limitation contained
in the direction would include commitments for
the System open market account:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise directed
by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for such transac
tions for the System open market account, either in the open market
or directly with the Treasury (including purchases, sales, exchanges,
replacement of maturing securities, and letting maturities run off
without replacement), as may be necessary, in the light of current
and prospective economic conditions and the general credit situation
of the country, with a view to exercising restraint upon inflation
ary developments, to maintaining orderly conditions in the Govern
ment security market, to relating the supply of funds in the market
to the needs of commerce and business, and to the practical adminis
tration of the account; provided that the aggregate amount of secur
ities held in the account at the close of this date other than spe
cial short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to
time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury shall not be
increased or decreased by more than $2,000,000,000.

3/8/51 -9
The executive committee is further directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for the
purchase for the System oen market account direct from the Treas
ury of such amounts of special short-term certificates of indebt
edness as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total amount of
such certificates held in the account at any one time shall not
exceed $1,000,000,000.
At Chairman McCabe's request, the Secretary read a revised draft
of the memorandum prepared by Mr. Martin, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury,
containg revisions made by Mr. Riefler which had been concurred in by Mr.
Martin, covering the staff discussions which had taken place during the
period February 20-23, 1951. The memorandum is set out on pages 6-10 of
the minutes of the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
March 1-2, 1951. The Secretary, also at Chairman McCabe's request, read
the statement of the principal points of the understanding with the Treasury,
approved by the Committee on March 2, 1951, and set forth on pages 30-31
of the minutes of that meeting.
In connection with a discussion of market developments this week,
Mr. Riefler read a draft of statement being released today by the Life Insur
ance Association of America and the American Life Convention, which had
been read to him over the telephone earlier today by Mr. O'Leary, Director
of Investment Research, Life Insurance Association of America. The state
ment read as follows:
"Last Monday a subcommittee of the Joint Committee on
Inflation Control of the Life Insurance Association of America
and the American Life Convention had the opportunity for a
long talk with top officials of the Treasury and Federal

3/8/51 -10
"Reserve System meeting jointly. This subcommittee consisted
of Carrol M. Shanks, President, The Prudential Insurance
Company of America, Newark, New Jersey; George L. Harrison,
Chairman of the Board, New York Life Insurance Company; and
Frazar B. Wilde, President, Connecticut General Life Insurance
Company, Hartford.
"The Joint Committee believes that the recent accord
reached by the Treasury and the Federal Reserve System is a most
heartening and important development in the fight against in
flation. The Treasury and Federal Reserve System deserve high
commendation for the realistic step they have taken. The com
plete terms with respect to the exchange offering of 2-3/4 per
cent Treasury bonds have now been announced by the Treasury.
"The Joint Committee strongly urges all life insurance
companies to support the exchange offering to the maximum
possible extent. The Joint Committee believes that the new
Treasury program is a significant step in the right direction
in the fight against inflation and thinks that it will prove
but the first measure, growing out of the accord, in a con
tinued vigorous program by Treasury and Federal Reserve
authorities to prevent a further expansion of the money
supply."
Chairman McCabe said that representatives of several life insurance
companies met with him and Messrs. Martin and Bartelt on Monday of this week,
that representatives of the investment bankers met with him yesterday, and
that both groups indicated their views as to the terms that should apply on
the Treasury note that would be available for exchange for the new 2-3/4
per cent nonmarketable bonds to be offered for conversion from the 1967-72
restricted Treasury bonds. He went on to say that some of the representatives
felt that a 1-1/2 per cent 5-year note would be the most desirable offering,
and that he felt that this would be the final decision of the Treasury.
Chairman McCabe then suggested that it be understood that, operat
ing under the general direction issued earlier at this meeting, the executive

3/8/51 -11
committee continue to carry out the program agreed upon at the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 1-2, 1951.
This suggestion was approved unanimously.
The meeting then recessed and, following a meeting of the executive
committee, reconvened at 3:35 p.m. with the same attendance as at the
close of the earlier session except that Messrs. McCabe, Sproul, Vardaman,
Thomas, and Riefler were not present.
Members of the staff of the Division of Research and Statistics
of the Board of Governors then gave a visual presentation of recent
economic developments. In this connection there were distributed a memo
randum prepared in the Board's offices under date of March 6, 1951, on the
Outlook for Treasury Cash Requirements, a memorandum on gross national
product and income, dated March 7, 1951, and two memoranda prepared in the
Board's offices under date of March 8, 1951, presenting information with
respect to (1) action to check inflation and (2) the supply of funds
available absorbing new money offerings of Government securities. Copies
of these memoranda have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
The time for the next meeting of the Committee was set tentatively
for the week beginning May 14, 1951.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.