A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Thursday, October 4, 1951, at 10:05 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Gidney
Mr. Gilbert
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Norton
Mr. Powell
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. A. H. Williams
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Bopp, Irons, Thompson, Tow, and
John H. Williams, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Riefler, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
Mr. Ralph A. Young, Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel, Board of
Governors
Mr. Youngdahl, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Ralph F. Leach, Economist, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Arthur Willis, pecial Assistant, Securities
Department, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Hugh Leach, C. S. Young, Bryan, and Earhart,
alternate members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Erickson, Johns, and Peyton, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, St. Louis,
and Minneapolis, respectively.
Mr. Townsend, Solicitor, Board of Governors
Mr. J. Marvin Peterson, Director of Research,
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

10/4/51
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
May 17, 1951, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the execu
tive committee of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee as set forth in the minutes of the
meetings of the executive committee held on
May 7, May 17, June 27, August 8, and August
27, 1951, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Before this meeting there had been sent to the members of the
Committee a report of open market operations prepared at the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York covering the period May 17 to September 27, 1951,
inclusive. Mr. Rouse commented briefly on this report and on a supple
mentary report covering commitments executed September 28 to October 3,
1951, inclusive, copies of which also were distributed to the members of
the Committee. Copies of both reports have been placed in the files of
the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account for the period May 17 to October
3, 1951, inclusive, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Members of the staff of the Division of Research and Statistics
of the Board of Governors then presented a report, illustrated by charts,
covering the economic situation. Following this report, Mr. Thomas made
a statement on the implications for credit policy in the current economic
outlook in which he said that during the first four months of the new
Federal Reserve policy developments indicated that either the policy was

10/4/51 -3
effective in restraining further credit inflation or that the abatement
of inflationary pressures for other reasons was so great as not to subject
the monetary policy to a rigorous test. Mr. Thomas went on to say that
there was evidence that credit restraints played some part in curbing
inflation, especially in the mortgage market, and that it was likely that
had the change in policy not occurred investment institutions would have
continued to sell bonds to the Federal Reserve with the result that re
serves thus created would have moved into the banks and inducement for
credit restraint would have been weakened. Mr. Thomas also said that in
this period the money market functioned on its own, that there was little
or no increase in total Reserve Bank credit, total bank loans and invest
ments, or total deposits, although the private money supply expanded some
what because of a reduction in Treasury balances. Within the past three
weeks, Mr. Thomas said, the picture had changed drastically and the System
had found it necessary to add nearly a billion dollars to its portfolio,
reflecting temporary factors such as tax payments, the desire of the banks
to avoid borrowing on a statement date, and a lack of enthusiasm for the
new Treasury refunding issues. The increase also reflected seasonal
loan and currency demands, which would continue during the rest of this
year, and the imminence of new cash borrowing by the Treasury, as well as
prospective large corporate issues, Mr. Thomas felt that Federal Reserve
Open Market purchases at this time, rather than forcing reliance on
borrowing by banks to meet reserve needs and permitting interest rates to
rise, could be justified on the grounds that some of the demands were of

10/4/51 -4
a temporary nature and that strong inflationary tendencies were absent
at this time.
As for the immediate future, Mr. Thomas said that the large
volume of excess reserves now outstanding (about $1 billion) and the
low level of borrowing at the Reserve Banks (less than $70 million),
together with a seasonal expansion in Reserve Bank float, should make
it possible that all reserve needs could be met during the remainder of
1951 without any further purchases of securities by the System unless
purchases were needed to assure success of new financing offers by the
Treasury. Mr. Thomas felt that the large increase in the private money
supply that had already occurred and that would continue, together with
growing defense expenditures, might result in a resumption of inflationary
pressures; if this occurred, the System might wish to adopt more positive
measures of restraint. The most promising approach for dealing with the
situation would be for the Treasury to offer securities of a type that
would compete with other demands and attract the available nonbank funds.
Such measures would be even more essential the latter part of 1952 when
Treasury borrowing needs probably would be tremendous, and unless those
needed funds could be obtained outside the banking system, Mr. Thomas felt
further sharp growth in the money supply would result and would present a
continuing strong inflationary threat.
There followed a brief discussion of the reports given by members
of the Research staff and Mr. Thomas, at the close of which Mr. Townsend
withdrew from the meeting.

10/4/51 -5
Chairman Martin then referred to a memorandum prepared in the
Board's offices under date of October 3, 1951, on "Treasury Cash Requirements
and Financing, October-December 1951" and to new financing alternatives
presented in that memorandum, copies of which were distributed among the
members of the Committee prior to this meeting and a copy of which has
been placed in the Federal Open Market Committee files.
In response to a request from Chairman Martin, Mr. Rouse made a
statement concerning prospective Treasury financing needs during the next
few months in which he said that the bill market was congested and was not
in a condition to take additional weekly offerings of regular bills, that
there was no outside demand for long-term Government securities at the
present price level, and that the source of nonbank funds appeared to lie in
the tax liabilities of corporations. He felt, therefore, that the Treasury
might avail itself of the situation in the short-term money market and sell
securities which would be purchased ultimately by corporations for use in
paying tax liabilities in the spring of 1952, when the Treasury could
repay such borrowings.
Chairman Martin then called upon Mr. Thomas who summarized informal
discussions that members of the staff had had with representatives of the
Treasury staff. Mr. Thomas said that, while the discussions were explora
tory, it was generally agreed that around $2.5 billion would have to be
raised by the Treasury to cover the deficit and attrition in refunding of
market issues this fall, that there was rather general agreement this could
not be raised by long-term issues, and that most of the funds available

10/4/51 -6
were funds held by corporations in anticipation of tax payments they would
have to make during 1952. One of the proposals under consideration, Mr.
Thomas said, was the offering of tax-date bills maturing about March 15
and June 15, 1952; such bills might mature within a few days after these
tax payment dates but would be acceptable in payment of taxes on March 15
and June 15. Mr. Thomas also commented upon alternative methods of issuing
such securities, stating that some individuals felt they should be issued
at one time while others preferred a series of issues coming out over a
period of several weeks.
There followed a discussion of the suggestions made in the staff
memorandum dated October 3, 1951, and of the comments of Messrs. Rouse and
Thomas, including discussion of the terms on which the tax anticipation
bills might be issued, at the conclusion of which Chairman Martin suggested
that the executive committee be authorized to submit recommendations to
the Treasury concerning both refunding and new financing needs, in the
light of the discussion at this meeting.
This suggestion was approved
unanimously.
Chairman Martin also referred to a report prepared by the System
Research Committee on Government Finance under date of September 28, 1951,
on "How the Defense Bond Program Can Be Strengthened", copies of which had
been sent to the members of the Committee before this meeting. He suggested
that the report be reviewed by the executive committee with a view to
having that committee submit a recommendation to the full Committee. He also

10/4/51 -7
suggested that Mr. Norton be asked to serve with the members of the executive
committee in making this review of the savings bond program in view of his
interest in and tentative suggestions concerning a more effective program
for merchandising bonds.
In connection with a discussion of the time for a meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee at which consideration might be given to
matters which should be taken up with the Secretary of the Treasury before
the end of this year, including the savings bond program, Chairman Martin
suggested that there be a meeting of the full Committee at which Federal
Reserve Bank Presidents who were not now members of the Committee would
also be present sometime during November 1951. He added that he had dis
cussed the question of possible changes in the savings bond program with
Secretary of the Treasury Snyder and that he was under the impression that
any recommendations which the Committee might wish to make should be sub
mitted by the latter part of November.
Following a discussion, it was agreed
unanimously that a study of the savings bond
program should proceed as suggested by Chair
man Martin, and that the next meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee, at which the
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks who
were not now members of the Committee would
also be present, would be held on Wednesday,
November 14, 1951.
In a discussion of open market policy, Mr. Powell expressed the
view that the money market, in a variety of ways, was stating the case
that interest rates had definitely risen and if the Treasury was going
to spread its refundings over a term of years in order to reduce the
size of the annual roll-over of debt, it would have to pay the higher

10/4/51 -8
rates that others were willing to pay. Mr. Powell went on to say that
this was the inevitable result of inflationary pressures and the System's
attempt to control them with money market instruments, and, after comment
ing on the factors evidencing upward pressure on the level of rates, he sug
gested that consideration be given to the question whether it would not be
necessary to permit interest rates on Treasury borrowings to rise, if
Treasury financing was to be fitted into a situation in which the Open
Market Committee continued to exert pressure against inflation through
the use of open market instruments.
Chairman Martin stated that Mr. Powell had raised a very pertinent
question, that there was a real problem of how effective the System could
be in a period of deficit financing in attempting to restrain inflation
through open market instruments.
After comments by several Reserve Bank Presidents concerning the
attractiveness of long-term Treasury securities to the average saver at
existing rates, Chairman Martin called upon Mr. John H. Williams who
stated that he shared Mr. Powell's views, that he felt the only way in which
the System could overcome inflation was through raising interest rates and
thus providing a means by which the Treasury could copete for savings. He
felt that this was the way to exert monetary pressure, that it looked as
though the country was getting to the end of the road as far as tax
increases were concerned except perhaps for a general sales tax, and that
the country was confronted with such questions as whether the military pro
gram was too large, whether it should be stretched out over a longer period

10/4/51 -9
of time than was now contemplated, whether it should be financed through
use of savings of the country, or whether it would have to be financed by
resorting to bank credit.
Mr. Bopp stated that he did not feel the question was one of a
deliberate raising of interest rates so much as one of letting the demand
for funds force rates up, rather than taking action to prevent a rise.
Mr. Thompson agreed with the comment made by Mr. Bopp, adding
that he felt it was unfortunate that the System was too often identified
with the proposition of raising interest rates whereas the proposition
was basically one of restricting the supply of funds so that those who
wanted credit would have to compete for it, which might mean an increase
in rates.
Mr. Tow said that any increase in interest rates should be a re
sult of monetary policy rather than a deliberate raising of rates, that
the question whether to permit rates to rise was one that would have to be
faced in terms of all factors in the situation at a given time, and that
it was not particularly significant whether such a change was permitted to
occur just after a savings bond sales campaign or at some other time.
Mr. Irons said that the System should not prevent rates from
rising if the forces in the market tended to bring about an increase. He
expressed doubt that the present rates, certainly those paid on savings
bonds, were sufficient to attract savings into Government securities, and
he felt that the System should be affirmative to the extent that it should
not prevent rates from rising.

10/4/51 -10
Mr. Peterson felt that it would be a mistake to concentrate on
the savings bond rate as such and leave longer-term securities out of
consideration.
Mr. Bryan stated that he would like to associate himself strongly
with the general line of thought initiated by Mr. Powell and that he did
not disagree with most of the comments made subsequently. He added that
it seemed to him that in a considerable part of the postwar world, central
banks had proceeded on an impression that there would be a savings surplus,
whereas, in fact, we had come into a situation where there was a savings
deficit. He commented that he did not see any way by which it was going to
be possible to avoid further inflation unless, in consort with the Treas
ury, the central banking system could reach a full recognition of the circum
stances in the market and permit an adjustment in the level of rates that
would meet the demand. Of the various choices available, Mr. Bryan felt
that the best was to face the rate question over a longer term since this
was the basic problem, rather than the technicalities as to how short-term
financing should be accomplished.
There was a further discussion at the conclusion of which Chair
man Martin stated that the problem was one of finding out how to attract
new money into Government securities in the period ahead.
Chairman Martin then referred to the authority given to all
Federal Reserve Banks on March 1, 1950, which was modified on February
8, 1951, and renewed on March 8, 1951, with respect to repurchase agreements
covering short-term Treasury obligations with nonbank dealers in United

10/4/51 -11
States Government securities qualified to transact business with the System
open market account. He stated that question had been raised as to whether
the present authority which gave additional leeway to the New York Bank
for executing repurchase agreements should be extended to all Federal
Reserve Banks.
In the discussion that followed, it was stated that the present
authority included the requirement that the rate on such agreements be at
least 1/8 per cent above the average issuing rate on the most recent issue
of United States Treasury bills, except that the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York was authorized by the actions of February 8 and March 8, 1951,
to enter into such agreements at a differential of less than 1/8 per cent
above the average issuing rate on United States Treasury bills. The view
was expressed that while this authority would continue to be used
primarily if not exclusively by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, it
should be granted to each of the Federal Reserve Banks so that it could
be used in the interest of orderly conditions in the Government securities
market, and that Federal Reserve Banks other than New York should have
the authority in case of an emergency necessitating the transfer of the
execution of open market operations to another Federal Reserve Bank.
Following a discussion, upon motion
duly made and seconded, it was voted unani
mously to authorize each Federal Reserve
Bank, in lieu of all similar previous
authorizations, to enter into repurchase
agreements with nonbank dealers in United
States Government securities who are qualified
to transact business with the System open
market account, under the following conditions:

10/4/51 -12-
1. Such agreements
a. Are at a rate which will be fixed in fractions of 1/8
per cent and which ordinarily will be not less than
the nearest fraction above the average issuing rate
on the most recent issue of 3-month Treasury bills
but which at times may be below the average issuing
rate on bills but not more than 1/8 per cent below;
(for example, when the issuing rate on Treasury bills
temporarily may have risen slightly above the existing
repurchase rate);
b. Are for periods of not to exceed 15 calendar days;
c. Cover only short-term Government securities selling at
a yield of not more than the issuing rate for 1-year
Treasury obligations; and
d. Are used with care and discrimination as a means of
providing the money market with sufficient Federal
Reserve funds as to avoid undue strain on a day-to
day basis.
2. Reports of such transactions are made to the Manager of the
System Open Market Account to be inluded in the weekly re
port of open market operations which is sent to the members
of the Federal Open Market Committee.
3. In the event Government securities covered by any such agree
ment are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant to the agree
ment or a renewal thereof, the securities thus acquired by
the Federal Reserve Bank are sold in the market or transferred
to the System Open Market Account.
In taking this action it was under
stood that a letter would be sent to all
Federal Reserve Banks advising them of
the above understanding.
Reference was made to the decision reached at the meeting of
the Committee on May 17, 1951, with respect to conversion of 2-3/4 per
cent nonmarketable bonds held in the System account into 5 year 1-1/2 per
cent marketable notes. Mr. Rouse stated that following out that action

10/4/51 -13
it would now be appropriate for the System to convert $500 million of the
2-3/4 per cent bonds into the 1-1/2 per cent notes and that an additional
$500 million should be converted on a similar basis in April 1952 at which
time consideration would also be given to the program for conversion of the
remaining $700 million held in the System account. Mr. Rouse went on to
say that before carrying out the exchange of $500 million at this time, it
seemed desirable to raise the question whether the Committee wished to
make any change in the earlier understanding. He also said that so far
as he was concerned in the management of the system account, it would not
matter whether the present understanding was carried out or whether the
conversion was made in some other manner.
Mr. Szymczak suggested that unless there was good reason for
changing the decision reached at the meeting on May 17, it would seem
desirable to proceed on the basis of that action.
This suggestion was approved
unanimously.
It was agreed that the executive committee should be author
ized to determine, within the limits of the general direction to be
issued at this meeting by the full Committee to the executive committee,
the basis upon which transactions would be conducted for the System
account in bills and other short-term securities. It was also agreed that
no change should be made in the existing understanding that operations
in longer-term securities should be conducted with a view to maintaining
orderly market conditions, in the light of the general direction to be

10/4/51
issued to the executive committee at this meeting.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following direction to the
executive committee was approved unanimously
with the understanding that the limitation
contained in the direction would include
commitments for the System open market
account:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise di
rected by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for such
transactions for the System open market account, either in the
open market or directly with the Treasury (including purchases,
sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing securities, and letting
maturities run off without replacement), as may be necessary, in
the light of current and prospective economic conditions and the
general credit situation of the country, with a view to exercis
ing restraint upon inflationary developments, to maintaining
orderly conditions in the Government security market, to relating
the supply of funds in the market to the needs of commerce and
business, and to the practical administration of the account;
provided that the aggregate amount of securities held in the
account at the close of this date other than special short-term
certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury shall not be increased
or decreased by more than $2,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for the
purchase for the System open market account direct from the Treas
ury of such amounts of special short-term certificates of indebted
ness as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total amount of
such certificates held in the account at any one time shall not
exceed $1,000,000,000.
The Secretary stated that he had been advised that the examiners
of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, in connection
with the regular examination of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, had
completed an audit of the System open market account and that they had
no objections to raise to the handling of the account. He added that the

10/4/51 -15
customary report of the audit would be distributed among the members of
the Committee in the usual manner.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned,
Secretary.