A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Thursday, May 17, 1951, at 10:05 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Eccles
Mr. Evans
Mr. Gidney
Mr. Gilbert
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Norton
Mr. Powell
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. A. H. Williams
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Bopp, Irons, Thompson, and John H.
Williams, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Riefler, Assistant to the Chairman, Board
of Governors
Mr. Ralph A. Young, Director, Division of
Research and tatistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Youngdahl, Chief, Government Finance Sec
tion, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Ralph F. Leach, Economist, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Messrs. Hugh Leach, C. E. Young, Bryan, and
Earhart, alternate members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Erickson, Johns, and Peyton, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, St. Louis,
and Minneapolis, respectively.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, William McChesney Martin,
Jr., was elected Chairman of the Federal Open
Market Committee to serve until the election

5/17/51 -2
of his successor at the first meeting of the
Committee after February 29, 1952, with the
understanding that in the event of the dis
continuance of his official connection with the
Board of Governors during that period, he would
cease to have any official connection with the
Federal Open Market Committee.
At the meeting of the Committee on March 1, 1951, it was noted
that no alternate member of the Federal Open Mrket Committee had been
elected for Mr. Gilbert, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
At this meeting it was stated that advice of the election of Malcolm H.
Bryan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, as alternate
member for Mr. Gilbert for the remainder of the year ending February 29,
1952, had been received, and that he had executed the customary oath of
office.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meetings
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
January 31, February 6-8, March 1-2, and March
8, 1951, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the execu
tive committee of the Federal Open Market
Committee as set forth in the minutes of the
meetings of the executive committee held on
January 31, February 8, February 14, Febru
ary 26, March 2, March 3, March 8, March 13,
and April 5, 1951, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
A report of open market operations prepared at the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York covering the period March 8 to May 11, 1951, in
clusive, was then presented and commented upon by Mr. Rouse. He also

5/17/51 -3
presented a supplementary report covering commitments executed from
May 12 to May 16, 1951, inclusive. Copies of both reports have been
placed in the files of the Federal Open Mrket Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account for the period March 8 to May
16, 1951, inclusive, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
There was then presented a report by members of the staff of the
Division of Research and Statistics of the Board of Governors, illustrated
by chart slides, covering the economic situation and referred to by Mr.
Ralph Young as a report on "Control Problems as Seen During a Lull in
the Boom."
Following the presentation, Mr. Thomas made a statement in which
he emphasized that the answer to the continuing inflationary pressures
could not be found in more production of goods and services when the
economy was operating at capacity, that primarily the inflationary pres
sures arose from the creation of additional money through credit expansion
and through increased turnover of money. Vigorous restraints on credit
expansion would have to continue if the development of substantial further
inflation was to be avoided. Mr. Thomas noted that if the defense program
developed as contemplated and as the needs of the Treasury for refunding
of securities progressed during the remainder of this year, there would
probably be continued demands for credit from both banks and other lenders,
although credit expansion would probably be at a reduced rate. While some
lending institutions would continue to sell Government securities, nonbank

5/17/51 -4
investors as a group would increase their holdings. The Federal Reserve
would be called upon to purchase Government securities or increase advances
to member banks in order to supply some of the funds needed to meet credit
demands and also to cover a drain on bank reserves resulting from the sea
sonal currency demand and a probable outflow of gold. In the aggregate,
he suggested the possibility of a further increase in Reserve Bank credit
by the end of 1951 of as much as $3 billion. These needs for reserves would
provide an element of restraint, particularly if a policy of reluctant buy
ing is followed.
In a discussion of credit policy in the months ahead when develop
ments in the international situation were so uncertain, Mr. Eccles raised
the question whether, if the Federal Government budget were balanced, there
was justification for any expansion in bank credit, and whether the objec
tive of Federal Reserve policy should not be to avoid supplying additional
reserves to the market except the amounts required by a rise in demand for
currency, a gold outflow, or an over-all expansion of production.
There was a general discussion of the various factors in the con
tinuing inflationary situation which would tend to increase the amount of
Federal Reserve credit outstanding and it was agreed that the objective of
System credit policy should be to limit the increase as much as possible.
During the discussion Mr. Vardaman left the meeting.
Chairman Martin stated that the principal development not previously
reported to the Committee since the last meeting was the announcement on
M.y 8, 1951, by the Secretary of the Treasury that he would not call the

5/17/51 -5
September 2's of 1951-53, and that there would be issued a new series of
tax savings notes, both of which actions were recommended to the Treasury by
the executive committee on May 7, 1951. Chairman Martin also stated that
the Treasury had decided not to announce it refunding of securities matur
ing in June, July, or August until the latest practicable date, which prob
ably would be late this month, and that this too was in accordance with the
recommendations of the executive committee.
In a discussion of open market policy, reference was made to a memo
randum prepared in the Board's offices under date of March 16, 1951, with
respect to the conversion of System holdings of 2-3/4 per cent bonds of 1975
80 into 5-year 1-1/2 per cent notes. Copies of the memorandum were distributed
to the members of the Committee before the meeting and a copy has been placed
in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Mr. Sproul stated that the memorandum apparently had been prepared
on the assumption that there would be an exchange of the nonmarketable bonds
for marketable notes, and that the only question was when and on what kind
of a schedule it should be made. His own judgment, he stated, was that it
would be desirable to convert $1 billion of the bonds at the present time,
$500 million on October 1, 1951, and an additional $500 million on April 1,
1952, at which time consideration might be given to the disposition to be
made of the $700 million remaining in the System account.
Mr. Rouse stated that the 5-year notes to be obtained in exchange
for 2-3/4 per cent bonds would bear the sane maturity date if converted

5/17/51 -6
anytime between now and the end of September 1951.
There was a general discussion of the
advantages and disadvantages of converting
the nonnarketable bonds under any of the
suggested alternative procedures and at the
conclusion of the discussion, upon motion
by Mr. Sproul, it was agreed unanimously
that steps should be taken at an appropriate
time between now and the end of September
to convert $1 billion of present System
holdings of the 2-3/4 per cent nonmarketable
bonds of 1 75-80 into 5-year 1-1/2 per cent
9
notes to be dated April 1, 1951, that an
additional $500m illion should be converted
into notes to be dated October 1, 1951, and
that an additional $500 million should be
converted into notes to be dated April 1,
1952, with the understanding that further
consideration would be given at a later meet
ing as to the program for conversion of the
remaining $700 million held in the System
account.
Chairman Martin suggested that, inasmuch as the terms of the new
refunding offering to be made by the Treasury would not be announced until
the latter part of this month, the executive committee be authorized to
determine, within the limits of the general direction to be issued at this
meeting by the full Committee to the executive committee, the basis upon
which transactions would be conducted for the System account in bills and
other short-term securities after the announcement was made.
This suggestion was approved unani
mously.
Chairman Martin then suggested that System operations in longer
term issues be carried on in a more aggressive manner than had been fol
lowed in the past, that such an operation be undertaken on an experimental

5/17/51 -7
basis with a view to probing the market for Government securities to see
if there would be developed a more active interest on the part of potential
buyers of such securities.
He also suggested that the Committee authorize him to appoint a
committee to consist of himself as chairman and not less than two or more
than four other members of the Federal Open Market Committee to make a study
of the scope and adequacy of the Government securities market during the
coming months with the understanding that the committee would be authorized
to call on outside assistance if that should be considered to be necessary
and that it would report to the executive committee and to the full Com
mittee. Chairman Martin emphasized that his suggestion for a study of this
type was in no sense a criticism of the operations of the System account.
In response to questions, he indicated that there was a need for a broader
market for Government securities, that perhaps there would be value in
studying the British Government securities market, that the time may come
when the Federal Open Market Committee might find it necessary to change
the procedure whereby it did business with only a small number of qualified
dealers, and that he hoped the study proposed would make some worthwhile
suggestions along these and other lines.
Several other members of the Committee expressed the view that it
would be desirable to have a study such as that proposed by Chairman Martin.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, Chairman Martin was authorized to
appoint a committee to make a study of the
Government securities market along the lines
he suggested.

5/17/51 -8
Turning to a discussion of the suggestion for more aggressive op
erations in the System account, Chairman Martin said that the Government
securities market had suffered a distinct shock since the Treasury-Federal
Reserve accord was announced on March 4, that there was a feeling in some
quarters that the market for Government securities was deteriorating be
cause of pressures from more sources than institutional investors who were
liquidating securities to meet previous commitments, and that he would like
to see the Committee authorize the use of, say, $250 million to carry on a
more aggressive operation with a view to probing the extent of the underly
ing demand for Government securities. This, he said, would mean that
instead of waiting for dealers to offer securities to the System when they
were under pressure there would be times when the System might have aggres
sive bids in the market. The general purpose of such a probing operation
would be to bring out buying which could result in a stronger and more
certain market for the large volume of Treasury refunding issues that would be
coming on the market.
Mr. Sproul stated that he did not feel the Committee had been entirely
passive although it had not been aggressive in exactly the manner suggested
by Chairman Martin. He agreed that there had been a shock to the Government
securities market in recent weeks but he did not think there was deteriora
tion in the market, that quite the reverse was true, and that the market had
shown stability and steadiness and was not one which reflected a psychology
of fear. He added that there was no indication of a feeling that could lead

5/17/51 -9
to failure of Treasury refunding issues over the next six months. He went
on to say that if the full Committee wished to direct the executive committee,
and the executive committee to direct the New York Bank and Manager of the
account, to operate in a more aggressive fashion, it could do so without
any special authorization of a specific amount to be used for that purpose.
Mr. Sproul added that it should be remembered that the Government securities
market is sui generis, that it is the market in which most adjustments of
cash positions are now made, that our operations in the market are conducted
in a "gold fish bowl" with weekly publication of our purchases and sales,
and that when we buy or sell we use a special kind of money, namely, reserve
funds. For these reasons, he said, the Government securities market and
operations in it are quite dissimilar to the stabilizing operations of pri
vate interests in other security markets.
During a comment on Chairman Martin's suggestions, Mr. Eccles stated
that he felt it would be worth while undertaking such an operation with a
relatively small volume of funds, even though it involved the risk indicated
by Mr. Sproul of adding to reserve funds in the market.
Other members of the Committee expressed themselves as favoring an
experimental operation along the lines suggested by Chairman Martin, and it
was agreed that, in issuing instructions to the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York for transactions in the System account, the executive committee should
do so in the light of the foregoing discussion.
Secretary's note: Before leaving the meet
ing Mr. Vardaman stated to the Secretary that

5/17/51 -10
he would favor whatever recommendations
were made by Chairman Martin as to actions
to be taken by the Committee.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following direction to the
executive committee was approved unanimously
with the understanding that the limitation
contained in the direction would include
commitments for the System open market
account:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise di
rected by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for such
transactions for the ,ystem open market account, either in the
open market or directly with the Treasury (including purchases,
sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing securities, and letting
maturities run off without replacement), as may be necessary, in
the light of current and prospective economic conditions and the
general credit situation of the country, with a view to exercis
ing restraint upon inflationary developments, to maintaining
orderly conditions in the Government security market, to relating
the supply of funds in the market to the needs of commerce and
business, and to the practical administration of the account;
provided that the aggregate amount of securities held in the
account at the close of this date other than special short-term
certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury shall not be increased
or decreased by more than $2,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for the
purchase for the System open market account direct from the Treas
ury of such amounts of special short-term certificates of indebted
ness as nay be necessary from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total amount of
such certificates held in the account at any one time shall not
exceed $1,000,000,000.
The date for the next meeting of the Committee was tentatively set
for October 3, 1951, with the understanding that a meeting of the Presidents'
Conference would be held earlier in that week.

5/17/51 -11
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.