A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Friday, February 29, 1952, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Evans
Mr. Gidney
Mr. Gilbert
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Mills
Mr. Powell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. A. H. Williams
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Bopp, Irons, Thompson, Tow, and
John H. Williams, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Youngdahl, Chief, Government Finance Section
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Arthur Willis, Special Assistant, Securities
Department, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Leach, Young, Bryan, and Earhart, alternate
members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Erickson, Johns, and Peyton, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston,
St. Louis, and Minneapolis, respectively
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
November 14, 1951, were approved.

2/29/52 -2
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the executive
committee of the Federal Open Market Committee
as set forth in the minutes of the meetings of
the executive committee held on November 13-14,
1951, and February 11, 1952, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Before this meeting there had been sent to the members of the
Committee a report of open market operations prepared at the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York covering the period November 14, 1951 through
February 25, 1952, inclusive. Mr. Rouse presented a supplementary report
covering commitments executed on February 26-28, 1952, inclusive, and com
mented briefly on both reports. Copies of the reports have been placed in
the file of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the Sys
tem account for the period November 14, 1951, to
February 28, 1952, inclusive, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Reference was made to the report prepared by Mr. Rouse under
date of January 23, 1952, with respect to dealer commissions on transac
tions for the System open market account, as presented and discussed at
the meeting of the executive committee on February 11, 1952. As recommended
at that meeting, copies of the memorandum had been sent to the Presidents
of all Federal Reserve Banks for their information and for such discussion
at this meeting as might appear to be desirable.
None of the members of the Federal Open
Market Committee and none of the Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks who were not members
of the Committee had any comments to make con
cerning the memorandum, and it was ordered re
ceived and filed.

2/29/52 -3
At Chairman Martin's request, the Secretary reported on a
change in the procedure for forwarding investment schedules pertaining
to the System open market account from the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York to the Division of Examinations of the Board of Governors currently
in connection with the examiners' audit of the System account. Mr.
Carpenter stated that this change was made in January of this year with
the thought that much of the detailed work of the examiners which hereto
fore has been accomplished with borrowed help at the New York Bank during
the examiners' audits of the System open market account could be done in
the Board's Division of Examinations on a current basis, and that the
investment schedules which previously had been set aside at the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York for the use of the Chief Federal Reserve Examiner
at the time of his examination of the Bank were now being forwarded to the
Board on as nearly a weekly basis as possible. Members of the Committee
noted the change without objection.
Members of the staffs of the Board's Division of Research and
Statistics and Division of International Finance then presented an economic
review and outlook illustrated by chart slides. At the close of the review,
Mr. Thomas made a statement with respect to credit and monetary policies
in relation to fiscal and debt management problems.
In his remarks, Mr. Thomas said that the economic picture was
one of approximate balance at high levels of activity, that this situation

2/29/52 -4
had prevailed for nearly a year during which there had been an important
measure of credit restraint, and that there now were in prospect some
factors suggesting the possibility of downward readjustments in prices and
decreases in some phases of business activity. There are also in prospect,
however, a number of factors that would tend to generate inflationary pres
sures, particularly the expanding defense program and the continued high
level of capital expenditures by business. With the Federal fiscal position
shifting from a cash surplus to a sizeable cash deficit which would be at
least $4 billion for the calendar year 1952, the Government might need to
borrow as much as $10 billion during the second half of 1952 in order to
meet the deficit and cover cash redemptions of maturing securities. Mr.
Thomas felt that unless individuals and corporations put relatively more of
their liquid savings into Government securities and held smaller cash
balances, there might need to be an expansion of bank credit, possibly as
much as $4 billion, to bring the volume of credit in line with potential
demand. This would add to the money supply and be an inflationary in
fluence.
Under circumstances recently prevailing and in prospect, Mr.
Thomas felt that continuation of Federal Reserve policies of neutrality
would be particularly appropriate since under those policies monetary and
credit restraint or ease results from the interplay of market forces of
demand and supply with a minimum of Federal Reserve intervention. Thus, if

2/29/52 -5
borrowing demands should turn out to be less than the supply of savings
available for investment, the money market should be relatively easy and
there would be little occasion for the System to try to prevent the ease
from occurring. On the other hand, should combined borrowing demands from
Government and private sources exceed the supply of savings and call for
much bank credit expansion, a tighter market should be expected unless the
Federal Reserve intervenes to supply reserve funds. Only in case forces
of recession or inflationary pressures become overwhelming should there be
need for positive and vigorous action by the System to operate against
the trend of borrowing demands, Mr. Thomas felt, and principal reliance
should be placed on member bank borrowing as a means of obtaining ad
ditional reserves.
With respect to financing the prospective deficit, Mr. Thomas
stated that it was impossible to provide easy credit for Government without
at the same time making easy credit available to private borrowers. There
should be a positive program of debt management aimed at attracting nonbank
funds to meet the deficit. An improved savings bond program and offerings
of other securities attractive to individuals would be needed to attract
savings into Government securities.
While additional restrictions on credit seemed unnecessary at
present, Mr. Thomas expressed the view that relaxation of restraints was
not called for and measures should continue in readiness to restrain any

2/29/52 -6
resumption of inflationary tendencies.
Following Mr. Thomas' comments, Mr. Powell stated that it ap
peared that during 1951 an important measure of restraint had been exercised
by the public through its willingness to save at a high rate but that if
the public were to resume spending at a substantially higher rate during
coming months, upward pressure on prices would be renewed. Under these
circumstances, Mr. Powell asked what the Committee might do in the field
of monetary and credit policy to offset the increased spending.
Mr. Thomas commented that in that situation vigorous action to
reduce the supply of funds would be desirable.
Mr. Sproul stated that he felt it was possible to place too much
emphasis on the role of consumer spending. He also said that while consumer
restraint in spending had been an important factor in the relative price
stability over the past year, it was his opinion that no small part of
the willingness of consumers to save reflected a belief that measures were
being or might be taken to preserve the purchasing power of the dollar, and
that if consumers continued to believe appropriate measures in that direc
tion would be taken there would be a continuation of savings. On the other
hand, if the public began to feel that proper fiscal and debt management and
monetary policies were not being pursued and that there was a likelihood of
renewed inflationary movements, the incentive to save would be reduced. Mr.
Sproul said that in that case the remedy prescribed by Mr. Thomas--vigorous

2/29/52 -7
action to reduce the supply of funds--would not be easy to apply. Whatever
the reasons, Mr. Sproul said, it was becoming increasingly apparent that the
country would not have an adequate fiscal policy in that there would be a
large Federal deficit at a time when the budget should be balanced. In the
field of debt management, the Treasury faced a need for substantial borrowings
to finance the deficit during the last half of the calendar year 1952, at the
same time that it would be almost constantly in the market with refunding opera
tions. This may well preclude a vigorous credit policy, so that if the public
does not continue to save a difficult problem will be presented. Under these
circumstances it was Mr. Sproul's view that it is necessary to begin immedi
ately to pursue a bold, vigorous program for obtaining funds from nonbank
sources wherever possible and that both an improved savings bond program and
a more effective program of sales of Government securities to nonbank investors
would be needed to accomplish this purpose. The problem ahead appeared to him
to be a very difficult one which could be quite intractable in terms of an
adequate credit policy if there were not a complementary problem of debt
management.
Chairman Martin commented that he felt some encouragement could
be found in the program undertaken by the Treasury in connection with its
March refunding although he did not minimize the difficulties outlined by
Mr. Sproul in his comments. He felt that the Committee should take advantage
of the period prior to the refunding of the July certificates to work out a

2/29/52 -8
further program with which to attack the problem. In this connection, he
referred to the memorandum on Government Financing in 1952 prepared by the
System Research Committee on Government Finance under date of January 25, 1952,
copies of which were sent to all members of the Committee before this meeting,
and at his request Mr. Youngdahl summarized the comments appearing in that
memorandum on pages 17-23 regarding types of long-term securities that might
be offered by the Treasury.
Following Mr. Youngdahl's statement, Mr. Sproul said that he felt
that, even under existing circumstances, a long-term unrestricted marketable
bond was preferable to a nonmarketable convertible issue, as it would be the
means by which the Treasury could raise the largest amount of long-term funds
from nonbank sources at the lowest cost. While there were risks in undertaking
long-tern financing in the situation which faces us, he felt that they were
necessary in order to do the financing in a manner that would not be inflation
ary and that would avoid greater risks of doing an unsatisfactory job of
attracting nonbank funds. He recognized that prices of existing issues would
decline but felt that the extent of the decline would be limited by the willing
ness of existing holders to sell at a loss. He thought this sort of market
adjustment preferable to trying to cushion the effects of long-term financing
by a nonmarketable convertible issue. Such issues, he said, would establish
an undesirable mechanical connection between short- and long-term rates and
would, in effect be a trap for the investor who might buy without full real
izetion of the conditions and penalties of liquidation. He also said such

2/29/52 -9
issues would take control of the debt structure out of the hands of the
Treasury because it would not know whether it had a thirty-year or five-year
obligation outstanding. He added that, although the convertible issue offered
by the Treasury last year was a desirable means of meeting the problem confront
ing the Treasury and the System at that time, the issue should not be further
imbedded into the debt structure and should not be recommended to the Treasury
as a way out of the dilemma of getting long-term funds as a supplement to an
improved savings bond program.
During Mr. Sproul's statement Mr. Riefler, Assistant to the Chair
man, Board of Governors, joined the meeting.
There was a further discussion of the advantages of marketable and
nonmarketable issues during which Chairman Martin inquired if the members of
the Committee had any views that differed from those expressed by Mr. Sproul.
No further comments were made whereupon Chairman Martin suggested that the mem
bers of the Committee continue to study the problem presented in the memorandum
prepared by the System Research Advisory Committee, that the full Committee
ratify the action of the executive committee in sending a copy of the memorandum
to the Treasury, and that the Treasury be advised that, after considering the
memorandum, the Federal Open Market Committee agreed that use of a marketable
security at a competitive rate would be preferable to the use of a nonmarket
able convertible issue in Treasury long-term financing operations later this
year.

2/29/52 -10
There was also a discussion of other questions relating to
Treasury financing including possible new money financing during May of
this year and question was raised as to whether the Treasury might find
it desirable to use tax anticipation bills similar to those issued in the
fall of 1951. There was also a discussion of whether payment for such
bills, if issued, should be permitted through credit to tax and loan ac
counts of banks or whether they should be sold only to corporations (in
cluding banks) which might use them in payment of their own taxes. Chair
man Martin said that these were matters in which the Committee should work
closely with the Treasury.
Mr. Sproul expressed the view that, if possible, it would be
desirable not to go to the market for new money in May or June of this
year, particularly since large refinancing operations would become neces
sary in July and new money financing would be necessary during the second
half of this year. If it should become necessary for the Treasury to
obtain new money before the end of June, Mr. Sproul suggested the possible
use of the authority of the Federal Reserve System to purchase direct from
the Treasury short-term certificates of indebtedness for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury.
Chairman Martin suggested that the question of a recommendation
to the Treasury on this point and other matters relating to Treasury financing
be left to the executive committee, that the Committee ratify the trans
mission to the Treasury of the memorandum on Government Financing in 1952,

2/29/52 -11
and that the Treasury be informed that the Committee would favor long-term
financing by means of a marketable issue rather than a nonmarketable con
vertible issue.
This suggestion was approved
unanimously.
Chairman Martin then referred to a memorandum dated February 25,
1952, with respect to the establishment of rates on purchases of bankers'
acceptances which had been sent to all members of the Committee together
with an opinion by Mr. Vest concerning the establishment of such rates
by the Federal Open Market Committee. At the Chairman's request, Mr.
Carpenter reviewed the circumstances which gave rise to the memorandum,
stating that when the currently effective buying rates for acceptances
were increased by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in December 1951
in accordance with a rise in dealers' rates, some of the other Reserve
Banks, instead of establishing a schedule of currently effective rates,
presented to the Board of Governors for approval an increase to 1-7/8 per
cent in their authorized minimum buying rate. As a result of discussions
at that time, he said, it was agreed that consideration should be given
at this meeting to the procedure to be followed in the future.
Chairman Martin suggested that the matter be referred to the
executive committee with a view to having it submit a recommendation at
the next meeting of the full Committee.

2/29/52 -12
This suggestion was approved
unanimously.
There followed a general discussion of open market policy during
which Chairman Martin commented upon the possible need for additional
bank credit to carry inventories incident to rescheduling of defense
production. At the conclusion of the discussion it was unanimously agreed
that no change should be made in the Committee's current policy of neutrality
in the market under which market forces of supply and demand are permitted
to have their effect with a minimum of System intervention except to the
extent necessary to promote orderly market conditions.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.