A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Thursday, June 19, 1952, at 10:20 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Earhart
Mr. Evans
Mr. Hugh Leach
Mr. Mills
Mr. Powell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. C. S. Young
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Wheeler and Ralph A. Young, Associate
Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Youngdahl, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Mr. Ralph F. Leach, Economist, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Willis, Special Assistant, Securities Depart
ment, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Craft, Technical Consultant
Messrs. Erickson, Gidney, and Johns, alternate members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Williams, Leedy, and Gilbert, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively
Mr. Clark, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta

6/19/52 -2
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee
on February 29 and March 1, 1952, were ap
proved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the execu
tive committee of the Federal Open Market
Committee as set forth in the minutes of the
meetings of the executive committee held on
March 1, April 4, April 21, May 9, and May
23, 1952, were approved, ratified, and con
firmed.
Before this meeting there had been sent to all members of the
Committee a report of open market operations prepared at the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York covering the period February 29, 1952 to June 13,
1952, inclusive. At this meeting, Mr. Rouse presented and commented
briefly on a supplementary report covering commitments executed on June 16,
17, and 18, 1952. Copies of both reports have been placed in the files of
the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account for the period February 29 to
June 18, 1952, inclusive, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Chairman Martin referred to a recommendation of the executive
committee adopted at its meeting on April 21, 1952 and transmitted to all
members of the Committee under date of May 7, 1952, that the Federal Open
Market Committee authorize the executive committee to issue a continuing
formal authorization to the Federal Reserve Banks to purchase special

6/19/52 -3
certificates of indebteness direct from the Treasury, from other Federal
Reserve Banks, or from the System open market account when such purchases
would facilitate the handling of the Treasury balances on Saturdays or
holidays when the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is closed and another
Federal Reserve Bank is open. The reasons for the recommendation were set
out in the minutes of the meetings of the executive committee on April 4
and April 21, 1952, as well as in a memorandum from Mr. Rouse dated April
17, 1952, copies of which had been sent to each member of the Committee
before this meeting.
During a discussion of the recommendation, Mr. Rouse suggested
that if the authorization were given it be made clear that it would apply
when the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was closed and any other Reserve
Bank or branch was open.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the Committee
authorized each Federal Reserve Bank, during
such period as the executive committee of the
Federal Open Market Committee may permit, to
purchase special certificates of indebtedness
of the United States, under arrangements made
with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, di
rectly from the Treasury, from another Federal
Reserve Bank, or from the System open market
account, when such purchases will facilitate
the handling of the Treasury's balances on
Saturdays or holidays when the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York is closed and another Federal
Reserve Bank or branch is open; provided that
the amount of such special certificates held
by all of the Federal Reserve Banks for their
own account as a result of such purchases,

6/19/52 -4
together with the amount of such special
certificates purchased directly from the
Treasury and held in the System open market
account, shall not exceed at any one time the
total amount of such special certificates
authorized to be held under the then current
authorization of the executive committee to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York for the System
account.
Chairman Martin then referred to recommendations of the executive
committee adopted at its meeting on April 21, 1952 regarding bankers'
acceptances, a copy of which was sent to each member of the Committee on
May 7, 1952. The recommendations included the proposal that section 8 of
the Regulation of the Federal Open Market Committee be amended to read as
follows:
"SECTION 8. OTHER OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS
"Subject to directions of the Committee and the following
conditions, each Federal Reserve bank may engage in open-market
operations other than the purchase or sale of Government
securities:
"(1) Each Federal Reserve bank, as may be required from
time to time by the Committee, shall report all such trans
actions to the Secretary of the Committee.
"(2) Only acceptances and bills of exchange which are of
the kinds made eligible for purchase under the provisions
of Regulation B of the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System may be purchased: Provided, That no obliga
tions payable in foreign currency shall be purchased or
sold for the account of the Federal Reserve bank except
in accordance with directions of the Committee.
"(3) Only bills, notes, revenue bonds, and warrants of
States, counties, districts, political subdivisions, or
municipalities which are of the kinds made eligible for
purchase under the provisions of Regulation E of the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System may be purchased.
"(4) No Federal Reserve bank shall engage in the pur
chase or sale of cable transfers for its own account except
in accordance with the directions of the Committee."

6/19/52 -5
The executive committee also recommended that:
"A. Each Federal Reserve Bank be authorized to purchase
prime eligible bankers' acceptances in the open market from
banks and financially responsible experienced dealers and to
hold such acceptances in its own portfolio.
"B. The minimum buying rate on such prime eligible bankers'
acceptances shall be fixed by the Federal Open Market Committee
at this time at 1-3/4 per cent, subject to change from time to
time by the Committee in order to carry out its policies.
"C. The effective rates at which a Federal Reserve Bank
may purchase bankers' acceptances shall be not less than the
minimum buying rate and shall be specified from time to time
by the manager of the System Open Market Account in the light of
market conditions and developments and in accordance with any
directives or limitations prescribed by the full Committee or the
executive committee for the purpose of carrying out the current
policies of the Federal Open Market Committee. Any change in
the effective buying rates on bankers' acceptances shall be prompt
ly reported by the Manager of the Account to the Federal Open
Market Committee."
At Chairman Martin's request, Mr. Vest reviewed the reasons for
the proposed amendment to the regulation and for the other recommendations
made by the executive committee concerning purchases of prime eligible
bankers' acceptances and setting of rates on such acceptances.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the recommendations
of the executive committee as set forth
above were approved.
Mr. Craft reported on the ad hoc committee study of the scope
and adequacy of the Government securities market, stating that satisfactory
progress was being made and that during the discussions with securities
dealers that had been taking place since June 9 there had been a fairly
consistent pattern of comments developed on the basis of the detailed out-

6/19/52 -6
line which had been prepared by the subcommittee for the express purpose of
securing comments from dealers in Government securities. Mr. Craft added
that the subcommittee was considering the possibility of preparing an appro
priate type of outline to be sent to some of the larger investor groups
such as insurance companies, savings banks, and State funds, with the
thought that their comments could be obtained largely by mail rather than
by asking that individuals come to Washington for discussions.
Mr. Vardaman raised the question whether copies of statements
made by securities dealers during discussions with the subcommittee might
be made available to all Committee members from week to week, and Chairman
Martin commented that it was contemplated that a report would be submitted
to all members of the Committee as promptly as possible, that it did not
seem feasible to prepare interim reports, and that he expected the sub
committee would not be in a position to submit a written report until some
time in September which would mean about 90 days from the time the study
commenced.
At this point members of the staff of the Board's Division of
Research and Statistics and Division of International Finance entered the
room and there was presented a review of the economic situation and credit
outlook, illustrated by chart slides.
In concluding this review, Mr. Thomas pointed out the implications
for Federal Reserve policy indicated by recent and prospective economic

6/19/52 -7
developments. He indicated that there are favorable prospects for contin
uation of an economic situation of approximate balance at a high level of
activity but the maintenance of such a balance may require even greater
reliance on general monetary restraints, particularly in view of the relaxation
of selective and voluntary measures. Prospects for the second half of 1952
are for substantial cash borrowing by the Treasury while private credit
demands may be only slightly less than last year even with relatively stable
prices. Although savings and the accumulation of liquid funds may continue
large, it will be necessary for the Treasury to adopt vigorous measures to
attract available funds into Government securities and for the Federal Re
serve to restrict the availability of bank reserves, if undue expansion of
bank credit is to be avoided. The intermediate financing in process and
subsequent offerings of tax anticipation bills, together with moderately
favorable results from the new savings bonds, may be adequate to meet the
Treasury's needs. Increased reserve needs might be adequately supplied
through member bank borrowing and repurchase agreements with dealers, with
a minimum of direct purchases of securities by the System. This would mean
the continuation of tight money markets. If credit demands tend to become
excessive, an increase in the discount rate might be appropriate.
Following the economic review, Chairman Martin reported briefly on
preliminary information he had received concerning the response to the cash
offering of 2-3/8 per cent Treasury bonds of 1958, on which the books were

6/19/52 -8
opened for subscription on Monday, June 16. He stated that it appeared that
the offering had been oversubscribed more than three times, that subscriptions
from nonbank investors apparently exceeded the amount of the offering of
$3,500, 000,000, and that the total allotment would have to be expanded in order
to provide any minimum allotment to commercial banks.
There followed a general discussion of the Treasury financing, during
which Mr. Evans called the Committee's attention to the fact that since the
war the Federal Open Market Committee has had several objectives in mind:
1. To refinance the public debt so that a larger proportion
would be in long-term securities in the hands of nonbank
investors.
2. To prevent further accumulation of Government securities
by banks.
3. To reduce bank loans in order to retard inflation.
Mr. Evans pointed out that these objectives have not been attained.
Up to the present time the refinancing of the debt with long-term
securities has not been effectively attempted and the average maturity of the
public debt has shortened. Banks have increased their loan portfolios to an
all-time high. Commercial banks are once more interested in purchasing
Government securities and they are available to them.
Mr. Evans suggested that the Committee give careful thought to its
statutory responsibilities and conduct its open market operations in such a

6/19/52 -9
way as to prevent the further deterioration of the purchasing power of the
dollar. The immediate policy question to be raised is how much bank credit
expansion--and, specifically, how much Reserve Bank credit expansion--can we
really afford to tolerate this year?
Turning to open market operations, Chairman Martin raised the
question whether there should be any change in the Committee's existing policy
of neutrality, under which market forces of supply and demand are permitted
to have their effect with a minimum of System intervention except to the
extent necessary to promote orderly market conditions.
Mr. Sproul then commented briefly as follows:
The reception accorded the cash offering of new 2-3/8 per cent
five-year Treasury bonds reflects fever rather than health in the
patient. There appear to be two primary dangers in the current
situation. The first of these is the confirmation of opinion held
by some at the Treasury that there is no such thing as market deter
mination of prices and yields on Government securities and that the
Treasury and the Federal Reserve System can and should make the
market. In that view, Treasury borrowing becomes a simple, crude
process of deposit creation by the banking system closely akin to
printing money. The second danger is the risk that the market will
assume as it has, and be confirmed in its assumption that the Treasury
and the Federal Reserve System are reverting to the wartime practice
of giving reserves to commercial banks in amounts necessary to make
each Treasury financing a complete success and to assure an advance
in the price of each new issue subsequent to its offering, if not
facilitating repeated offerings at rising prices. The large sub
scription response to the new 2-3/8 per cent bonds of 1958 means
little regarding the true needs and the true resources of the sub
scribers. Commercial banks have a definite interest in the new
bonds but lack the reserves (apart from their creation by the
Federal Reserve System) to fill their needs. For the most part,
the response from nonbank investors represents "free riding" under
taken largely in the hope of selling the issue profitably at an early
date without risk of price depreciation. The current economic and

6/19/52 -10
market situation suggests the wisdom of keeping a close check rein
on credit without committing the System to a policy which would
suggest that it was concerned either with the development of in
flation or deflation at this time. In terms of open market operations
that would mean allowing the market to adjust itself with a minimum
of positive assistance from the System open market account while,
at the same time, encouraging commercial banks to meet reserve needs
through rediscounting rather than extending direct aid to them through
open market transactions. A collateral result would be to eliminate
some of the profit from "free riding" operations by speculative
subscribers to the 2-3/8 per cent bonds. It appears that many
investors must relearn the meaning of a free market. It would seem
wisest to reaffirm the current policy of neutrality and to continue
efforts to encourage the banks to seek reserves through the discount
window.
Chairman Martin suggested that in the absence of objection the Com
mittee reaffirm its existing policy, and none of the members of the Committee
indicated disagreement with this suggestion.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following direction to the execu
tive committee was approved unanimously with the
understanding (1) that the limitation contained
in the direction would include commitments for
the System open market account; and (2) that if
the authority contained in Section 14(b) of the
Federal Reserve Act to purchase securities
directly from the Treasury were not extended
beyond June 30, 1952, the authority given in the
second paragraph of the direction would terminate
on that date:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise directed
by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for such trans
actions for the System open market account, either in the open
market or directly with the Treasury (including purchases, sales,
exchanges, replacement of maturing securities, and letting matu
rities run off without replacement), as may be necessary, in the
light of current and prospective economic conditions and the general
credit situation of the country, with a view to exercising restraint
upon inflationary developments, to maintaining orderly conditions in

6/19/52 -11
the Government security market, to relating the supply of funds in the
market to the needs of commerce and business, and to the practical
administration of the account; provided that the aggregate amount of
securities held in the account at the close of this date other than
special short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased from time
to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury shall not be
increased or decreased by more than $2,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for the
purchase for the System open market account direct from the Treasury
of such amounts of special short-term certificates of indebtedness
as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary accommodation
of the Treasury; provided that the total amount of such certificates
held in the account at any one time shall not exceed $2,000,000,000.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee tentatively
should be scheduled to be held some time during the week commencing September
22, 1952.
Mr. Sproul stated that in view of the fact that John H. Williams,
Economic Adviser to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and presently an
associate economist of the Committee, would retire from active service effec
tive June 30, 1952, continuing only as a consultant at the New York Bank, he
(Mr. Sproul) would recommend that Harold V. Roelse, Vice President of the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of New York, be elected an associate economist of the Federal
Open Market Committee effective July 1, 1952 to succeed Mr. Williams.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded and by unanimous vote, Mr. Roelse
was elected an associate economist, to serve
until the selection of his successor at the
first meeting of the Committee after February

6/19/52 -12
28, 1953, with the understanding that in the
event of the discontinuance of his official
connection with the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York he would cease to have any official connec
tion with the Federal Open Market Committee.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.