A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washing
ton on Saturday, March 1, 1952, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Earhart
Mr. Evans
Mr. Leach
Mr. Mills
Mr. Powell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. C. S. Young
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Thurston, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Riefler, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
Mr. Youngdahl, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Carpenter reported that advices of the election for a period
of one year commencing March 1, 1952, of members and alternate members of the
Federal Open Market Committee representing the Federal Reserve Banks had been
received, that each newly elected member and alternate member had executed
the required oath of office, and that it was the opinion of the Committee's
Counsel, on the basis of advices received, that the following members and
alternate members were legally qualified to serve:
Allan Sproul, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, with William F. Treiber, First Vice Presi
dent of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as
alternate member;

3/1/52 -2
Hugh Leach, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond, with J. A. Erickson, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, as alternate member
C. S. Young, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, with Ray M. Gidney, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate member;
Malcolm Bryan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta, with Delos C. Johns, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, as alternate member;
C. E. Earhart, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco, with J. N. Peyton, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, as alternate
member.
Chairman Martin referred to section 2 of article II of the by-laws
of the Federal Open Market Committee, as amended August 5, 1949, which pro
vides that the Secretary of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System shall be the Secretary of the Committee, stating that in order to
divide the work of members of the staff at the Board of Governors more
effectively, he would recommend that the by-laws of the Committee be amended
to provide that at its first meeting on or after March 1 of each year the
Committee shall elect a Secretary and an Assistant Secretary to serve until
the first meeting on or after March 1 of the next year. He went on to say
that if this change were made he would suggest that Mr. Riefler, presently
Assistant to the Chairman of the Board of Governors, be elected Secretary
and that Mr. Thurston, presently Assistant to the Board of Governors, be
elected Assistant Secretary, to serve until the first meeting on or after
March 1, 1953.

3/1/52 -3
At the Chairman's request, Mr. Carpenter read drafts of changes
that might be made in sections 2 and 6 of article II and section 2 of article
III of the by-laws in order to carry out Chairman Martin's suggestion. The
revised sections as read by Mr. Carpenter are as follows:
ARTICLE II. OFFICERS
Section 2. Secretary and Assistant Secretary. At its first
meeting on or after March 1 of each year the Committee shall
elect a Secretary and an Assistant Secretary to serve until the
first meeting on or after March 1 of the next year. It shall
be the duty of the Secretary to keep minutes of all meetings of
the Committee and a complete record of the action taken by the
Committee upon all questions of policy relating to open market
operations and he shall record the votes taken in connection
with the determination of open market policies and the under
lying reasons assigned therefor. He shall have custody of
such minutes and records and shall perform such other duties as
the Committee may require. In the absence of the Secretary of
the Committee, the Assistant Secretary shall act as Secretary
pro tem.
Section 6. Filling Vacancies. At any meeting the Committee
may fill any vacancy in the office of Chairman, Vice Chairman,
Secretary, Assistant Secretary, Economist, Associate Economist,
General Counsel, or Assistant General Counsel.

3/1/52 -4-
ARTICLE III. EXECUTIVE COMMMITTEE
Section 2. Secretary. The Secretary of the Federal Open
Market Committee shall act as the Secretary of the Executive
Committee and it shall be his duty to keep minutes of all meet
ings of the Executive Committee, furnish copies thereof to the
members of the Executive Committee, and perform such other
duties as may be required. In the absence of the Secretary,
the Assistant Secretary of the Federal Open Market Committee
shall act as Secretary pro tem.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, amendments to the by-laws
of the Federal Open Market Committee as set
forth above were adopted, effective immediately.
Thereupon, upon motions duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous votes, the follow
ing officers of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee were elected to serve until the election
of their successors at the first meeting of the
Committee after February 28, 1953, with the un
derstanding that in the event of the discontinuance
of their official connection with the Board of
Governors or a Federal Reserve Bank, as the case
might be, they would cease to have any official
connection with the Federal Open Market Committees
Wm. McC. Martin, Jr. Chairman
Allan Sproul Vice Chairman
Winfield W. Riefler Secretary
Elliott Thurston Assistant Secretary
George B. Vest General Counsel
Woodlief Thomas Economist
George W. Mitchell, Earle L. Rauber, Associate Economists
Oliver P. Wheeler, Charles W.
Williams, John H. Williams, and
Ralph A. Young

3/1/52
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York was selected to execute trans
actions for the System open market account
until the adjournment of the first meeting
of the Committee after February 28, 1953.
Mr. Sproul stated that the Board of Directors of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York had selected Mr. Rouse as Manager of the System
Open Market Account, subject to the selection of the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York by the Federal Open Market Committee as the Bank to execute
transactions for the System account and his approval by the Federal Open
Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the selection of Mr. Rouse
as Manager of the System Open Market Account
was approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the following were selected
to serve with the Chairman of the Federal Open
Market Committee (who under the provisions of
the by-laws is also Chairman of the executive
committee) as members and alternate members of
the executive committee until the selection of
their successors at the first meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee after February 28,
1953:
Members Alternate Members
James K. Vardaman, Jr. Abbot L. Mills, Jr.
Oliver S. Powell J. L. Robertson
R. M. Evans
M. S. Szymczak
(To serve in the order
named as alternates for
Messrs. Martin, Vardaman,
and Powell)

3/1/52 -6
Members AlternatMee mber
Allan Sproul C. S. Young
Hugh Leach Malcolm Bryan
C. E. Earhart
(To serve in the order
named as alternates for
Messrs. Sproul and Leach)
Reference was made to the resolution adopted by the Federal
Open Market Committee on November 20, 1936, authorizing each Federal Re
serve Bank to purchase and sell at home and abroad cable transfers and
bills of exchange and bankers' acceptances payable in foreign currencies
to the extent that such purchases and sales may be deemed to be necessary
or feasible in connection with the establishment, maintenance, operation,
increase, reduction, or discontinuance of accounts of Federal Reserve Banks
in foreign countries. Mr. Sproul stated that, as had been the case for the
past several years accounts were now maintained with the Bank of Canada
($17,384), the Bank of England ($10,4 68), and the Bank of France ($42.79),
and that while its use would be only infrequent if at all he would recom
mend that the authority be continued in its present form.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, it was agreed that no
action should be taken at this time to amend
or terminate the resolution of November 20,
1936.
There was a discussion of the action of the Committee on November
30, 1937, as renewed from time to time since then, under which it was
agreed that inasmuch as securities acquired by the Federal Reserve Bank.
in settlement of claims against closed banks would be in such small amounts
as to be unimportant from the standpoint of credit control, the Federal

3/1/52 -7
Open Market Committee would interpose no objection to a Federal Reserve
Bank holding such securities or to their sale whenever such sale was deemed
advisable by the holding bank. In the discussion, it was stated that the
authority had not been used for some years and that it did not seem likely
that need for it would arise in the near future. It was suggested, therefore,
that the authority be terminated with the understanding that if circumstances
arose which made it appear that it would be useful the Committee would con
sider the matter at that time,
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, it was agreed that the
authority granted at the meeting of November
30, 1937, should be terminated, effective im
mediately.
Mr. Sproul referred to the amended authority granted to the
Federal Reserve Banks by the Federal Open Market Committee on October 4,
1951, with respect to repurchase agreements covering short-term Treas
ury obligations with nonbank dealers in United States Government securi
ties qualified to transact business with the System open market account.
In response to a question from Chairman Martin, Mr. Rouse stated that the
authority was useful as a supplementary market instrument and that he
would recommend it be renewed on the same basis as the existing authority.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, it was agreed that no action
should be taken at this time to amend the authority
granted at the meeting on October 4, 1951.
In a discussion of the procedure for the allocation of securi
ties in the System open market account as approved at the meeting of the

3/1/52 -8
Committee on March 8, 1951, it was stated that the existing procedure was
working satisfactorily, that there had been no suggestions for change, and
that in the absence of objections it should be continued without amendment
at this time.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, it was
agreed that no change should be made at
this time in the method of allocating
securities as approved at the meeting of
the Federal Open Market Committee on
March 8, 1951.
Chairman Martin then referred to the published terms on which
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York transacts business with qualified
dealers in United States Goverment securities for the System open market
account, stating that he had no suggestions for a change in the terms at this
time.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, it was agreed that no
change in the statement of terms should be
made at this time.
In a discussion of who should receive copies of the weekly
report of open market operations prepared by the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, Mr. Rouse suggested that in addition to changes made
necessary by changes in the official status of individuals associated
with the Committee, the list be changed to provide that a copy also be
sent to Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Overby who would be working
with the Committee on debt management and monetary and credit matters.

3/1/52
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimnus vote, the distribution of the
weekly report of open market operations prepared
by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was ap
proved as follows:
1. The members of the Board of Governors.
2. The Presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve
Banks.
3. The Secretary, the Economist, and the
Associate Economists of the Federal
Open Market Committee.
4. The Secretary of the Treasury.
5. The Under Secretary of the Treasury.
6. The Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
working on debt management problems.
7. The Fiscal Assistant Secretary of the
Treasury.
8. The Chief of the Division of Bank Opera
tions of the Board of Governors.
9. The officer in charge of research at each
of the Federal Reserve Banks which is not
represented by its President on the Federal
Open Market Committee.
10. Mr. Treiber, alternate member of the Federal
Open Market Committee; the Assistant Vice
President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York working under the Manager of the
System Account; the Manager of the Securities
Department of the New York Bank; the Vice
President in Charge, and the Manager of the
Research Department of the New York Bank;
and the confidential files of the New York
Bank as agent for the Federal Open Market
Committee.
Mr. Carpenter referred to the action taken at the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 1-2, 1951, authorizing
the Chairman of the Committee to appoint a Federal Reserve Bank as
agent to operate the System account temporarily in case the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York was unable to function. He stated that the

3/1/52 -10
authorization was given for possible use in the event of a bombing
disaster and that it would appear desirable to continue it.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, it was agreed that there
should be no change in the authorization given
to the Chairman by the action taken at the
meeting of the Committee on March 1-2, 1951.
Chairman Martin referred to the action at the meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee yesterday, in which it was agreed that the
Secretary of the Treasury should be advised that the Federal Open Market
Committee, after considering the memorandum on Government Financing in
1952, agreed that the use of a marketable security would be preferable to
a nonmarketable issue in long-term Treasury financing operations later
this year. At that meeting it was also agreed unanimously that (1) the
question of recommendations to be made to the Treasury concerning the ob
taining of new money later this spring and other matters relating to Treas
ury financing be left to the executive committee and (2) that no change
should be made in the Committee's current policy of neutrality in the
market under which market forces of supply and demand are permitted
to have their effect with a minimum of System intervention except to
the extent necessary to promote orderly market conditions.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, these actions of the Com
mittee were reaffirmed and approved.
With respect to the general direction to be issued to the ex
ecutive committee, Mr. Rouse stated that, in view of the prospect that

3/1/52 -11
the Treasury might wish to sell short-term securities direct to the Fed
eral Reserve Banks in an amount approximating $1.25 billion in order to
smooth the effect of tax collections on the reserve position of banks over
the March tax payment period, he would recommend that the limitation con
tained in the second paragraph of the direction relating to purchases
direct from the Treasury of special short-term securities for the tempo
rary accommodation of the Treasury be increased from the present figure
of $1 billion to $2 billion.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following direction to the
executive committee was approved unani
mously with the understanding that the
limitation contained in the direction
would include commitments for the System
open market account:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise di
rected by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for such
transactions for the System open market account, either in the
open market or directly with the Treasury (including purchases,
sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing securities, and letting
maturities run off without replacement), as may be necessary, in
the light of current and prospective economic conditions and the
general credit situation of the country, with a view to exer
cising restraint upon inflationary developments, to maintaining
orderly conditions in the Government security market, to relating
the supply of funds in the market to the needs of commerce and
business, and to the practical administration of the account;
provided that the aggregate amount of securities held in the
account at the close of this date other than special short-term
certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury shall not be increased
or decreased by more than $2,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for the purchase for the System open market account direct
from the Treasury of such amounts of special short-term certifi
cates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time for

3/1/52 -12
the temporary accomodation of the Treasury; provided that the
total amount of such certificates held in the account at any one
time shall not exceed $2,000,000,000.
In a discussion of a date for the next meeting of the Committee,
it was tentatively agreed that it should be held during the week of June
16, 1952, at which time it was expected that there would also be a meeting
of the Presidents' Conference and of the Board of Trustees of the Retire
ment System of the Federal Reserve Banks.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.