A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Thursday, September 25, 1952, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Earhart
Mr. Evans
Mr. Hugh Leach
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. C. S. Young
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Mitchell, Rauber, Roelse, Wheeler,
C. W. Williams, and R. A. Young, Associate
Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market
Account
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board
of Governors
Mr. Youngdahl, Assistant Director, Division
of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Mr. R. F. Leach, Acting Chief, Government
Finance Section, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Willis, Assistant Secretary, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Erickson, Gidney, Johns, and Powell,
alternate members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. A. H. Williams, Leedy, and Gilbert, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively
Mr. Peterson, Director of Research, Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis

9/25/52 -2
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
June 19, 1952, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the executive
committee of the Federal Open Market Committee
as set forth in the minutes of the meetings of
the executive committee held on June 6, June 19,
July 22, and August 29, 1952, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the action of the members of
the Committee on July 22, 1952, revising the
conditions under which the Federal Reserve
Banks are authorized to enter into repurchase
agreements with non-bank dealers in United
States Government securities, was approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Before this meeting there had been sent to all members of the
Committee a report of open market operations prepared at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York covering the period June 19 to September 19, 1952, inclu
sive. At this meeting, Mr. Rouse presented and commented briefly on a
supplementary report covering commitments executed on September 22, 23,
and 24, 1952. Copies of both reports have been placed in the files of the
Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account for the period June 19 to Sep
tember 24, 1952, inclusive, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
A review of the economic situation and credit outlook, including
a projection of gross national product and income through 1953, was then

9/25/52 -3
presented by members of the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System. A memorandum prepared in the Board's Division of Research
and Statistics unde. date of September 23, 1952 on the projection of gross
national product and income was distributed before the meeting, and a copy
of the script used in the visual presentation has been sent to each member
of the Committee.
Following the review of the economic situation, Chairman Martin
reported on developments since the meeting of the Committee on June 19,
stating that the general policy of neutrality which resulted in placing
some restraint on credit expansion had been interpreted by the executive
committee as meaning that only such reserves should be supplied to the mar
ket as were consonant with normal growth in the economy and which would
maintain the money flow so that the defense effort and the business commun
ity were not unduly hampered. In carrying out this policy, the Chairman
said, the executive committee had done everything that it could to assist
the Treasury in its financing, consistent with a minimum growth in bank
credit. In this connection, he stated that he had asked that members of
the Committee be furnished with a copy of a paper read by Mr. Riefler at
the annual meeting of the Western Economic Association on September 4,
1952 on "Debt Management, Fiscal Policy, and Monetary Controls", which
discussed in some detail the effects of flexible Reserve Bank operations
during July and August this year, with the thought that the members of the
Committee might wish to comment regarding the points covered in Mr.

9/25/52 -4
Riefler's paper at or before the next meeting. Chairman Martin also sug
gested that during the next few months the members of the Committee give
special thought to its responsibility in connection with underwriting
Treasury financing, adding that sooner or later the Committee would have to
reach a decision as to whether it should give up the underwriting of Treas
ury offerings or whether it should proceed in more or less the manner that
has been followed in the past.
With specific reference to the October 1 financing, for which the
Treasury had offered a 2-1/8 per cent 14-month note in exchange for $10,861
million maturing 1-7/8 per cent certificates of indebtedness, the Chairman
noted that, except for purchases of the maturing issue during the four-day
period the books were open, the System's open market operations had supplied
only a negligible additional amount of reserves to the market since the end
of June. He felt that the Committee's operations during this three-month
period had been reasonably successful in keeping an even flow of money
through the economy without having had funds "swishing over the banks" or
contracting unduly. The fact that member banks had continued to borrow in
the neighborhood of $1 billion from the Reserve Banks during most of this
period suggested that consideration might be given to the possibility of an
increase in the discount rate if further restraint on credit expansion be
came necessary. The Chairman suggested, however, that at this time the
problem was whether the Committee's present policy of neutrality, which in
practice meant a situation having modest restraint upon credit expansion,

9/25/52 .5
should be reaffirmed, modified in the direction of greater restraint, or
changed to bring about easier credit conditions during coming months.
Mr. Earhart stated that he felt the existing policy should be
reaffirmed but that he had been somewhat disturbed by the amount of Gov
ernment securities purchased at a premium by the System open market
account in connection with the October 1 Treasury financing, whereas in
the August 15 financing, the Federal Reserve was not willing to pay a
premium on the maturing issue and acquired only a small volume.
In response to Mr. Earhart's comment, Chairman Martin made a
statement substantially as follows:
I think a discussion of that point would be very useful.
It touches directly on the underwriting problem we have in front
of us to which I have just referred. The executive committee at
the time of the August refinancing decided not to do anything
with respect to purchases of "rights" at a premium. In discuss
ing the October 1 financing at our meeting on September 15, the
executive committee decided to make purchases of "rights" at a
premium of 3/64. The question Mr. Earhart raises is first whether
we put in more money in connection with the October financing
than our projection of the demand for credit this fall would call
for, and second, if we did whether we can secure the position in
connection with the approaching sale of Treasury tax anticipation
bills, which will increase the demand for reserves. I think this
operation is extremely difficult, particularly while we are mov
ing from a pegged market to a free one. During this period there
is bound to be a certain amount of misunderstanding in the market
and misinterpretation of what our policy is. At the last meet
ing of the executive committee we had quite a debate as to whether
we would buy the "rights" at a premium of 1/32 or 1/64 or 2/32
or something else. The 3/64 represented a compromise. The area
of difference in the amount of attrition we took on ourselves
is somewhere between 97 per cent of the total maturing issue and
91-1/2 per cent. In view of all the circumstances, that does
not seem to me to be a great amount. I was sorry we had to buy at
all but it still does not seem too much. If we had bought the

9/25/52 -6
"rights" at a premium of 1/64 we might have bought less. I think
that by and large we ought to err, if we are to err, on the side
of being sympathetic with the Treasury's problem since we have,
perhaps wrongly, assumed some underwriting responsibility in the
past year or so for their issues. Whether we should proceed more
cautiously and minimize Federal Reserve takings of the maturing
issue is a very real problem. I would think you could make a
pretty good argument on either side as to the handling of the
Treasury's October 1 offering, but my feeling is that the way
we did it was on the right side. The question whether our pur
chases, if any, should be at par and 1/32 or 1/64 or 3/64 is
something that can only be determined over a period of time.
In the executive committee meetings we have been discussing
very frankly the area of necessary discretion that lies between
decisions in policy matters and decisions on operations. I think
we are feeling our way between the problems of debt management and
of monetary policy from day to day. I would also like to have Mr.
Sproul give his views on this.
Mr. Sproul then made a statement substantially as follows:
As to how we should proceed, I think it was and is a question
of judgment based on experience during this period of transition
from a pegged market to a free market. The results of the August
financing and of the October 1 financing are perhaps significant:
In August we bought "rights" only at par and the attrition on the
Treasury was 17-1/2 per cent and on us 7-1/2 per cent. In the
October 1 financing when we bought "rights" at par and 3/64, the
attrition on the Treasury was 8 per cent and on us 17-1/2 per
cent. In other words, at a time of restraint on credit avail
ability and rising interest rates or anticipation of rising
interest rates, we must expect that attrition on these Treasury
issues is going to be substantial. We should no longer think in
terms of 5 or 10 per cent attrition over-all.
As to the general question of whether we or the Treasury
ought to take the attrition, I should think we should want, in
a period of credit restriction, to let the Treasury take the
attrition since we would wish to avoid supplying reserve funds.
The Treasury would be able to offset the attrition with increased
issues of weekly Treasury bills or tax anticipation bills. It
should not be unduly embarrassed.

9/25/52
In this last operation, we put more credit into the market
than any of us would have preferred at that particular time. How
ever, over the next few weeks we have the natural factors of
decreasing float, building up of Treasury balances, and seasonal
increases in required reserves working in our favor to reduce the
amount of reserves available in the market. If we hold back now
so that the banks are again brought into the position of substan
tial borrowing, I think we can retrieve what we lost in the
October 1 financing.
Several other members of the Committee commented on reactions in
their areas to the results of the October 1 financing and there followed a
brief discussion of factors which might affect the demand for Government
securities during the first part of 1953.
During this discussion, Mr. Evans commented that while he did
not think anyone could say how great the credit needs would be during the
next month or two, he felt that the policy should be one of constant re
straint, so that the amount of money put into the market would be held to
a minimum.
None of the members of the Committee indicated that there should
be any change in the current general policy of neutrality, which means re
straint on undue credit expansion, and at the conclusion of the discussion
there was unanimous agreement with Chairman Martin's suggestion that the
present policy be reaffirmed.
Chairman Martin then expressed the view that the policies of the
Federal Open Market Committee would be having their maximum effect if
member banks were in a position where they were borrowing from the Fed
eral Reserve Banks somewhere in the neighborhood of $1 billion. He felt

9/25/52 -8
that if borrowings increased to $1-1/2 or $2 billion or more, the restric
tive effects might decrease. The point, he said, was that as the volume
of borrowings increased bankers became more accustomed to being in debt
to the Federal Reserve. He also felt that too heavy a load of borrowing
might have undesirable repercussions in the mobility of the money markets.
Some of the members of the Committee felt that banks have a gen
eral reluctance to borrow and that while, to some degree, they might become
reconciled to discounting, there would be accumulative restraining effects if
the situation developed to the point where further larger borrowings at the
Federal Reserve Banks were necessary.
In reponse to a question from Chairman Martin as to the use of
repurchase agreements, Mr. Rouse stated that the present authority contin
ued to be useful but that it was not a major tool and had not been used to
any great extent during the past few months. With respect to the Chair
man's comment that member bank borrowing ranging upwards from $1 billion
might become progressively less effective, Mr. Rouse agreed in general
that when borrowing got much over $1 billion it meant that the money market
was tight, that dealers were less likely to make a market under such condi
tions, and that some of the flexibility was thus taken out of the market.
He felt it was not possible to give a categorical reply to the question
whether the situation would become less restrictive if borrowing rose above
that figure although he expressed doubt that it would.

9/25/52
In a discussion of Treasury needs for additional funds during
coming months, Mr. Thomas stated that it appeared that somewhere between
$4 and $5 billion would be needed between now and the end of the year and
that this probably would be met by the issue of tax anticipation bills
announced by the Treasury in the amount of $2-1/2 billion this week and by
a further additional issue of tax anticipation bills within the next month
or two for about the same amount. While there would be a small refunding
totaling approximately $1 billion around December 1, 1952, Mr. Thomas felt
that no conclusion could be reached at this time as to the best means of
handling that refunding.
Reference was then made to a memorandum dated September 23, 1952,
from Mr. Leonard, Director of the Division of Bank Operations of the Board
of Governors, concerning open market participation in special Treasury
certificates of indebtedness. The memorandum, copies of which had been
sent to each member of the Committee before this meeting, pointed out that
at present such Treasury certificates of indebtedness (which are carried
only on a few occasions during the year and only for a few days at a time)
are carried in the open market account with resulting participation by all
Federal Reserve Banks. It also stated that the procedure whereby these
certificates are allocated to the several Federal Reserve Banks involves
considerable bookkeeping and considerable exchange of telegrams between the
manager of the open market account and the individual Reserve Banks and
also results in complications when certificates are carried over Saturdays

9/25/52 -10
and holidays, when some Reserve Banks are open and others are closed and
the Treasury wishes to make payments on the certificates. The memorandum
suggested that consideration be given to having the special certificates
carried by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for its own account instead
of being held in the open market account, noting that the System's earnings
on such certificates are relatively small ($4,000 in 1951 and $49,000 dur
ing 1952 up to September 22) and that the proposed procedure should not
affect significantly the earnings position of any Reserve Bank.
Chairman Martin stated that he felt the procedure suggested in
the memorandum would be desirable and, in response to the Chairman's request,
Mr. Sproul reviewed the reasons for the proposed change in procedure. Sev
eral of the members of the Committee who also were Reserve Bank Presidents
stated they would favor having the New York Bank handle the special Treas
ury certificates.
Mr. Rouse stated that adoption of the proposed change would prob
ably make unnecessary the authorization approved at the meeting of the full
Committee on June 19 concerning purchases of special certificates over week
ends when some Federal Reserve Banks are closed but others are open. He
observed that that authorization had been approved to make it possible for
the Treasury to pay down the amount of the special certificates on any day
when only a portion of the Reserve Banks or branches were open, but that
the Treasury had indicated to him that the possible saving in interest was
not sufficient to justify the use of the procedure on a recent occasion

9/25/52 -11
when most of the Federal Reserve offices were not open.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the Com
mittee authorized the adoption of a proce
dure whereby the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York would purchase direct from the
Treasury, for its own account, such amounts
of special short-term certificates of in
debtedness as may be necessary from time to
time for the temporary accommodation of the
Treasury within the limit authorized by the
executive committee. In taking this action
it was understood that (1) in cases where it
seemed desirable, the New York Bank was au
thorized to issue participations to one or
more Federal Reserve Banks, and (2) the exe
cutive committee was authorized to issue
such detailed instructions to the New York
Bank as were needed to carry out the action
of the full Committee.
Mr. Rouse referred to the discussion at the meeting of the execu
tive committee on April 4, 1952 at which time the executive committee agreed
to recommend to the full Committee that the remaining $713 million of 2-3/4
per cent non-marketable bonds of 1975-80 held in the System account be con
verted into 5-year 1-1/2 per cent marketable Treasury notes to be dated
October 1, 1952.
It was agreed unanimously that
the remainder of the non-marketable
bonds of 1975-80 should be exchanged
for 5-year 1-1/2 per cent marketable
Treasury notes to be dated October 1,
1952, in accordance with the recommen
dation of the executive committee at
its meeting on April 4, 1952.
During a discussion of the general direction to be issued by the
full Committee to the executive committee, Chairman Martin mentioned that

9/25/52 .12
some minor changes in wording would be necessary as a result of the Commit
tee's approval earlier during this meeting of the proposal that special
Treasury certificates of indebtedness be carried by the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York rather than in the System open market account, and he suggested
that the existing direction, revised to include such changes in wording as
Mr. Vest felt were necessary to carry out that decision, be approved. The
Chairman also mentioned that the June 19, 1952 direction included a clause
to the effect that the authority to purchase securities direct from the
Treasury would terminate on June 30, 1952 if the authority contained in
section 14(b) of that Reserve Act were not extended beyond that date, and
that since Congress had extended this authority for an additional two years,
the clause was no longer needed. Mr. Rouse suggested that the existing
limitations in the direction be renewed at this time.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the following direction
to the executive committee was approved
unanimously.
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise directed
by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for such transac
tions for the System open market account, either in the open market
or directly with the Treasury (including purchases, sales, ex
changes, replacement of maturing securities, and letting maturities
run off without replacement), as may be necessary, in the light of
current and prospective economic conditions and the general credit
situation of the country, with a view to exercising restraint upon
inflationary developments, to maintaining orderly conditions in
the Government security market, to relating the supply of funds
in the market to the needs of commerce and business, and to the
practical administration of the account; provided that the aggre
gate amount of securities held in the System account (including
commitments for the purchase or sale of securities for the account)
at the close of this date, other than special short-term certifi
cates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary

9/25/52 -13
accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be increased or decreased
by more than $2,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for the
purchase direct from the Treasury for the account of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York (which Bank shall have discretion, in cases
where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one or more
Federal Reserve Banks) of such amounts of special short-term certi
ficates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time for
the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the
total amount of such certificates held at any one time by the Fed
eral Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate $2,000,000,000.
It was agreed unanimously that the next meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee would be held during the week beginning December 8, 1952.
Thereupon, the meeting adjourned.
Secretary