A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Monday, December 8, 1952, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Earhart
Mr. Evans
Mr. Hugh Leach
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. C. S. Young
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Mitchell, Roelse, Wheeler, C. W.
Williams, and R. A. Young, Associate
Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market
Account
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board
of Governors
Mr. Youngdahl, Assistant Director, Division
of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Mr. Willis, Assistant Secretary, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Erickson, Gidney, Johns, and Powell,
alternate members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. A. H. Williams, Leedy, and Gilbert,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Philadelphia, Kansas City, and Dallas,
respectively.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of
the Federal Open Market Committee held on Sep
tember 25, 1952, were approved.

12/8/52
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the minutes
of the meetings of the executive committee
held on September 15, September 25, October
8, October 22, November 5, and November 25,
1952, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Before this meeting there had been brought to the attention of
each member of the Committee a report of examination of the System open
market account as of October 17, 1952, made in connection with the
regular examination of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and submitted
by the examiner in charge for the Board of Governors. The report took no
exception to the handling of the account and stated that the accounting
procedures, records, system of internal control, and degree of care
exercised by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in connection with the
System open market account were reviewed and continued to be regarded as
satisfactory.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the report was received and
ordered filed.
A report of open market operations prepared at the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York covering the period September 25 to December 3,
1952, inclusive, had been sent to all members of the Committee before this
meeting and at this time there was presented a supplementary report covering
commitments executed on December 4 and 5, 1952. Mr. Rouse commented briefly
on both reports, copies of which have been placed in the files of the

12/8/52 -3
Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System account for the period September 25 to
December 7, 1952, inclusive, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
At this point, members of the staff of the Board of Governors
entered the room to assist Messrs. Thomas and Ralph Young in presenting
a review of the economic situation and credit outlook. The review pointed
out that high level economic stability had continued during the autumn
with activity and employment advancing to higher levels than last spring
and with prices not advancing. There was some evidence that the peak of
the defense program in terms of requirements for materials and manpower is
close at hand, and that the rise in public expenditures in the next six
months would be much less than expected earlier. On the other hand, if
problems in Korea or elsewhere should become more serious than heretofore,
military expenditures might resume a rapid rise. In either case, continua
tion of acute international uncertainties may have the result of encourag
ing many businesses to hold larger inventories and more standby capacity
than otherwise. Government policies on stock piling and production
capacity goals will also continue to reflect the uncertainties of the
foreign situation. Because of these uncertainties and for other reasons,
there will probably be heavy pressure on the Federal Government to do
everything possible to avoid any marked decline in economic activity.
With respect to the credit situation, the review stated that total

12/8/52
-4
credit demand had been at record peacetime levels this year reflecting
particularly Federal deficit financing during the last half of the year and
that the recent accelerated bank credit expansion was a matter of concern in
view of the economy's present intensive use of its physical resources and the
large volume of credit already outstanding. While monetary expansion, partly
because of a greatly enlarged savings supply, had been held to moderate
limits this year, the economic outlook beyond the next few months was by no
means clear. Accordingly, the review stated that credit and monetary policy
would need to be kept alert to realignments in underlying forces that might
affect long-term growth and stability so that it could be adjusted promptly
and effectively to changing condition as they develop. It was felt that
the progress made during the past two years in redeveloping a pattern of
Federal Reserve operations based on traditional procedures, adapted to a
market in which Government securities play a prominent role, provides a
workable basis for future credit and monetary policies geared to the needs
of a dynamic economy.
During the discussion regarding the presentation, Mr. Ralph
Young, in response to a question, stated that, while current information on
inventories of manufacturers and distributors was rather sketchy, avail
able data indicated there had been some further development of inventory
accumulation during the month of November. He added that the increase re
sulted to some extent from the fact that many concerns probably desired to
carry larger inventories at this time as a safeguard against possible

12/8/52 -5
shortages that might develop if the international situation worsened, but
that the inventory accumulation also reflected expanding private demands
for final products.
Chairman Martin then referred to a memorandum prepared in the
offices of the Board of Governors under date of December 8, 1952 on the
outlook for Treasury cash requirements and bank reserves, copies of which
were distributed before this meeting. In response to the Chairman's request,
Mr. Youngdahl commented upon this memorandum, stating that although it
referred to an estimated Treasury cash deficit for the fiscal year ending
June 30, 1953 of about $3.5 billion, there was now some feeling among
informed persons in Washington that the actual cash deficit might be below
this figure. The situation had changed primarily, Mr. Youngdahl said, as a
result of lower-than-anticipated expenditures for security purposes.
In response to the Chairman's request, Mr. Thomas commented that
in recent weeks the demand for credit and particularly for currency had been
greater than amounts projected earlier this fall as representing moderate
seasonal demands. The net result had been that Reserve Bank credit other
than float had risen about $1-1/4 billion in the September-November period
compared with the earlier estimate of $800 million. The difference had
been reflected in an increase of member bank borrowing to over $1-1/2 bil
lion. The task for the next few weeks, Mr. Thomas said, was to take care
of holiday and year-end demands, smoothing out any money market strain.

12/8/52 -6.
He thought that strain probably had reached a peak during the past week, and
that, if the expected increase in Federal Reserve float took place between
now and Christmas, borrowings from the Reserve Banks could be reduced
somewhat. There would be a temporary strain in the market at the year-end,
after which the return flow of currency would make for easier conditions in
the money market, but reduction in the large volume of member bank borrowing
and of repurchase contracts outstanding would absorb a substantial amount
of the reserve funds that would become available. The question then, Mr.
Thomas felt, would be the extent to which the System would wish to maintain
a tight rein on the situation by permitting bills to run off, and perhaps by
selling certificates if there were an opportunity. Additional restraint
could be imposed upon future demands by increasing the discount rate.
Chairman Martin referred to the statement by Mr. Sproul contained
in the minutes of the meeting of the executive committee for November 25, 1952
with respect to the possible desirability of a change in the discount
rate and suggested that there be a further discussion of that question at
this meeting of the full Committee both as related to the immediate situ
ation and the situation that would exist after the turn of the year.
Mr. Hugh Leach stated that the situation at the year-end in 1951
had presented considerable difficulty, that this year borrowings from the
Reserve Banks were much higher than a year ago, and that if the discount
rate were raised between now and the first of the year it would increase
problems in the money market and would make it necessary for the System

12/8/52 .7
to purchase additional securities which was something to be avoided. He
felt the System should wait until January to see what changes in prices
took place, what inventory developments were indicated, and whether the
expected seasonal liquidation of credit occurred before deciding whether
an increase in the discount rate were necessary.
Mr. Powell raised the question whether the quality of credits
of member banks may have deteriorated with declines in prices for products
collateraling such credits. He cited instances of increases in farm
mortgage debt recently for the purpose of securing farm loans that were
undercollateraled because of declines in livestock prices, and of the
concern on the part of some bankers because underfinanced companies were
building up inventories and borrowing on receivables. Mr. Powell felt that
this situation might be considered in a discussion whether the discount rate
should be increased, adding that a small increase in the rate would not
upset the market and might be a warning that the Federal Reserve System
thought collections on loans ought to be watched. He also suggested that
such a warning might be given now rather than waiting until after the first
of the year.
Mr. Evans commented on conditions he had observed in the Middle
West during the past two weeks, stating that on the basis of his observa
tions, Mr. Powell's description of conditions in that area was, if anything,
an understatement of the situation; that some of the bankers he had talked
with stated that a good deal of livestock paper now represented 100 per cent

12/8/52 -8
loans based on present prices. Mr. Evans felt the Committee had been a
little too lax in permitting credit to expand as much as had taken place
during the past six to eight months. He thought it a question, however,
whether the Committee should now tighten credit very much in view of the
conditions prevailing in the Midwest as a result of the drought, declines
in cattle and other farm products prices, and accumulating inventories of
dealers and manufacturers of farm equipment.
Mr. C. S. Young stated that while he agreed with Mr. Powell as to
the need for studying the quality of credits, he felt the redeeming factor
was that member banks were aware of this situation, that they were doing a
remarkable job of weeding out poor loans and of securing additional collateral;
on the whole, he felt the banks were in good condition although the quality
of some loans had deteriorated.
Mr. Leedy stated that the drought was a serious factor in the
Kansas City District and, although conditions had been improved somewhat
by moisture during the past two weeks, the winter wheat crop for next year
would be small. With respect to cattle loans, most such paper being offered
the Kansas City Reserve Bank for discount indicated there was still a
satisfactory margin of collateral.
Mr. Earhart said that activity on the Pacific Coast appeared to
be running a little ahead of the national level at this time reflecting a
continued inflow of population plus the inflow of funds resulting from transfers
of funds of individuals and payments by the Federal Government for aircraft,

12/8/52 -9
the aggregate of which exceeded the outflow of funds from the Twelfth
District. Building was very active, particularly in the southern part
of the district, and while one of the largest banks felt the outlook for
the entire year 1953 was good another bank which had been making large
volumes of real estate loans was beginning to feel that there were real
dangers ahead, particularly in the real estate market. Mr. Earhart said
that he would go along with the view that there should be no change in
the discount rate now but that he felt it was too low, that it should
have been increased before this, and that after the turn of the year
there might be reasons which would make it seem about as untimely to in
crease the rate as the present.
Mr. Gidney commented on the discussion recorded in the minutes of
the November 25 meeting of the executive committee, stating that in his
judgment the reasons for an increase in the discount rate, as summarized
by Mr. Sproul, were much more convincing than the reasons presented for
not increasing the discount rate promptly. The high level of bank loans,
the fact that Federal Reserve credit in use had gone up recently while
the Committee apparently was operating on a policy of "neutrality", and
recent economic developments (other than the modest change in wholesale
prices) pointed clearly to the desirability of an immediate increase in
the discount rate. He added that the present offered a better opportunity
than is likely to occur for some time for making such an increase without
disturbing the market unduly, while after the turn of the year reasons

12/8/52 -10
against making a change quite probably would develop or be advanced, in
cluding those related to interference with Treasury refunding operations.
Chairman Martin stated that he seriously questioned the desirability
of an increase in the discount rate at this time. The period over the year
end would be difficult in any event because of disturbed conditions in the
money market and uncertainties as to the credit outlook; to take action at
present would only add to the upset condition in the market and probably
would achieve little in the way of affecting the differential between the
discount rate and the bill rate. If, following January 1, conditions did
not bring about liquidation of the credit that had been extended this fall,
it would be desirable to give consideration to an increase in the discount
rate at that time.
Mr. Bryan said that while he had no argument to present for a change
in the discount rate at this time, it seemed somewhat absurd for the central
bank to have a discount rate of 1-3/4 per cent at a time when plant and labor
supplies of the country were being utilized virtually at capacity. He felt
that the Committee had been in a self-congratulatory mood over the past year
in taking the view that the country was having stability at a high level.
But unemployment now was negligible, and Mr. Bryan felt this could not per
sist without a rise in prices. He wondered, therefore, whether the Committee's
policy had been sufficiently restrictive.
Mr. Sproul felt that the price level had reflected a relatively
stable economic situation up to now and that the policy of the System, what-

12/8/52 -11
ever its influence, had been consistent with a stable price level and a
high level of economic activity. Unless it was felt that credit restraint
should have been used to bring about an actual decline in prices, he did
not see how the "high level stability" during the period under discussion
could be considered a criticism of the policy pursued. Looking ahead, Mr.
Sproul felt that two points of view, perhaps paradoxical, had been raised:
first, there was the view that the general outlook was for a high level
of income and production over the next three to six months with no immediate
evidence of price inflation although there was some evidence of inventory
accumulation. This view suggested that the Committee should remain on
the alert, but it did not call for action at this time. The other point
of view, Mr. Sproul said, was that there were some elements in the situa
tion which suggested disintegration in the area of bank credit such as loans
which were becoming undercollateraled because of agricultural production
difficulties and prospective or present declines in the agricultural outlook
and prices. This might suggest a relaxation instead of a tightening of
credit policy. To some extent, Mr. Sproul said, the System was a prisoner
of the fact that it was just working back into the use of the discount rate
and flexibility in that rate. It had laid great emphasis on the meaning
of a change in the discount rate, and a move now might be regarded as symbolic
of a change in the general economic situation rather than a technical read
justment. Mr. Sproul doubted whether an increase of one-fourth or one-half
of one per cent--which was all that he assumed anyone would suggest at this

12/8/52 .12
time--would accomplish anything in the next two or three weeks except to
complicate adjustments in the year-end money market.
Mr. A. H. Williams stated that in the Philadelphia district the
most general view was that a change in the discount rate should not be
made until there had been an opportunity to observe developments after
the turn of the year so as to be more certain whether a change was needed.
Mr. Gilbert said he would not be in favor of an increase in the
discount rate at this time, that he would much rather wait until after the
end of the year to observe whether the normal repayment of borrowings
that had developed this fall took place; if the seasonal liquidation in
loans did not take place, he thought consideration then should be given
to an increase in the rate.
Mr. Erickson agreed with this view.
Mr. Bryan reiterated the comment that while he did not advocate
an increase in the discount rate at this time, he thought it an extra
ordinary event in terms of central banking that the rate remained at 1-3/4
per cent at a time when the economy was operating with virtually full em
ployment, and that such a rate was defensible only in terms of the record
of the Open Market Committee over a period of several years.
Chairman Martin commented that it was also important to remember
that the present rate had existed in a conjunction of circumstances evident
in the return to a freer market in Government securities. He went on to say

12/8/52 -13
that, as he had indicated at the meeting of the executive committee on
November 25, the Federal Reserve System was in a constant dilemma with
respect to the effect of its actions on Treasury financing. At some point
it would be necessary to meet this issue head-on; this, he said, should
preferably be done in conjunction with the Secretary of the Treasury. He
felt that the System should not make a move to increase the discount rate
until it was convinced that such an increase was appropriate, but that it
should then act even though at that time the System might be faced with
the immediate question of the effect of the increase on the Treasury's
financing program. The System may have "missed the boat" in not having
raised the discount rate some time ago, the Chairman said, but if that
were true it still did not warrant taking corrective action at this
particular time simply because it might be more difficult to face up to
the problem of appropriate monetary policy when Treasury financing vas
under active consideration early next year. Chairman Martin added that
the System had been going through these periods of anxiety, that it had
made some progress in its monetary policy, that Mr. Bryan had made an
excellent point in suggesting that the Committee not be too ready to
congratulate itself, and that Mr. Gidney had brought out a view which it
was very desirable to discuss. Nevertheless, Chairman Martin said, the
discussion indicated that the Committee should proceed with its present
policy, having in mind that it might become necessary to have another
meeting of the Committee soon after the first of the year.

12/8/52 -14-
There was no indication of disagreement with Chairman Martin's
suggestion for continuation of the existing policy of the Committee.
Mr. Sproul noted that speculation regarding a possible change
in the discount rate caused disturbance in the money market and suggested
that, in so far as possible, discussion of such a possibility not be
carried on outside.
Chairman Martin agreed with this suggestion, adding that while
it was necessary for the directors of the Reserve Banks to discuss the
matter, it would also be desirable for the Reserve Bank Presidents to
caution them against discussion of the subject outside the meetings of
the directors.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following direction to the
executive committee was approved unanimously:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for such transactions for the System open market account,
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury (in
cluding purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing
securities, and letting maturities run off without replace
ment), as may be necessary, in the light of current and
prospective economic conditions and the general credit
situation of the country, with a view to exercising restraint
upon inflationary developments, to maintaining orderly con
ditions in the Government security market, to relating the
supply of funds in the market to the needs of commerce and
business, and to the practical administration of the account;
provided that the aggregate amount of securities held in the
System account (including commitments for the purchase or sale
of securities for the account) at the close of this date, other
than special short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury,
shall not be increased or decreased by more than $2,000,000,000.

12/8/52 -15
The executive committee is further directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for the purchase direct from the Treasury for the account of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (which Bank shall have discretion,
in cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to
one or more Federal Reserve Banks) of such amounts of special
short-term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such certificates held at any
one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the
aggregate $2,000,000,000.
In a discussion of a date for the next meeting of the full Com
mittee, reference was made to a memorandum prepared by Mr. Vest dated Decem
ber 2, 1952, stating that inasmuch as March 1, 1953, will fall on a Sunday,
it would seem to be desirable, if otherwise practicable, for the meeting
of the new Committee to be held during the first week of March 1953. In
commenting on this, Mr. Vest stated that the organization meeting of the
new Committee usually had been held on March 1 of each year and that it
was customary for a meeting of the old Committee also to be held late in
February in order to ratify actions taken up to that time. He said there
was no reason why, if ratification is necessary, the new Committee could not
ratify actions taken by the previous Committee, and that he did not think
it essential that the old Committee meet in late February. Following a dis
cussion, it was agreed that the next meeting of the full Committee should
be held during the week beginning March 2, 1953.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary