A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Thursday, June 11, 1953, at 10:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Evans
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Johns
Mr. Mills
Mr. Powell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Abbott, Hostetler, Peterson, Roelse,
Parker B. Willis, and Ralph A. Young,
Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Youngdahl, Assistant Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. R, F. Leach, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Mr. Arthur Willis, Assistant Secretary, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Gilbert, Leedy, Williams, and C. S. Young,
alternate members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Bryan, Earhart, and Hugh Leach, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, San Fran
cisco, and Richmond, respectively
Messrs. Leonard, Director, Division of Bank Opera
tions, Board of Governors, and Deming, First
Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

6/11/53 -2
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee held on March 4-5,
1953 were approved,
The Secretary stated that advices of the election by the Boards
of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and Chicago of
W. D. Fulton as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee for the
remainder of the year ending February 28, 1954 had been received and
that Mr. Fulton had executed the customary oath of office. The Secretary
also stated that Mr. Fulton had proposed that L. Merle Hostetler, of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, be elected an associate economist of
the Committee to succeed Donald S. Thompson of that Bank; and that Mr.
Erickson had proposed that Parker B. Willis, of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston, be elected an associate economist of the Committee to succeed
Arthur A. Bright, Jr.
The election of Mr. Fulton as a member of the
Federal Open Market Committee for the remainder of
the year ending February 28, 1954 was noted, and,
upon motion duly made and seconded and by unanimous
vote, the election of Messrs. Hostetler and Willis
to serve as associate economists of the Federal Open
Market Committee until the election of their suc
cessors at the first meeting of the Committee after
February 28, 1954 was approved. These actions were
noted and approved with the understanding that in
the event of the discontinuance of their official
connections with the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleve
land or Boston, as the case might be, Messrs. Fulton,
Hostetler, or Willis would cease to have any official
connection with the Federal Open Market Committee.
In taking this action, it was also understood
that Mr. Fulton was selected as an alternate member

6/11/53 -3
of the executive committee, and that the order in
which the alternate members of the executive com
mittee would serve for Messrs. Sproul and Erickson
would be Mr. Johns, Mr. Powell, and Mr. Fulton.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the actions of the executive com
mittee of the Federal Open Market Committee as set
forth in the minutes of the meetings of the execu
tive committee held on March 5, March 24, April 8,
April 24, May 6, May 13, and May 26, 1953 were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Before this meeting there had been sent to the members of the
Committee a copy of a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York covering operations in the System open market account from March 4
to June 5, 1953, inclusive. At this meeting, Mr. Rouse presented a sup
plementary report covering commitments executed from June 6 to June 10,
1953, inclusive, and commented briefly on the reports, copies of which
have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Chairman Martin referred to operations in the System account dur
ing the past week, particularly to developments on Monday and Tuesday,
June 1 and 2, 1953, when there was serious unsettlement in the Government
securities market which brought prices of longer term Government securi
ties to record lows for outstanding issues, and which caused the new issue
of 2-5/8 per cent certificates of indebtedness to settle below par. He
said that on June 2 the System account handled purchases of $81.5 millions
of bills with dispatch and efficiency that seemed to bring commendation

6/11/53 -4
from everyone. However, the question had been raised as to whether, in
view of the position taken by the executive committee at its meeting on
May 6, 1953 at which time it was agreed that there should be injections
of reserves into the market to avoid a further tightening, System purchases
of bills had been sufficient over the past several weeks. The Chairman
then asked Mr. Rouse to give the Committee his rationale of operations for
the account during this period.
Mr. Rouse stated that he felt the purchases of securities made for
the System account had been sufficient although he recognized that in hind
sight judgments might differ on this point. He had been surprised that
more people did not apply the "multiplier" with respect to the amount of
reserve funds that had been put into the market. He felt that it had been
fortunate that funds had been available from Government investment accounts
last week for purchases of Government bonds, noting that $3.5 million of
long-term 2-1/2's were purchased at the opening on Tuesday, June 2, with
considerable effectiveness. Mr. Rouse stated that while he knew there was
some feeling that purchases for the System account may not have gone far
enough, on the other hand it must be noted that the System had increased
its holdings of securities by $328.8 million since the last meeting of
the full Committee and that in recent weeks the Treasury had put $1100
million of reserves into the market through reductions in its balances with
the Reserve Banks and in a special account, and through sales of special

6/11/53 -5
certificates of indebtedness. If reserves were going to do the job, Mr.
Rouse felt the reserves had been available. As far as the current market
is concerned, Mr. Rouse said that at present the Treasury would have dif
ficulty in selling securities in the amount of $1-1/2 billion to meet the
prospective deficit in July and August. There is, however, some indica
tion that the psychology in the market is improving, Mr. Rouse said, al
though fairly sharp movements in Government bond prices may still occur
on a single day.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions in the Sys
tem open market account for the period March 4 to
June 10, 1953, inclusive, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
Chairman Martin referred to a draft of proposed revision in the
directive of the Federal Open Market Committee prepared pursuant to the
understanding at the meeting of the full Committee on March 4-5, 1953, a
copy of which had been sent to all members of the full Committee and the
executive committee. At the Chairman's request, Mr. Vest commented on
the proposal, emphasizing that the drafts prepared by the staff were in
tended to change only the form of the directives and were not intended to
make any changes of substance in them.
Chairman Martin stated that while the drafts of revision had been
discussed by the executive committee at its meetings on May 13 and May 26,
the committee had no recommendation to make with respect to the matter.

6/11/53 -6
During a brief discussion, he suggested that the full Committee refer the
matter to the executive committee with the understanding that the executive
committee would appoint two of its members to consider the proposal for
revision in directives, and with the further understanding that this special
committee would submit its recommendations to the members of both the full
Committee and the executive committee.
This suggestion was approved unani
mously.
Reference was then made to a memorandum prepared in the Division of
Bank Operations of the Board of Governors under date of May 21, 193 with
respect to the allocation of securities in the System open market account,
the present formula for which had been adopted effective January 1, 1948.
The memorandum had been prepared as a result of the action taken by the
full Committee at its meeting on March 4-5. 1953, at which time it was sug
gested that the staff study the present basis of allocations in the System
open market account with a view to having a discussion of any suggested
changes at this meeting.
At Chairman Martin's request, Mr. Leonard, Director of the Board's
Division of Bank Operations, reviewed the content of the memorandum, dis
cussing the present basis of allocation, reasons why there might be a
change, and possible bases of allocation. In his comments, Mr. Leonard
stated that without making any recommendation the memorandum attempted
to present various allocation formulae which might be related to (a) expenses

6/11/53 -7
and dividend requirements as at present, (b) size of the Reserve
Banks as measured by various factors, (c) equalizing reserve ratios
initially with freedom of movement thereafter within some pre-determined
range, (d) tending to equalize ratios of surpluses to capital, or (e)
district, financial, and other economic data. Mr. Leonard said that it
was his belief that any formula adopted should not only be logical, but
should appear on its face to be so, that it should be simple, and that
it should eliminate the necessity for frequent adjustments in holdings
in the account. He went on to say that if the allocation were based on
size of the Reserve Banks, about the same distribution would result from
use of either total assets or the total of Federal Reserve Bank deposit
and note liabilities. Similar distribution would result from use of a
formula to equalize reserve ratios.
Chairman Martin said he had no fixed view on the matter but was
inclined to believe total assets was the best basis.
There ensued a general discussion during which several of the
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks expressed preferences for an
allocation system based upon total assets. Mr. Bryan stated, on the other
hand, that he would have a preference for the use of Federal Reserve Bank
deposit and note liabilities, as being somewhat more closely related to
the conventional concept of reserve requirements; he agreed it was desir
able to have the allocation based upon some measure of the size of the

6/11/53 -8
Federal Reserve Banks.
During the discussion, Mr. Earhart raised the question whether
possible legal aspects of the loss-sharing agreement of the Reserve Banks
might be affected by a change in the procedure for allocating securities,
in response to which Mr. Vest expressed the tentative opinion that a
change in allocation procedure would not be of such a basic nature as
to affect the validity of the loss-sharing agreement.
Following the discussion, it was agreed
unanimously that Messrs. Leonard and Rouse be
requested to prepare a memorandum for the con
sideration of the Committee covering the de
tailed steps which might be necessary in order
to change the present allocation procedure to
one based upon total assets of the respective
Federal Reserve Banks.
At this point Mr. Leonard withdrew from the meeting and members
of the staff of the Board of Governors entered the room to participate
in the presentation of an economic review, illustrated by chart slides,
and of an analysis of the changing debt structure and its relationship
to developing economic conditions, as well as the current issues of credit
and monetary policy. A copy of the text of the presentation was sent to
each member of the Federal Open Market Committee following the meeting
and a copy has been placed in the Committee's files.
The review stated that the period since the meeting in March had
been characterized by a moderately higher level of economic activity and
generally stable prices. While the economic situation has continued

6/11/53 -9
strong, financial markets have been unsettled at times and throughout the
period there has been an undertone of concern about potential declines in
economic activity. Doubts have related to the strength of underlying con
ditions, concern has been expressed lest measures designed to limit credit
expansion to sustainable proportions be carried too far setting in motion
forces of decline which would be difficult to check, and in recent weeks
uncertainties have been increased by new developments in Korea.
As to the analysis of debt it was stated that, considering the
nature of the defense economy in prospect for some time yet, the charac
ter of the present debt, and the financial position of lending institu
tions, it was difficult to visualize any widespread liquidation of debt.
Thus, the study of the debt situation had been somewhat reassuring. How
ever, restraint in further increasing the volume of debt may be important
for preventing development of an unsound debt structure such as that of
the late 1920's.
With respect to credit and monetary developments, Mr. Thomas stated
that the cumulative effectiveness of monetary restraints had gradually be
come more evident in the financial and business community and that with
the present tone of sensitive markets and the higher productivity of the
economy, there seemed little immediate danger of excessive optimism or a
renewed inflationary upsurge that would extend very far, Whether there
is the opposite danger, requiring at some point an aggressive easing of

6/11/53 -10
the credit situation, is not now evident, but it is evident that additional
credit will be needed this year to meet seasonal demands and to finance
further economic expansion and that these needs will be substantial.
During a discussion of the economic review, Mr. Powell referred
to statements made on the Senate floor yesterday afternoon by Senator
Humphrey of Minnesota with respect to the costs of servicing the Govern
ment debt and raised the question as to the probable future relationship
between disposable income and debt servicing costs, Mr. Powell also
raised the question whether the rise in interest rates might shut off
the market for corporate and municipal investments with the result that
the decrease in such issues might bring on unemployment because of the
lack of capital funds for investment. He also inquired as to possible
repercussions on the farm mortgage market and in other segments of the
economy.
Mr. Ralph Young stated that the longer the increased level of
interest rates was maintained, the higher would be the ratio of costs of
debt service to disposable income. He went on to say that in so far as
the volume of new issues was concerned, the rise in interest rates appar
ently had brought about acceleration in borrowing, partly reflecting the
feeling that funds would not be available later in view of the heavy
Treasury borrowing that might be anticipated in the second half of the
year. Mr. Young also said that the volume of corporate issues scheduled
for June was very large, that municipal issues were high in relation to

6/11/53 -11
last year, and that it appeared that there would be a record volume of
new issues in June of this year. With respect to the mortgage market,
Mr. Young said that the situation developing was rather disturbing in that
the higher rates available on corporate securities apparently were caus
ing some firms which had furnished mortgage money in the past to defer
making commitments for such loans, at least to large scale building op
erators.
Mr. Thomas commented that the whole purpose of the restrictive
policy had been to exercise restraint, that if there were repercussions
of the type Mr. Powell feared that was the course to be expected, and
that the question was whether the restraint was too great. If the restraint
were cutting down the flow of funds to a point where the resources of the
economy were not being utilized, that would indicate restriction was too
great. However, Mr. Thomas said, there is no evidence that such develop
ments have occurred thus far.
Chairman Martin then made a statement substantially as follows
I would like to make some general comments on that question
because it bears directly on the subject of this meeting and
points up the problem the executive committee has been wrestling
with since the last meeting of the full Committee in carrying out
the policy laid down at that time. That policy, interpreting it
broadly, was one of modest restraint. By the end of April, it
was clear there were some forces shaping up which may have changed
the situation from one of modest restraint to one of real restraint.
The capital market had a real jolt. At the meeting of the execu
tive committee on May 6, we took account of those developments. I
think the charts indicate that we had a decrease in the money sup
ply during May, probably more than we would have liked to have had

6/11/53
-12-
if we could have measured it beforehand. These are extremely dif
ficult things to measure. This has been a most interesting period
and there is room for difference of opinion with respect to its
implications, but basically our thinking at the time of the May 6
meeting was that there would have to be put into the market between
that time and the end of the year reserves of between $2-1/2 and
$3-1/2 billion in order not to tighten the market further. That
amount would be needed just to maintain the market as it was at
that time.
As to the point Senator Humphrey referred to, which Mr. Powell
has cited, the jolt in the capital market has served to accelerate
the number of capital issues coming forward at this time rather
than to decrease it. Regardless of whether some have been post
poned permanently, so far as May and June are concerned you have
had a terrific increase in capital flotations, particularly be
cause of the fear that funds would be harder to obtain later on.
All of us who have followed the capital markets know that the
strongest volume of issues is written at the top of the boom and
that is a cause for concern at the present time.
The point I am trying to focus on for discussion at this
meeting is the point I raised with Mr. Rouse at the beginning of
this meeting, that is, whether in pursuing the course of putting
funds into the market so as not to tighten it further, we have
erred on the side of not putting in sufficient funds during this
period. In terms of its technical aspects, it is not a question
of "easy money". But if we wish to supply the reserves indicated
to the market between May 6 and the end of 1953, the question is,
should we not have stepped up our purchases more rapidly?
That brings into focus the other problem we have had: namely,
the fact that the discount rate is behind the market. If we wanted
to meet the market, we certainly would raise the discount rate. We
have had several suggestions that we raise the discount rate and at
the same time step up open market purchases, and we have had sugges
tions that we reduce reserve requirements across the board. The re
sult of this whole situation is now before this Committee, I think
we ought to move forward and have a full discussion of the question.
I would like to have Mr. Sproul's comment on the question of whether
bills are an adequate medium in relation to our policy of supplying
funds to the market. All of these questions ought to be put on the
table. We ought to realize that this is a critical situation, that
we may have to call the full Committee back into session during the
summer months-not once but maybe twice. We can not dispose of this
matter this morning and wait until next September. We are at a criti
cal turning point where common sense indicates certain forces are op
erating in supply and demand areas. We are not engineering anythings

-13-
we ought not to be. If I am critical of anything in our opera
tion, I am critical of my own judgment with respect to the tight
ness of the money market in May, I think the money market in May
got so tight across the board that it violated one of the cardinal
principles of good central banking operations. It became so
tight that money was almost unavailable. We should discuss the
most effective way of supplying reserves to the market aside from
embracing an easy money policy.
Mr. Sproul then made a statement substantially as follows:
On the question of the amount of reserves put into the market
during May, as Chairman Martin said, in making a change over from
a policy of credit restraint which, partly due to other influences
than our own had become more restrictive than was felt to be de
sirable, it was the view of the executive committee that we did
not want to make a complete change to a policy of credit ease.
Therefore, we had the difficult task of trying to put sufficient
funds into the market to try to maintain a sufficient degree of
restraint or ease without allowing it to become a policy of easy
money. There are many other factors that impinge on reserve funds
aside from our own operations and it is difficult to estimate these
factors in advance so that, while you can lay out a fairly good es
timate of a needed amount of reserve funds to the end of the year,
you can not lay out an estimate which will be at all accurate from
week to week. The amount of funds we put into the market has to be
geared to other factors affecting the supply of reserve funds. The
Chairman mentioned that during May, the amount of reserve funds put
into the market may not have been sufficient, or may not have been
put in in the right way or at the right time. We had days when the
market had "air pockets" in it. Whether you could accurately say
that credit was almost unavailable-though never quite unavail
able, I doubt. It was difficult to obtain, more difficult to ob
tain than we wanted it to be, perhaps, but not unavailable. That
leads me to the point of what we need to discuss as a policy of
the Open Market Committee.
1. Since the last meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee we have been operating under two prohibitions adopted by
the Committee, the general prohibition limiting operations to
short-term securities at all times, and the special prohibition
limiting operations, during periods of Treasury financing, to
exclude the purchase of maturing issues, when-issued securities,
and outstanding issues of comparable maturity to those being
offered in exchange.

2. In my opinion, the present situation and the likely
situation during the next three months require that we remove
these prohibitions and restore to ourselves greater freedom of
action. Private demands for capital and credit continue strong,
and the Treasury is going to be a large and necessitous borrow
er. Our policy, in the circumstances, is one of maintaining
restraint on credit expansion, while trying to prevent that
restraint from being intensified by Treasury demands on the
banking system. If this continues to be our policy, and if we
continue to confine our operations to purchases of bills, I do
not think we can walk the tightrope successfully. Our policy
of restraint will be intensified at a time when it should be
leveling off with the boom.
3. On what grounds would we continue to deprive ourselves
of freedom of action? With respect to the prohibitions we adopted
at our last meeting,
(a) we were told that the market should be relieved of the threat
of our intervention in the longer term areas so that it might de
velop breadth, depth, and resiliency.
(b) We have not intervened in these areas for some months and,
in one way or another, the market has acquired the idea that we
are not going to intervene. Yet seldom has the market shown
less breadth and depth while quotations have shown, if anything,
too much resiliency.
(c) I think it has been demonstrated that if apprehension con
cerning our intervention in the market was once the cause of un
certainty, it was a transient phenomenon. Other factors have
since been at work. Recently there has been our restrictive
credit policy, continued heavy private demands for funds, and
mounting Treasury cash needs. These have generated the expecta
tion of a decline in Government security prices (and private
security prices) and a rise in interest rates of unknown extent
and duration.
(d) Under such conditions a market of the size and present vul
nerability of the Government security market doesn't develop
real breadth, depth, and resiliency, and the Treasury's neces
sitous financing can be made unnecessarily difficult and onerous.
(e) In so far as credit policy is responsible for this, the
problem is how to direct open market operations with sufficient
flexibility and versatility to minimize the adverse effects of
the general policy without sacrificing the general objective.
4. I don't think we can do it if we continue, as we have
been doing, to confine ourselves at all times to operations in
Treasury bills. We have been told that operations in bills

-15-
would have prompt and pervasive effects throughout the market,
That was the theory of perfect fluidity-perfect arbitrage. I
think historical records and current observation indicate that
a prompt and invariable response between short and long markets
can not always be expected. Under present conditions operations
solely in bills may relieve the reserve position of the banks
without giving timely relief from the complex pressures in the
credit and capital markets created by large Treasury borrowing
operations.
5. If the threat of our intervention isn't the source of
lack of breadth, depth, and resiliency in the Government security
market, and if that market and the whole capital market isn't as
fluid as the theory of perfect arbitrage would suggest, why do we
deprive ourselves of freedom of action? It seems to me that we
must either still be reacting violently against market pegging
or embracing a somewhat doctrinaire attitude on free markets.
6. There is a middle road. No one here wants to return
to pegging nor to try to substitute our judgment as to prices
and yields for those of the market. But if our credit policy
calls for putting funds into the market, as it does, and if at
the same time we can assist the Treasury with its very difficult
task of debt management, we should do it. It would be in accord
with the resolution we adopted on relations with the Treasury
and it would contribute to economic stability. We should be
free, particularly at times of Treasury financing, to make
purchases in whatever area of the market is under most pressure,
so that there will not be an unnecessary erosion of rates, af
fecting adversely investor and banking psychology and intensi
fying the restrictive effects of our credit policy at the wrong
time.
7. We have made it clear to the market that we are not
interested in pegging prices, and the Treasury has made it clear
that it wants to price its obligations on the market, not on us.
Within this framework, I think we should reserve for ourselves
maximum freedom to operate in any way which, without sacrificing
credit policy, will support the Treasury's program and the sta
bility of the market.
8. To withhold the System portfolio from participation in
the market, except for bill transactions, in the light of the
present economic situation and the Treasury's needs, seems to
me to be sacrificing credit policy to untried theory. To go
further, and to withhold the System portfolio from participa
tion in the tremendous redistribution and swapping process which
takes place in the market during the short period of a Treasury
financing is likely to prove to be irresponsible.

6/11/53 -16
9. I suggest the elimination, from the instructions of the
full Committee to the executive committee, of the present pro
hibition against open market operations in other than short-ter
securities, and against operations in certain kinds of securities
during Treasury financings.
10. Even though our operations continue to be largely in
bills, effective credit policy can best be achieved, in my
opinion, by retaining flexibility of action to meet the un
predictable circumstances which are always arising. To freeze
the System into a pattern of behavior which involves not doing
certain things could be just as harmful to the success of credit
policy as a frozen commitment to do certain things. We can't
afford a succession of black Mondays and Treasury near-failures
over the next few months and the omens are none too good.
Chairman Martin said that in adopting the two recommendations of the
ad hoc subcommittee referred to by Mr. Sproul, it was not intended that they
should be frozen into the Committee's understanding for all time. He dis
agreed with Mr. Sproul's judgment with respect to the depth, breadth, and
resiliency in the Government securities market as far as operations of the
System account may have affected that market. There had been no claim on
the part of the ad hoc subcommittee that there would be perfect arbitrage,
he said, and a clear indication of the validity of the subcommittee's
recommendation had been given by the Government securities market on Tuesday,
June 2, when market sentiment improved markedly following purchases of some
$81 million of Treasury bills for the System account. It was Chairman
Martin's belief that if the System account had made aggressive purchases of
bills during the last several weeks there would have been a much sounder
market. The full Committee had covered the matter of dealing with a dis
orderly market, Chairman Martin said, but so far as he knew the Manager of

6/11/53 -17
the Account had never notified the executive committee that disorderly con
ditions existed.
Mr. Rouse agreed with the statement that he had not notified the
Committee that, in his opinion, we had a disorderly market, He said he had
considered the question on Monday and Tuesday, June 1 and 2, but that pur
chases of $3.5 million of long-term 2-1/2's for Treasury investment accounts
at the opening on Tuesday morning took care of the situation. Mr. Rouse
said that one of the factors affecting the market was the attitude of the
Reserve Banks toward making advances to member banks; there had gotten to
be a feeling around the country that the Federal Reserve was almost en
tirely opposed to discounting, and this was a factor in the current situa
tion in the market.
Chairman Martin said that there was no question but that such a feel
ing existed, that there had been a conjunction of misinterpretations and
rumors along with factors such as Mr. Sproul had mentioned which had created
a tightness that was not anticipated, that had become more severe and more
savage than he personally had anticipated. He did not wish to be doctrinaire,
Chairman Martin said, but he was unconvinced that, in supplying reserves, it
was desirable for the Committee to put them into the long-term market. There
might be exceptions (there may have been conditions in recent weeks which were
disorderly and it might have been advisable to invoke the authority for cor
recting that situation) but as a matter of minimizing intervention and of

6/11/53
-18-
not maximizing intervention, he felt, and it had seemed to the ad hoc sub
committee, that, by and large, dealing in short-term securities was a sound
general policy to outline. He did not think that fears that the System
would or would not get into the long end of the market had deterred that
market. What had happened, the Chairman said, was that there had been a
fear that the Federal Reserve was not going to supply any reserves between
now and the end of 1953, a condition which could not help but have an effect
on the market, whereas actually it has been the intention of the Committee
to supply reserves needed for normal economic conditions, and it had been
estimated that as much as $3 billion of reserve funds would have to be put
into the market between May and the end of 1953. Chairman Martin said that
his conception of the operation was that the Committee should put a minimum
burden on the open market account and the Open Market Committee for determin
ing what the market shall be, that it should be free not only of the peg per
se, but of levels of pegs. Each member of the Federal Open Market Committee
might have a different judgment from that of the Manager of the Account, he
noted, with respect to what ought to have been done in order to have depth,
breadth, and resiliency, but if the Federal Reserve is to be out of the
business of making a market, there should be some general rule for the
guidance of the account manager. Chairman Martin also disagreed with Mr.
Sproul in that he questioned whether there had been a fair test of the extent
to which arbitrage might take place if System purchases were confined to the

6/11/53 -19
short end of the Government securities market,
Mr. Sproul said that he was suggesting that, so long as it was the
policy of the Committee to put funds into the market, there be more freedom
to put them in where the pressures were greatest in order to minimize the
amount the Committee would have to put in to achieve its purpose; that he was
objecting particularly to having the recommendation of the ad hoc subcommittee
that operations be confined to short-term securities, whittled down so that
only operations in Treasury bills are permitted. On June 2, he said, prompt
aggressive purchases of a large amount of bills, aided by small Treasury pur
chases of long-term bonds, had a considerable effect, both actually and
psychologically. However, at the time of the recent Treasury financing with
2-5/8 per cent certificates the pressure was not in the bill markets every
one was trying to get into the bill market along with the Federal Reserve,
and the Federal Reserve was putting funds into the bill market where there
was no need for them while other sectors of the market were responding more
violently to a temporary lack of demand than was necessary under the Commit
tee's policy. His suggestion, he reiterated, was that the full Committee
give to the executive committee more authority than that embodied in the di
rective for correcting disorderly markets. He thought that the present pro
hibition put a premium on sluggish action which would not meet the situations
that may arise.
Mr. Mills expressed the view that to follow Mr. Sproul's suggestion
would run the risk of confusing monetary policy with the market itself and

6/11/53 -20
of creating a condition which would only cloud the objectives of monetary
policy. His view was that the position of the market was secondary to
monetary policy, albeit a reflection of that monetary policy.
Mr. Sproul reiterated that his suggestion would apply only when it
would not conflict with the objectives of monetary policy.
Continuing, Mr. Mills said that in his judgment the Committee should
reaffirm the existing understanding as to confining operations to the short
end of the market, that prior to the appearance of a disorderly condition
in the market there was no good reason for putting funds into the market
other than in the short end, but that if a disorderly condition were indi
cated then action to correct the situation should be prompt and immediate.
In other words, there should be no change in the Committee's present policy
in this respect.
Mr. Sproul responded that he could not see that there would be any
change in credit policy under his suggestion, that he could see no deviation
from credit policy if the Committee were to purchase bonds of 56-59 rather
than bills, if it was going to put funds into the market anyway and provided
the pressure was in that area of the market. The only time such purchases
would be considered, he said, would be when they fitted into present policy
the Committee should not let concern for the Government securities market over
ride credit policy.

6/11/53 -21
Mr. Mills suggested that if the Committee were to buy other than
bills for the purpose of reassuring the market, it would mean the selection
of issues where purchases would relieve conditions which were affecting
dealers' positions which, if given time, would correct themselves without
Federal Reserve action.
To this, Mr. Sproul said that purchases would not be for the purpose
of relieving dealers' positions, that they would take account of the fact
that the System portfolio is a very large factor in the market and would
allow the account to make some response to supply and demand conditions in
the market in order to get the best results from its open market operations
Operations solely in bills, Mr. Sproul said, assume that through arbitrage
the same effects would be gotten that might be obtained through direct action,
All he was suggesting was that if operations are limited to bills, the
response may be too late and too tardy in terms of the existing market to
be effective; he felt it likely that there would be times and circumstances
in the next few months when the reaction to bill purchases and arbitrage
would be too tardy to accomplish the Committee's purposes.
Mr. Mills did not believe that situations in the market of the type
Mr. Sproul was talking about necessarily deserved correction through open
market policy other than through the medium of bills, and Mr. Sproul ex
pressed the view that the Committee would be justified in acting if other
wise the situation might become so severe as to have an effect on the market

6/11/53 -22
psychology of businessmen, investors, and the whole economy.
Chairman Martin referred to the 2-5/8 per cent certificates offered
by the Treasury recently, stating that he felt that they were priced close
to the market, that he had expressed the view at the time that it would
have been better to price them at 2-3/4. He also said that the tightness in
the availability of credit that occurred in May must have had a profound
effect on the Government securities market at the time.
Mr. Sproul commented that this is a very difficult period for the
Treasury, that it will have to come to the market very shortly for around
$4 billion of new funds, that its need is not one that can be postponed, and
that any assistance which the Committee can give would be justified if it
does not conflict with credit policy. As to the 2-5/8 per cent certificate
offering in May, Mr. Sproul felt it was not the tightness in the money mar
ket that had affected the Treasury financing. The money supply, as far as
bank reserves were concerned, did not tighten in May, and banks were reduc
ing their borrowing during that month and their free excess reserves were
increasing. While there was a question whether they might have been given
more funds by System purchases, the fact was that the banks' reserve posi
tion was easing during the month because of the System's operations.
Mr. Rouse said that there was a fluidity in the market during May
but that with the decline in prices of Government securities and with
losses showing on the books of the banks many of them just were not inter
ested in moving.

6/11/53 -23
Mr. Powell commented on Chairman Martin's remarks regarding the
money supply during May, stating that he did not believe the money supply
is always in the same relation to the volume of business. During the past
few weeks, Mr. Powell said, the money supply has been going down partly
because corporations have been buying securities and, while these funds
get back into the banks shortly, the net effect is to reduce the money
supply as a by-product of the increase in interest rates which has made
it profitable for corporations to put funds into the bill market. He felt
that the Committee should be very careful in its conclusions as to the
significance of short-term changes in the money supply. As to the broader
problem, Mr. Powell felt that in the last few months the Open Market Com
mittee had been faced with an impossible task-inflation control, tighten
ing up the money market to restrain undesirable credit expansion such as
some forms of consumer credit, and at the same time putting funds into the
market so that normal business would not die. Mr. Powell felt this was a
tightrope, that present conditions did not call for what the account has
been doing in its operations, that sticking to short-term Treasury securi
ties was not desirable, that because of the imperfect flow of funds from
the short end of the market into other sectors this involved the danger of
supplying more bank money through the multiplier effect than was necessary.
In other words, to put funds only into the short end of the market might
create more bank reserves than was necessary, Mr. Powell said. He also
felt the Committee should not overlook the public confidence factor. For

6/11/53 -24
one reason or another, he said, the public is concerned about the present
situation and he cited comments by members of the Board of Directors of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the concern shown by many banks
regarding the decline in Government securities prices even though they
did not have long-term securities in their portfolios, and bad reaction
in the press. He felt that even though the System might be doing the
things that would carry out its true function, the public, through lack of
understanding or through misinterpretations of policy, might be critical
of the System and irreparable damage might be done. He stated that he
would like to support Mr. Sproul's thesis that the Manager of the Federal
Open Market Account be allowed to use any part of the Government bond mar
ket for the purpose of supplying reserves in times such as the present.
Mr. Earhart felt that the System may have underestimated the
effects of the tendency to move to a tougher discount policy in recent
months. He noted that the view had been expressed several months ago that
there might be around a billion dollars of borrowings but that banks should
not borrow to avoid the excess profits tax, Gradually the System has moved
practically to the position that banks should not borrow under present con
ditions because they should not be borrowing in order to make a profit, and
there is a profit motive back of almost every borrowing operation. This
has had the effect of exerting more pressure on the borrowing banks to
follow a restrictive policy, at least in the Twelfth Federal Reserve Dis
trict, Mr. Earhart said. As Federal funds have become available most of

6/11/53 -25
the borrowing banks have reduced their indebtedness to the Reserve Banks and
purchased Federal funds, but, as yet, there has been no appreciable easing
of credit in the Twelfth District.
Mr. Hugh Leach said that city banks were very cautious and that
country banks were very concerned because of conditions in the Government
securities market and for other reasons. He felt that if there was anything
the Federal Reserve could do to relieve this concern, it should be done if
it did not conflict with credit policy.
Chairman Martin doubted that the suggestion that had been made
would help the Treasury. The real point under discussion, he said, was
whether the Committee was going to have a method of operation which leads to
a minimum of intervention, or whether it was going to have a procedure which
would lead to maximum intervention by the Federal Open Market Committee in
the market. If the System account were to start specializing in some of
the individual Treasury issues, it could uncover a role for itself that
would be limitless. At the same time, Chairman Martin said, the Committee
should not be doctrinaire and a provision for dealing with disorderly condi
tions in the market had been adopted. He went on to say that, while he did
not wish it to be taken as criticism of the management of the account, he
had been somewhat surprised that the Manager of the Account did not notify
the executive committee of a disorderly condition recently in view of this
provision of a method for dealing with an exceptional situation,

6/11/53 -26
Mr. Rouse suggested that as background for further consideration
of the problem, the Committee note that the Treasury had put $1100 million
into the market recently which it would have to take out before the end of
June. In addition, the Treasury shortly would have to borrow a large sum
and it appeared that something like $1700 million of reserves in addition
to those already put in by the System account would be needed within the
next few weeks.
The meeting then recessed for luncheon and reconvened at 2:15 p.m.
with the same attendance as at the close of the morning session.
Mr. Williams asked whether the Treasury had voiced any concern
about conditions in the Government securities market in a way indicating
that it felt that the Federal Reserve could help it through a transition
period, or whether any action that might be taken by the Federal Reserve
would be independent and gratuitous.
Chairman Martin replied that the Treasury had not "thrown itself
on the mercy of the Federal Reserve" nor had it indicated that it needed
the support of the Federal Reserve in order to carry on its financing
operations. It had not been critical of System operations nor had it
indicated in any way that it felt the Federal Reserve had let the Treasury
down during this period. The Chairman felt, however, that the Treasury
would welcome any assistance which the Federal Reserve could give it.
Mr. Rouse agreed with this statement and Mr. Sproul commented to
the effect that immediately prior to the meeting of the executive committee

6/11/53 -27
on May 6, when Messrs. Burgess and Heffelfinger of the Treasury met
with members of the executive committee, Mr. Burgess had made it plain that
the Treasury considered that credit policy was a problem of the Federal
Reserve.
Chairman Martin then suggested that the individual members of the
Federal Open Market Committee and the Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks who are not now members of the Open Market Committee express their
views concerning the proposal that had been made by Mr. Sproul.
Mr. Erickson said that he agreed generally with Mr. Sproul, While
the major part of the Committee's operations should be in the bill market,
he could visualize some circumstances where it might be desirable to operate
elsewhere. Therefore, he felt that the Committee's policy should have flexi
bility. There should be no figure of the amount of operations to be car
ried on since figures have a habit of getting outside the Committee, he
said, but whatever was advisable at the time should be done. He reiterated
that he would prefer generally to operate in the short-term market, and he
suggested that a more precise definition of "disorderly" might be helpful,
adding the comment that he had felt last week that the market was bordering
on being disorderly.
Mr. Sproul said that there had been some clarification of the mean
ing of "disorderly" at this meeting. His impression of a disorderly market
as discussed at the March meeting had been the situation that might exist
in the event of outbreak of war or some other major disruption of the market,

6/11/53 -28
whereas it now had been suggested that during the past two weeks there
may have been a disorderly condition, or incipient disorder.
Mr. Erickson reiterated the statement that he had felt a week ago
that the market was bordering on being "disorderly", and that he had dis
cussed the situation with Mr. Rouse by telephone at the time.
Mr. Robertson felt that there need be no greater flexibility in
the authority given by the full Committee to the executive committee and
that there need be no deviation from the policy adopted at the meeting last
March. There might, however, be a need for greater flexibility between the
executive committee and the Manager of the System Open Market Account.
Mr. Johns stated that he was a little uncertain about the question
that had been raised; that he was not sure how far apart the two views
which appeared to be in opposition really were. He was under the impres
sion that those expressing the two points of view perhaps would agree that
at times during the past two weeks it might not have been inappropriate
to intervene in the market in some sector other than the short-term area: one
side said it would not have been surprised if the management of the account
had suggested the possibility of a disorderly market, while the other side
would say that instead of trying to operate under a more flexible concept
of a disorderly market, it would be better to relieve the account of the
prohibition embodied in the present agreement regarding operations in the
short end of the market. Mr. Johns felt this was a difference in procedure

6/11/53 -29
without any radical difference in substance. He was inclined to believe
that in the matter of procedure, it would be preferable to relieve the
executive committee of the prohibition agreed upon at the March meeting,
but in any event, he could not understand why any member of the full Com
mittee should not suggest that a disorderly market existed or that it
was an incipiently disorderly market; he could not see why the whole onus
of determining whether the market was disorderly should be on the Manager
of the Account and he felt that any member of the full Committee, regard
less of whether he was located in New York or Washington or elsewhere,
should be able to raise the question. On the whole, Mr. Johns said, his
leaning was more toward the view expressed by Mr. Sproul than by the
others.
Mr. Earhart referred to the views regarding the effects of the
discount operations of the Reserve Banks which he had expressed at the
meeting this morning, adding the comment that the relief the Committee
had attempted to give to the market recently had not been as effective
as it might have been because of the feeling on the part of the banks that
the System did not want them to borrow. He went on to say that his views
on the suggestions made by Mr. Sproul were much the same as those expressed
by Mr. Johns; there seemed to be more or less agreement that something ad
ditional might have been done recently in the market and it was a matter of
just how to proceed. He could not see any particular reason why the execu
tive committee should have a firm instruction from the full Committee which

6/11/53 -30
would prohibit the executive committee from deciding between bills and
certificates.
Chairman Martin stated that there was no such prohibition on the
executive committee at present, that the present understanding was that
under present conditions operations should be confined to the short end
of the market except in the case of correcting a disorderly market. The
question being presented, he said, was whether it is better, as a general
policy, to confine System account operations to the nearest thing to money.
He referred to the recommendation made by the ad hoc subcommittee that
some of the uncertainties that were detrimental to the development of
depth, breadth, and resiliency of the Government securities market could
be eliminated by an assurance that henceforth the Committee "will inter
vene in the market, not to impose on the market any particular pattern of
prices and yields but solely to effectuate the objectives of monetary and
credit policy, and that it will confine such intervention to transactions
in very short-term securities, preferably bills". The wording of the
Federal Open Market Committee's understanding on this point, as recorded
in the minutes of the March meeting, had been written very carefully,
Chairman Martin said, and provided that "under present conditions, operations
for the System account should be confined to the short end of the market
(not including correction of disorderly markets)". As to why the onus for
determining a "disorderly market" should be on the management of the account,
Chairman Martin said that anybody should be able to raise the question at

6/11/53 -31
any time. The members of the Committee should realize, however, that the
Manager of the Account is much closer to the market, and is in a position
to see forces that others may not be able to judge from a distance. What
the Committee has been driving at, he said, is giving the Manager of the
Account the maximum protection but at the same time the maximum latitude
so that he could operate as a broker, the members of the Committee should
be careful about operating the account in relation to a scare situation,
Chairman Martin said, emphasizing that the Manager of the Account is infi
nitely better qualified as the Committee's agent on the floor to evaluate
the forces that may determine whether a disorderly or incipiently dis
orderly situation exists.
Mr. Gilbert said that under more normal conditions he would pre
fer to intervene in the market only through purchases of bills but that
these were not normal conditions and he thought there should be more
flexibility than there appeared to be. He would favor also permitting
purchases of certificates, notes, and short-term bonds, but would not
favor purchases of very long-term bonds, except to correct disorderly
market conditions, because such purchases might tend to create confusion
in the market and would very likely be interpreted to mean that the System
had decided to support market prices at a given level and thus substitute
its own judgment for that of the market itself. Although the under
standing reached at the March meeting to which Chairman Martin had referred
might not include a specific prohibition against purchases of short-term

6/11/53 -32
securities other than bills, Mr. Gilbert said, it had been interpreted
as being the sense of the Federal Open Market Committee that purchases
should be limited to bills.
Chairman Martin then read the following provisions which were
under discussion and which were set out on pages 41 and 42 of the min
utes of the meeting of the full Committee held on March 4-5, 1953:
"There was further discussion of the various suggestions
made in the subcommittee's recommendations regarding relations
with the market in the course of which unanimous agreement was
reached on the following points:
"1. Under present conditions, operations for the System
account should be confined to the short end of the market (not
including correction of disorderly markets).
"5. It was understood that, pending further study and
further action by the Committee, the Committee approved the
subcommittee's recommendation that it should refrain during
a period of Treasury financing from purchasing (1) any matur
ing issues for which an exchange is being offered, (2) when
issued securities, and (3) any outstanding issues of compar
able maturity to those being offered for exchange."
Mr. Riefler noted that, as Secretary, he had transmitted the
foregoing paragraphs to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York on April 8,
1953, in a letter which had been approved by the executive committee at
a meeting on that day and which embodied the substance of the recommenda
tions in the ad hoc subcommittee report which had been agreed upon at
the meeting of the full Committee held on March 4-5.
Mr. C. S. Young commented that it was clear that no action by
the full Committee was needed to permit the System account to go into

6/11/53 -33
Treasury certificates and Mr. Rouse stated that while this was true,
he had raised the question at the meeting of the executive committee
on May 13, 1953, noting at that time that there was a shortage of bills
in the market and suggesting that the easiest procedure for getting
reserve funds into the market would be for the System account to make
purchases of 2 per cent Treasury bonds due in 1953 and 1954, in response
to which Chairman Martin had expressed the view that it would be a mis
take for the System account to make purchases of 2 per cent bonds in the
open market at the time, that it would be distinctly preferable for the
System account to continue to operate in the bill market, and that he
(Chairman Martin) believed bills would be available. Mr. Rouse went on
to say that since no member of the executive committee had taken exception
to Chairman Martin's statement (Mr. Sproul was absent), he had taken it
as a guide to operations in the account since that time.
Mr. C. S. Young expressed the view that wherever support was
needed, the Committee probably should give it provided it did not go
into the long-term market. If the Committee were to go into the long
term market, Mr. Young said, it might be the worst thing it could do
in that critics would say that pressure had been brought to bear and
that the Committee had acted accordingly. However, purchases in the
intermediate market or in certificates might be desirable, Mr. Young
said that, in his opinion, the Committee was minimizing the element of
distrust and the lack of buying power in various segments of the economy.

6/11/53 -34
He felt that the Committee should not be so optimistic about the business
outlook, referring particularly to the agricultural income situation,
the feeling of bankers and others about the restrictive credit policy,
declines in Government bond prices, and widespread uneasiness caused
by and resulting from various rumors. He mentioned specifically that
there were rumors that the Comptroller of the Currency was going to require
national banks to charge off depreciation in Government bond accounts of
banks.
Mr. Johns said that he was having difficulty understanding why
some seemed to assume that if purchases were made of securities other
than bills, which, as Chairman Martin said, were the nearest thing to
money, the transactions ipso facto lost their character as monetary
policy operations and became support operations. He could not see
why if other securities were purchased, when such purchases were con
sistent with monetary policy, they should not be considered as primarily
to effectuate the objectives of monetary policy and that whatever support
might be given to other segments of the market was wholly collateral.
Chairman Martin suggested that the question asked by Mr. Johns
be put in reverse, i.e., why should not purchases of bills be equally
satisfactory in carrying out monetary policy.
Mr. Sproul said that purchases of bills would put reserves
into the market but that in view of the lack of liquidity of the
banking system, they might not be as effective as would be desirable

6/11/53 35
in avoiding unwarranted changes in the Government securities market.
Changes in that market might affect investment conditions generally
and be a factor to be considered in carrying out the aims of monetary
policy.
Mr. Mills stated that if the account were now to enter all
segments of the market it might confuse the market thoroughly, that
the market would not have any indication of how the System account
was going to operate or what sector of the market it might enter. He
went on to say this was one of the main considerations in the study
of the ad hoc subcommittee, that its recommendations in this respect
had been given credence by the full Committee at its meeting in March,
and that before there was to be a change, the whole report of the sub
committee should be reviewed.
Mr. Sproul said that the full Committee had given credence
to that part of the ad hoc subcommittee's report under present con
ditions but that in his opinion conditions had changed. It was not a
question of trial under all conditions; the understanding reached in
March had referred to present conditions and in Mr. Sproul's opinion
conditions since then had changed.
In response to a statement by Mr. Powell that he could not
recall voting on this matter at the meeting in March, Chairman Martin
replied that the matter had been voted on, that it was agreed to unani
mously, and that it was fully recorded in the minutes of the meeting

6/11/53 -36
which had been sent to all members of the Committee and approved unani
mously,
Mr. Sproul added the comment that the matter of confining
operations to the short end of the market was voted on "under present
conditions", and that the question of restricting operations during
periods of Treasury financing was voted on "pending further action
and study by the Committee", These actions, he said, could not be
considered as permanent actions which could not now be considered
and changed by the Federal Open Market Committee. Mr. Sproul felt
that the market would not be disturbed if some of the funds the
Committee put into it were in a form other than in bills, and he
said that there was no thought that if the instructions in question
were changed, the executive committee would authorize the New York
Bank to go into the market under any and all conditions and buy
securities of all maturities. Purchases other than bills would be
made only, he said, if credit were needed in a certain sector of
the market which was not being reached immediately and promptly by
purchases of bills.
Mr. Hugh Leach said that ordinarily purchases for the System
account should be in Treasury bills and that ordinarily the account
should not come to the rescue of the Treasury. He did not like to
have this as a permanent policy, however, and he thought the situa
tion was now different from what it was in March. He felt that the

6/11/53 -37
Manager of the Account had been right in not suggesting that a dis
orderly market existed recently but he said that if quotations for
Government bonds were to change by several points in a day, the
executive committee should be in a position to do something about it.
Mr. Leach believed that disorderly markets should be interpreted a
little differently now than had been the case earlier in view of the
discussion at the March meeting and he said that he was more con
cerned at present about the Treasury's financing problem than he had
been.
Mr. Evans said that the discussion at this meeting clearly indicated
that pegging of Government security prices was deeply rooted in the Com
mittee's thinking and that it was evident it was having a hard time getting
rid of the idea. Some of the members of the Committee still seemed to look
upon the Government security market as "our" market, he said, and while
there was talk of a free market, it was not so clear that a free market
was really wanted when we were faced with the reality of it. Mr. Evans
said that there had been little discussion of the economic situation at
this meeting, that as a member of the executive committee he felt it im
portant that the full Committee indicate whether it believed the boom was
still pretty stout and credit policy should be relatively neutral; or
whether the boom was a thing of the past and the economy was approaching
a serious deflationary period which would call for supplying ample reserves

6/11/53 -38
to the market. Most of the discussion had been directed to market tech
niques, Mr. Evans said, and to a suggestion for changing some of the pro
cedures that had been agreed upon in March as a result of the study by
the ad hoc subcommittee. For his part, Mr. Evans would like to continue
the operating procedures agreed to in March and, as a member of the execu
tive committee, he would like to have the full Committee indicate whether,
as a matter of credit policy, funds should be put into the market, whether
the market should be kept about as it is, or whether it should be permitted
to become tighter.
Mr. Leedy said that while he was not a member of the full Committee,
as an alternate member, he felt this was a discussion basically of the
question whether the agreement reached with respect to the report of the
ad hoc subcommittee should be carried forward or dropped. He felt there
had not been a fair trial of the procedure of putting funds into the short
end of the market, which was just becoming acquainted with what it might ex
pect from System operations. If the present procedure were to be changed
now, the market would not have any guide as to what to expect from the Com
mittee. As to the business situation, Mr. Leedy referred to the estimate
that perhaps $3 billion of reserves would have to be put into the market
between May and the end of the year in order to meet the needs of normal
economic developments. He suggested that some indication from sources
within the System that the Committee recognized that a sizeable amount of
reserves would have to be put into the market and that it was prepared to

6/11/53 -39
provide them might help to accomplish the Committee's objectives. Mr.
Leedy also said that he would be greatly disturbed, as Chairman Martin
had indicated, if the Committee got into an operation where there was
a series of pegs and there seemed to be a substitution of the Committee's
judgment as to where prices of Government securities ought to be, rather
than letting market forces determine them. In sum, Mr. Leedy felt that
conditions at present had not changed sufficiently to warrant a departure
from the agreements reached in March regarding confining purchases for
the System account to short-term securities and refraining from certain
operations during periods of Treasury financing.
Mr. Mills said that while the recommendations in the ad hoc subcom
mittee report could be magnified out of their true importance, the principles
expressed in the report were vital and fundamental to the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee s operation. It would be a great mistake in his opinion to
depart from those principles as now in operation; such departure would be
evidence of weakness and vacillation on the part of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
Mr. Robertson stated that the discussion at this meeting proved
the correctness and wisdom of the Committee's decision in March not to
issue a statement of principles regarding its operations, that the mere
fact that there had been this discussion of possible changes in techniques
illustrated how embarrassing the position of the Committee might have been
made if it had issued such a public statement of principles, Mr. Robertson

6/11/53 -40
said that he had become convinced in his study of the recommendations of
the ad hoc subcommittee that it was desirable to limit operations to the
short term area of the Government securities market except in the case of
disorderly conditions. He felt that Mr. Johns was mistaken in believing
that there was little difference in the two opposing positions that were
under discussion. While the Manager of the Account should, of course, be
completely free to recommend action to correct a disorderly situation,
Mr. Robertson said that he would not have thought that the market last week
had been disorderly and he would have felt that the Committee's operations
should have been limited to purchases of bills. To depart at this time
from the understandings reached in March would be a step back toward the
position of trying to rig the market, Mr. Robertson said; he thought that
injection of reserves at the short end of the market should be just as ef
fective as though the Committee were to put itself in the position of seem
ing to influence other sectors of the market, thus creating an additional
factor for investment portfolio analysts to deal with in trying to measure
the forces that were affecting the long-term Government securities market,
In hisopinion, some members of the Committee were getting a little panicky
about the rise in interest rates; it was his judgment that this rise had
been effective in reducing or postponing demands for credit and this was
one of the objectives of the Committee. As to Mr. C. S. Young's suggestion
that banks were getting concerned about the prices of Government bonds
and the rumor that the Comptroller of the Currency might require them to

6/11/53 -41
write down depreciation, Mr. Robertson said that the Comptroller still had
in effect his agreement that such depreciation would not have to be taken
in valuing bank portfolios. The Board had in effect the same policies
with respect to bond accounts of State member banks. With respect to the
economic situation, Mr. Robertson said that he could see nothing in the
economic presentation of the staff this morning or in the comments of the
members of the Committee or the Presidents from the individual Federal Re
serve districts which would indicate that the situation had changed materi
ally recently; it appeared still to be a situation of delicate balance at
a very high level of activity. If there were to be any change in the un
derstandings reached at the March meeting with respect to recommendations
in the ad hoc subcommittee report, Mr. Robertson said, such proposals should
be seriously considered only when the members of the Committee came fully
prepared to discuss and debate the recommendations in that report.
Mr. Sproul felt that all members of the Committee should have
studied the report and should have come to this meeting prepared to debate
the subject.
Mr. Powell stated that he would wish to bar a doctrinaire attitude
in a situation as critical as the present and that he would like to leave the
open market operation as flexible as possible in any instructions given by
the full Committee.
Mr. Fulton said that while he would like to see operations for the
System account continued as largely as possible in the short end of the

6/11/53 -42
market, he believed that greater flexibility for operations in other areas
was needed. He noted that the only way many banks could adjust their re
serve position was by selling securities of a type other than those which
the System account was interested in buying, that some of the bankers were
saying that they would rather make loans to any one than to buy a Govern
ment bond, and that the attitude of bankers with respect to the Government
securities market seeped down through the whole community including holders
of savings bonds. Mr. Fulton felt that a little support on the part of
the open market account in the longer end of the Government securities
market would be of great help to that market, if such support was within
the amount of reserves that the Committee thought should be put into the
market. He also noted that it takes time for reserves to seep down through
the market to the smaller banks throughout the country, and he felt that
purchases for the System account in the short end of the market were taking
a longer time to seep into the long-term Government securities market than
the requirements of the present situation dictated.
Mr. Williams said that Mr. Leedy had expressed his thoughts fairly
closely. As a result of the ad hoc subcommittee's report, Mr. Willimas said,
the full Committee made a change in policy. He did not think that there
had to be a debate as to whether it was a permanent change or a temporary
change; the Committee was now in the midst of an operation which was experi
mental. A lot of publicity had been given to the change which was generally
considered, at least among bankers, to have resulted from the study of the

6/11/53 - -43
ad hoc subcommittee. If, at a time when the public was jittery, the Com
mittee by another action indicated that there was still another change to
come, it would add still another set of problems to those it was having to
deal with. Mr. Williams did not feel that the Committee at this stage could
be sure enough about the wisdom of a change such as that which was being
proposed to be certain that it should make it now. It ought to continue
to experiment along the present lines, with a willingness to make a change
as that seemed to be indicated. Mr. Williams said that a shift in the Com
mittee's operating technique in the Government securities market now would
be interpreted as an indication that the Committee did not know what it was
doing. It was his belief that the present general type of operation should
be continued, that the situation should be watched carefully, that the Com
mittee should try to give adequate publicity as to what it was going to do
in the way of injecting funds into the market, and that it should try to
counteract some of the present jitteriness in the market. As to the business
situation, Mr. Williams said there was a wide difference of opinion, that
at the last meeting of the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia reports were brought in from nine regional meetings indicat
ing businessmen were making plans for further expansion, while the representa
tive on the Federal Advisory Council reported that at the May meeting of the
Council the reports generally were to the effect that businessmen were dis
turbed about the outlook. Mr. Williams felt that the credit policy of the
Committee should continue about as it is for the present.

6/11/53 -44
Mr. Bryan stated that the discussion at this meeting had gotten into
three fundamental questions: (1) Mr. Evans' question as to whether the
policy of the Committee with respect to adding reserves to the banking system
has been adequate. In his opinion, Mr. Bryan said, the program is not
adequate. Although not a member of the Committee, Mr. Bryan felt that if
it did not embark rapidly on a more adequate program of adding reserves to
the banking system it was entirely possible that we might get what Mr.
Sproul seemed to fear, a widespread convulsive tightening in the market.
(2) There is the question of arbitrage between the short-term market and
other sectors of the Government securities market, and (3) the question
whether the Federal Open Market Committee should give discretionary au
thority to the management of the account to intervene in the long-term
Government securities market. Mr. Bryan said that we had lived through
a period in the market which was most unfavorable to arbitrage of the
short- and long-term market. He recalled some of the things that had hap
pened since last March when the present experiment in free markets was
undertaken. Before that time, there had been an extraordinarily long
period of more or less "administered" markets and it was then impossible
to predict the extent and duration of changes in the yield curve in getting
back to a free market. Within recent months there has been the tightening
in reserve positions of banks, the Federal Reserve made no additions to
its portfolio until May, the Treasury's 3-1/4 per cent 30-year issue was
permitted to be slaughtered by the free-riders, the Treasury was indicating

6/11/53 -45
at every opportunity that it would come into the long-term market, and
it was evident that there could be an almost unlimited supply of long
term bonds, if the Treasury were determined in such a policy, Under these
circumstances, Mr. Bryan said, it was remarkable that the long-term Govern
ment securities market had not "fallen completely out of bed", As to the
immediate situation, Mr. Bryan felt that the manager of any investment
portfolio would note that System purchases have been very modest, that the
current easing in the market has come from Treasury operations and other
considerations of a temporary nature, and that to expect the portfolio
manager of an insurance or other investment company to show interest in
long-term Government bonds under these conditions was to expect the im
possible. While the Federal Open Market Committee might know that it had
a policy of supplying reserves that might be needed for normal business
operations during the next few months, managers of investment accounts do
not know what that policy is. Mr. Bryan did not believe that the efficacy
of arbitrage had been settled by any manner of means by the experience of
the past few months. On the matter of giving greater discretion to the
executive committee or to the management of the System account, Mr. Bryan
noted that the Committee had already provided a procedure by which, with
a considerable degree of latitude, the management of the account could
call to the attention of the executive committee by conference telephone
or individual telephone calls, in a matter of moments, any situation in
which the market was or threatened to become disorderly in the long end.

6/11/53 -46
He would dislike to see any change in the present procedure, which he felt
was adequate, he did not believe this procedure had been fully tried, and
he suggested that it be given a trial before the full Committee voted un
limited discretion to the executive committee along the lines suggested.
It was his view that neither on the basis of experience during the past
three months nor in principle would it be wise for the full Committee to
give discretion of such magnitude.
Mr. Sproul said that the question under discussion at the moment
was the instruction of the full Committee to the executive committee, that
there was no question under discussion of giving full discretion to the
management of the System open market account. Rather, the question was
whether the full Committee should freeze the executive committee's author
ity or whether it should give the executive committee more discretion to
meet a situation that might develop. In referring to a lack of an adequate
period of testing, Mr. Sproul said, this got back to the idea that some
how the full Committee had permanently adopted a policy in March that would
not be changed. In Mr. Sproul's opinion, the March policy was adopted
"under present conditions," conditions have changed since March, and con
ditions in the next three to six months will be peculiar conditions such
as we have seen in recent weeks. He did not feel the authority for deal
ing with a disorderly market situation, as understood at the time of the
March meeting, was adequate to meet the situation that might develop, but
at the moment he was not talking about abandoning that procedure. The

6/11/53 -47
situation that the Committee now faces is whether it is making open market
policy effective in the best way possible, in the light of the business
situation and other factors.
Mr. Robertson inquired whether, if disorderly markets were de
fined to include a situation such as has existed in the last week or two,
Mr. Sproul would feel differently, and Mr. Sproul responded that that would
be much better than the basis on which the account had been operating but
that he would prefer to have the full Committee not limit the executive
committee at this stage with any attempt at definition of a disorderly
market. Mr. Sproul reiterated that it would not necessarily be the objec
tive to go into the long-term market, that that might or might not be the
market under the most pressure or the weakest sector of the market at any
given time. He did not feel it was a question of going back to pegging
or to a series of pegs, nor was it a question of substituting the Commit
tee's judgment for that of the market.
Chairman Martin said that, having heard the comments of all mem
bers of the Committee and of the Presidents who were not on the Committee,
he still held the views he had expressed early in the meeting. With re
spect to the point raised by Mr. Fulton regarding efforts by the System
to restore confidence among bankers, Chairman Martin said that he believed
any actions which the System might take in that direction would not only
not benefit the Government securities market but would actually harm it

6/11/53 -48
through deviating from a policy which the Committee has been working to
ward over a period of two years. While he would grant that conditions have
changed over the months, it was a matter of judgment as to the extent of
such change and he did not feel that the operating procedure approved in
March as a result of the recommendations of the ad hoc subcommittee had
had a test at all, He felt that more aggressive purchasing of bills dur
ing the recent period would have had a marked reaction in terms of arbi
trage, and he felt that the procedure which had been authorized by the full
Committee and the instructions given by the executive committee fully per
mitted such operations. Chairman Martin noted that only nine voting mem
bers of the full Committee were in attendance at this meeting, and he in
quired whether any member of the Committee thought that on a question as
grave as this one it was appropriate to put the matter to a vote. His own
feeling was that, where there was such a difference of opinion as had been
expressed on a matter of as much importance as the one that was involved,
the Committee should not put it to a vote in the absence of some members
and a lack of real urgency.
Mr. Sproul inquired as to what kind of instructions would be given
to the executive committee and, in turn, what kind of instructions would
the executive committee give to the New York Bank.
Chairman Martin suggested that in order to answer Mr. Sproul's
question, the Committee turn to consideration of the credit policy that
should be followed. Should the Committee aggressively and on a rising and

6/11/53 -9
progressive scale supply reserves to the market from this point on? Should
the discount rate be changed upward? Should consideration be given to a re
duction in reserve requirements? He noted that at its meeting on May 6 the
executive committee took the position that there should be no further tighten
ing in the market, and he raised the question whether the position then taken
by the executive committee should be validated, or whether there should be an
easing of the market, or whether there should be further tightening.
Mr. Evans stated that he felt the Committee should put more funds
into the market to ease the reserve position of banks.
Mr. Sproul felt that the policy which the Committee has been fol
lowing is the course that it should continue for the present, that is, it
should maintain the existing degree of restraint but it should not allow
the restraint to be further intensified, and if errors were made they should
be on the side of ease rather than restraint.
Mr. Mills agreed generally with Mr. Sproul's position except that he
would emphasize quite strongly supplying reserves to the market liberally.
Chairman Martin stated that he felt that in the immediate future the
System should step up its purchases quite sharply. He noted that the views
expressed by Messrs. Evans, Sproul, Mills, and Bryan all emphasized that op
erations should be on the side of easing the market, and Mr. Rouse said
that he was thoroughly in accord with that view.
Mr. Earhart said that this view was reflected in recent comments by
members of the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,

6/11/53 -50
that they felt generally that the economy was cresting, and that he felt
sure the directors of that Bank would be loathe to take any restrictive
action such as increasing the discount rate or doing anything else that
might be interpreted as further tightening of the situation,
None of the other members of the Committee expressed views contrary
to those indicated, and Mr. Rouse mentioned again the fact that the Treasury
had put $1100 million into the market recently which would have to be re
placed within the next few weeks along with additional reserves needed in
connection with Treasury financing. This might mean, he said, that the
System would have to put in around $1600 to $1700 million within the next
six weeks. Mr. Rouse felt that some relaxation in the attitude of the Reserve
Banks toward discounting would have an effect in the market and the extent
to which discounts were used would, of course, have to be considered in con
nection with the amount of funds put into the market by the System account.
Following further discussion, Chairman Martin stated that it appeared
to be the consensus of the Federal Open Market Committee that there should
be an aggressive supplying of reserves to the market during the near future,
on a sharply rising basis. None of the members of the Committee expressed a
different view and Chairman Martin stated that, accordingly, this would be
the general policy of the full Committee, to be carried forward in its
instructions to the executive committee.
Chairman Martin then reverted to the proposals made by Mr. Sproul
for changes in the understandings at the March meeting with respect to

6/11/53 -51
confining purchases to the short end of the market and with respect to
System operations during periods of Treasury financings.
Mr. Sproul stated that the only question being raised was that of
the instructions from the full Committee to the executive committee: if
no vote were taken on his proposals, that amounted to a vote to continue
the present instructions, which he felt ought to be changed. His recom
mendation, therefore, as suggested earlier, was that the restrictions on
the executive committee against buying securities in other than the short
term area except in correcting a disorderly market, and against certain
purchases of securities during periods of Treasury financings, be rescinded.
Chairman Martin again questioned whether Mr. Sproul felt that the
matter was of sufficient urgency to put it to a vote in the absence of some
members of the Committee, when it involved, as it did, a change in policy
of importance.
Mr. Sproul responded that he did feel the matter was urgent or he
would not have kept proposing the change, and he referred to the Treasury
financing needs during the next few weeks as a consideration. In response
to a question from Mr. Thomas as to precisely what his suggestion was, Mr.
Sproul said that he was proposing to rescind the two prohobitions adopted
at the meeting of the full Committee on March 4-5, 1953, namely, that (a)
under present conditions, operations for the System account should be con
fined to the short end of the market (not including correction of disorderly
markets), and (b) pending further study and further action by the Committee,

the Committee should refrain during a period of Treasury financing from
purchasing (1) any maturing issues for which an exchange is being offered,
(2) when-issued securities, and (3) any outstanding issues of comparable
maturity to those being offered for exchange. This would mean, Mr. Sproul
said, that the executive committee would not be prohibited from authorizing
transactions in other than short-term securities, or from purchasing securi
ties as indicated during periods of Treasury financing; whether the execu
tive committee would want to use that authority would be up to the execu
tive committee.
Thereupon, Mr. Mills moved that the
two understandings referred to by Mr. Sproul
and noted above be reaffirmed by the full Com
mittee and that the executive committee be
instructed to continue to operate accordingly.
Mr. Mills' motion was put by the Chair
and lost, Messrs. Martin, Evans, Mills, and
Robertson voting "aye", and Messrs. Sproul,
Erickson, Fulton, Johns, and Powell voting "no".
Mr. Sproul then moved that the understand
ings relating to confining operations for the
System account to the short-term sector of the
market and to refraining from certain purchases
during periods of Treasury financings, as ap
proved at the meeting of the Committee on March
4-5, 1953 and as set forth above, be rescinded,
with the understanding that the executive committee
would be free to determine how operations should
be carried on in the respects mentioned, in the
light of the current general credit policy of
the Federal Open Market Committee.
Mr. Sproul's motion was put by the Chair
and carried, Messrs. Sproul, Erickson, Fulton,
Johns, and Powell voting "aye", and Messrs.
Martin, Evans, Mills, and Robertson voting "no".

-53-
Chairman Martin then referred to the directive to be issued to
the executive committee and mentioned a suggestion by Mr. Riefler that,
in view of the policy adopted at this meeting that operations in the
account should be to supply reserves aggressively to the market during
the near future on a sharply rising basis, there should be a change in
the wording of the phrase in the present directive which stated that op
erations should be "with a view to exercising restraint upon inflationary
developments". There was agreement with this suggestion and also with Mr.
Rouse's suggestion that the limitations in the directive be continued at
the present levels.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following direction to the
executive committee was approved unanimously:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise di
rected by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for
such transactions for the System open market account, either
in the open market or directly with the Treasury (including
purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing securities,
and letting maturities run off without replacement), as may be
necessary, in the light of current and prospective economic
conditions and the general credit situation of the country,
with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in the market
to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to avoiding de
flationary tendencies without encouraging a renewal of in
flationary developments (which in the near future will require
aggressive supplying of reserves to the market), (c) to cor
recting a disorderly situation in the Government securities
market, and (d) to the practical administration of the ac
count; provided that the aggregate amount of securities held
in the System account (including commitments for the purchase
or sale of securities for the account) at the close of this
date, other than special short-term certificates of indebted
ness purchased from time to time for the temporary accommoda
tion of the Treasury, shall not be increased or decreased by
more than $2,000,000,000.

The executive committee is further directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for the purchase direct from the Treasury for the account of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (which Bank shall have
discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue parti
cipations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) of such amounts
of special short-term certificates of indebtedness as may be
necessary from time to time for t temporary accommodation of
the Treasury, provided that the total amount of such certificates
held at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not ex
ceed in the aggregate $2,000,000,000.
Mr. Hugh Leach stated that it was contemplated that the next meet
ing of the Presidents' Conference would be held during the week beginning
September 20, 1953, at the time of the annual convention of the American
Bankers Association which is to be held in Washington, D. C. on September
20-23, 1953.
Chairman Martin suggested that a meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee also tentatively be scheduled for the week beginning September 20,
but he emphasized the probability of having to call at least one meeting
of the full Committee before that time.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned at 3:45 p.m.
Secretary.