A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Tuesday, December 15, 1953, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Evans
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Johns
Mr. Mills
Mr. Powell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Abbott, Hostetler, Peterson, Roelse,
Willis, and R. A. Young, Associate
Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Youngdahl, Assistant Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Leedy, Williams, and C. S. Young, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bryan, Earhart, and Leach, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, San
Francisco, and Richmond, respectively
Mr. W. D. Gentry, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas

-2-
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
September 24, 1953 were approved,
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the executive
committee of the Federal Open Market Committee
as set forth in the minutes of the meetings of
the executive committee held on September 24,
October 6, October 20, and November 6, 1953,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Robertson stated that before the actions of the executive
committee of the Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting on Novem
ber 23, 1953 were approved by the full Committee he would like to bring
up for consideration the matter of "swaps" of Government securities that
were authorized by the executive committee at its November 23 meeting.
He then made a statement substantially as follows:
Pursuant to that authorization, "swaps" have taken place
during the past few weeks by way of sales of issues maturing
out to 12-1/2 months and purchases of an equal amount of bills.
But before getting to the merits - the basic question of the
advisability of "swaps" of this nature - I should like to clear
away the possible uncertainty, from a legal point of view, as
to whether the executive committee had authority to authorize
purchases and sales for the purpose of changing the maturity
pattern of the System Open Market Account portfolio.
Since our March 1953 meeting it has been our intention,
as I understood it, that open market transactions be confined
to purchases and sales for the purpose of releasing or absorb
ing reserves. The action taken at the June meeting, and re
scinded in September, did not affect this basic objective, but
related only to our modus operandi in pursuing it.
It is difficult to maintain that the sale, for example,
of December 1954 2s and the purchase of equivalent amounts of
bills fall within these limits, since such balanced sales and
purchases do not release or absorb reserves - they leave the

12/15/53 -3
volume of reserves at the level which prevailed before the
transactions took place.
I have at hand a memorandum which sets forth the grounds
on which it might be contended that the authorization of these
"swaps" was invalid, with supporting data, but since the entire
Open Market Committee is here and can clear up the matter by its
action today, there does not seem to be any reason for exploring
history. At the same time, since there is no question whatever
as to the good faith of the executive committee and the Manager
of the Account, there seems to be no good reason for permitting
the question of legality or validity of the action to remain in
history, possibly to be raised later when the facts are less well
in hand.
Therefore, having explicitly raised that
question, I wish, before going on to the merits
of this problem, and subject to any objections
on other grounds, to move that the actions of
the executive committee, as revealed by the
minutes of its meeting on November 23, 1953, be
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Robertson's motion was seconded and,
following a brief discussion, approved by unani
mous vote
Before this meeting there had been sent to the members of the
Committee a copy of a report of open market operations prepared at the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York covering the period September 24 to
December 9, 1953, inclusive. At this meeting Mr. Rouse presented a sup
plementary report covering commitments executed from December 10 to Decem
ber 14, 1953, inclusive, and commented briefly on that report. Copies of
both reports have been placed in the files of the Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the transactions in the
System open market account for the period
September 24 to December 11, 1953, inclusive,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.

12/15/53 -4
Members of the staff of the Board of Governors then entered the
room for the purpose of presenting a review of recent business and credit
developments, illustrated by chart slides. Copies of the text of the re
view have been sent to each member of the Committee and a copy has been
placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee,
Mr. Thurston joined the meeting at the conclusion of the economic
review, and, following a brief discussion, members of the staff who had
entered the room for the purpose of assisting in its presentation withdrew.
Chairman Martin referred to the report of the ad hoc subcommittee
which had been appointed to study operations in the Government securities
market and to the discussion of that report at the meeting of the full
Committee on March 4-5, 1953. He recalled that at that time two unfinished
items of business were referred back to the subcommittee for further con
sideration, namely (a) the "housekeeping" arrangements and (b) the recommen
dation of the subcommittee that repurchase facilities at an appropriate rate
and with appropriate limitation as to volume be made regularly available to
nonbank dealers over week-ends. The ad hoc subcommittee was instructed to
meet with Mr. Sproul for the purpose of discussing the housekeeping arrange
ments covered in the subcommittee's report; and, with respect to repurchase
facilities, it was requested to review the recommendation set forth under
(b) in terms of the problem of orderly markets and of making reserve funds
available on an automatic basis,
Chairman Martin stated that the ad hoc subcommittee met with Mr.
Sproul on October 20, 1953 for the purpose of discussing housekeeping

12/23/53 -5
arrangements. He noted that in its original report the subcommittee had
made no recommendation concerning housekeeping arrangements other than to
suggest that the full Committee re-examine and review the structure of its
organization. He stated that at the meeting on October 20 at which Mr. Sproul
was present there was a discussion of all aspects of the housekeeping prob
lem in a manner which had been useful and constructive. As a result of that
discussion, Chairman Martin said, the subcommittee decided to make no addi
tional recommendations at the present time. It also agreed that the problem
should be returned to the full Committee with the thought that such matters
as the budget for operating the open market account, management of the ac
count, the responsibility of management, and the modus operandi would be re
viewed by the full Committee from time to time. Chairman Martin referred
in this connection to the letter addressed by Mr. Sproul to each member of
the Committee under date of December 7, 1953 which presented information con
cerning the organization of the securities function at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York and the management of the System account, including data
with respect to the expense of operation of the account, He felt that the
information contained in Mr. Sproul's letter made a useful contribution to
the study of the problem and he noted that Mr. Sproul's letter extended an
invitation to all members of the Federal Open Market Committee to visit the
New York Bank to observe the actual operations of the account.
Chairman Martin stated that in suggesting that the housekeeping
problems be returned to the full Committee, it was not intended to eliminate

12/15/53 -6
review and study of these problems. He urged that each member of the Com
mittee and appropriately designated staff members arrange to go to New York
as opportunity offered and spend some time observing the operations of the
account and the problems of its management, the responsibility for which
was shared by all members of the Committee. Chairman Martin also said that
he would like to have members of the Committee who were able to visit New
York comment on the operation at forthcoming meetings of the full Committee.
With respect to the question of repurchase agreements, Chairman
Martin said that the use of such agreements was a running problem and the
ad hoc subcommittee would like to have it returned to the full Committee
for whatever study seemed warranted. He referred to a memorandum which had
been prepared by Messrs. Riefler and Thomas for distribution to all members
of the Committee under date of December 9, 1953 on the use of repurchase
contracts to meet temporary reserve needs in December of this year. (A copy
of this memorandum has been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market
Committee.) Chairman Martin felt the questions raised in the memorandum
warranted study by the Committee but he did not think they could be decided
at this meeting. He suggested that there be a discussion of this matter
later during this meeting as well as of a letter addressed by Mr. Sproul to
each member of the Committee under date of December 4, 1953 (a copy of which
has been placed in the files of the Committee) commenting on the action taken
by the full Committee at its meeting on September 24 in approving a motion

12/15/53 -7
by Mr. Mills that operations for the System account be confined to short
term securities (except in the correction of disorderly markets) and that
the System account refrain from certain transactions in Treasury securities
during a period of Treasury financing.
Chairman Martin went on to say that Mr. Sproul's letter of Decem
ber 4 set forth clearly and explicitly the position he had understood Mr.
Sproul to hold but that it did not alter his (Chairman Martin's) views re
garding the desirability of confining operations to short-term securities
and refraining from dealing in certain securities during Treasury financings.
The Chairman also said that he had asked the staff to gather additional data
as to the recent performance of the Government securities market about which
Mr. Sproul had commented in his letter. Such material would be sent to the
members of the Committee for their further consideration, Chairman Martin
said, even though statistics might not be conclusive in indicating the
validity of the position he had taken in his letter to the members of the
Committee of September 15, 1953, nor would they necessarily carry out the
points made by Mr. Sproul in his letter of December 4. He thought it would
be desirable, however, for the members of the Committee to consider and
study the information that had been submitted and would be submitted in this
connection.
Secretary's note: A memorandum from
Chairman Martin presenting additional data
regarding pressure on the market during per
iods of refunding was sent to the members of
the Committee at the time these minutes were
distributed, and a copy has been placed in the
files of the Federal Open Market Committee.

12/15/53 -8
Chairman Martin emphasized that the problems which had been pre
sented in the ad hoc subcommittee report and which had been covered in Mr.
Sproul's letters of July 16 and December 4, 1953, and in his (Chairman
Martin's) letter of September 15 were problems which must be continually kept
under study by the members of the Committee. He felt, he said, that the
study made by the ad hoc subcommittee had fulfilled its purpose; as a mem
ber of the full Committee, he was encouraged by the amount of discussion that
had been engendered by the subcommittee's report, and he hoped the work done
by the subcommittee would continue to be a matter of discussion at meetings
of the full Committee and of the executive committee.
Thereupon, without objection, Chairman
Martin's report was accepted and it was agreed
that the ad hoc subcommittee be discharged.
Mr. Robertson then made a statement substantially as follows:
The recent "swap" transactions were not of great quantitative
importance, but they do serve to point up the fundamental and re
curring question of the appropriate role of our open market opera
tions.
As I understood it, one of the chief purposes of our action
at the September meeting was to effectuate further the principle
which permeated the ad hoc subcommittee report and underlay the
policy decisions of this Committee throughout 1953 - that our in
tervention in the market should be solely for the objective of
providing or absorbing reserves in accordance with the needs of
the economy.
There may be circumstances in which our intervention else
where than in the shortest-term sector of the market might have
beneficial effects from the point of view of debt management,
without having any material relation to monetary and credit policy.
All of us have given our best thought to this problem, and I for
one have concluded that the possible advantages of participating
in all sectors of the Government securities market, with a variety
of objectives, are outweighed by the benefits of a strictly lim
ited participation. The chief of these benefits, as I see them,
are:

12/15/53 -9-
(1) The likelihood of increased effectiveness of market
action designed to effectuate general credit policy
when that action is not impeded and its objectives
are not obscured by the pursuit of other objectives;
(2) The development of greater depth, breadth, and resil
iency in the Government securities market, as dealers
and others become certain, as months go by, that (in
the absence of very unusual conditions) the Open Mar
ket Committee's transactions will be solely in the
shortest-term sector.
The ad hoc subcommittee did a thorough and objective job, and
its reasoning and conclusions, together with our discussions of the
matter, have convinced me that our wisest course is a policy of
rigorous self-limitation along the lines I have described. Our job
is to supply reserves and withdraw reserves in order to contribute
to the maintenance of an economy that is both stable and highly pro
ductive. In ordinary circumstances, the way to accomplish this
efficiently, without weakening the fiber of the Government securi
ties market and without tinkering with problems of debt management
that are not our responsibility, is to confine ourselves (apart
from repurchase transactions) to selling securities in the shortest
term sector when we believe reserves should be absorbed and buying
such securities when we believe additional reserves should be sup
plied. This will enable us not only to pursue single-mindedly our
most vital duty of keeping reserves as close as possible to the
optimum level, but at the same time to contribute to the strength
of the market by enabling dealers and investors to make decisions
and take positions with a minimum of worry about a massive but
largely imponderable "X" factor - i.e., the effect of transactions
on behalf of the overpowering portfolio of the Federal Reserve
System.
Needless to say, this policy would bar such "swap" transac
tions as took place during the past month, since their purpose
and effect were not the supply or absorption of reserves,
In view of the fears expressed in September that our action
in this matter might be regarded as immutable - written in tab
lets of stone, as Mr. Sproul said - it is appropriate to reiter
ate that what I propose is no more than a statement of the present
policy of the Committee, always subject to modification at any
time when experience with the policy or changed conditions call
for modification.
Therefore, I move that the Federal Open
Market Committee adopt the following policy,
to be followed until such time as it may be
superseded or modified by further action of
the Committee:

12/15/53 -10
Transactions for the System account in the open market
shall be entered into solely for the purpose of providing
or absorbing reserves (except in the correction of dis
orderly markets), and shall not include offsetting pur
chases and sales of securities for the purpose of alter
ing the maturity pattern of the System's portfolio,
Mr. Mills stated that he would agree with the proposal that
transactions for the System account in the open market shall be entered
into solely for the purpose of providing or absorbing reserves (except in
the correction of disorderly markets). However, it was his impression,
he said, that the ad hoc subcommittee's study of swaps and recommendation
for their elimination had reference only to occasions of Treasury refund
ings, It was his belief that the swap transactions currently undertaken
had especial characteristics having to do with corporate financing in
the market that were not comprehended by the ad hoc subcommittee's finding
against such actions. It was his conclusion that the present experience
with swap transactions had served the useful purpose of clearly demonstrating
their inadvisability under all foreseeable circumstances. He would, there
fore, favor the motion proposed by Mr. Robertson.
Mr. Earhart inquired whether there was any objective in the swap
operations carried on since the meeting of the executive committee on
November 23, 1953 beyond that indicated by the minutes of that meeting,
namely, to acquire some additional holdings of bills in order to facili
tate operations in the System account in carrying out credit policy,
Mr. Rouse stated that at the meeting of the executive committee
on November 23 there was some discussion of the possibility of withdrawing

12/15/53 -11
reserves from the market in January and the suggestion for authorizing
swaps was for the purpose of increasing holdings of January bills in order
to facilitate the withdrawing of reserves in January if that seemed desir
able under the Committee's credit policy. He stated that the proposal was
not for the purpose of changing the maturity of the portfolio of the
System account in any other sense. He further noted that the System account
was passive in the operation. It had simply responded to offers from
the market.
Chairman Martin noted that the executive committee made the de
cision to authorize the swaps at its meeting on November 23 and that the
Manager of the System Account had engaged in the swap transactions referred
to pursuant to the action taken by the executive committee at the time,
He stated that while Mr. Robertson had raised the question of validity of
that authorization, he (Chairman Martin) was inclined to think that the
executive committee had authority to authorize such transactions and that
it acted within its authority at the November 23 meeting. However, since
a question as to the validity of the action had been raised, Chairman
Martin felt it would be preferable to have the action confirmed by the
full Committee at this meeting.
Chairman Martin went on to say that in approaching this problem
he felt the full Committee should be very careful not to find itself in
the position of being "doctrinaire" about the matter. He did not feel that
the swaps made in the account during the period since November 23 had

-12-
seriously impaired the market although as a matter of principle, generally
speaking, he felt that the position suggested by Mr. Robertson in his motion
would be a sound position in the light of the general philosophy under
which the Committee had been working for some time.
Mr. Robertson emphasized that he was not contending that the
action of the executive committee was clearly invalid legally; he was merely
saying its validity was questionable and that it would be desirable to
clarify in the record the authority for the action that had been taken
as well as to indicate what the full Committee felt should be the authority
of the executive committee in this connection hereafter.
Mr. Sproul noted that he was not present at the meeting of the
executive committee on November 23, and he then made a statement substan
tially as follows:
1. Governor Robertson's motion suggests that the sole pur
pose of open market operations is to put reserve funds
into the market and to take them out. It can properly
be said that this is the primary function of open
market operations, but to say it is the sole function
is much too narrow an interpretation; much narrower than
saying that the sole purpose is to effectuate the objectives
of monetary and credit policy. And it also denies
secondary functions, one of which the Committee has
formally recognized in connection with debt management.
2. The motion goes on from this sweeping but narrow gen
eralization to a prohibition of "swaps" by the open
market account. Recent swaps approved by executive
committee in the short-term sector of market were
an appropriate use of System portfolio - they helped
the banks and particularly others to readjust their
short maturities as they desired, and increased the
System's holdings of January bills which we may
want to use as a weapon of credit policy. That it
may have prevented some decline in yields of other
short securities and some rise in bill yields is

12/15/53
-13-
no particular concern of ours in the existing situ
ation, and no real interference with market flexi
bility,
3. It is now held or charged or suggested that there was
some breach of principle in this action. This is the
doctrine of the unbreachable principle in its most
extreme form,
4. For my part I see no breach of principle in this
action but if there were I would be for it.
5. As I said in my recent letter to members of the
Committee, I see no compelling reason permanently
to proscribe swaps by the System Account.
6. The purpose of such swaps in their broader meaning
would not be to operate against a market trend but
to steady a market groping for the trend, and to
bring about desirable adjustments in the Account
portfolio, in terms of credit policy.
7. With the present enormous volume (and variety) of
Government securities, both actually and in relation
to all other debt instruments, and with the whole
private security market basing itself, in part, on
the Government market, I think we may be asking too
much of that market at all times and in all circum
stances to make prompt adjustments to sudden changes
in credit or other conditions. The advantages of al
lowing the large System portfolio to assist in this
process, at times, seem to me to outweight the dis
advantages. We would still have plenty of flexibil
ity in the market and plenty of room for private ar
bitrage, on the part of the great majority of those
interested in and concerned with the Government se
curity market. Only a very few most agile operators
might feel their style might be cramped, I doubt
if even they would be seriously hindered in their
proper pursuit of profits in the Government security
market - but in any case open market policy shouldn 't
be determined by their views or assumed needs for
"freedom" in the market,
In response to a question from Mr. Leach as to exactly what is
undesirable about swaps, except that some in the market may object to them,
Mr. Mills said that he had reached the conclusion from watching the

12/15/53 -14
operations of the System account recently that the swaps that had taken
place had clouded the pattern of the Government securities market. It
was his view that dealers in Government securities were very alert to
every influence injected into the market and that where that influence was
in the form of entrance by the System open market account in a manner
which was not clearly discernible in its objectives, the action might
cause confusion among Government securities dealers in reaching their
judgments. On the whole, Mr. Mills felt that the disadvantages of the
swaps outweighed the possible benefits from such operations.
In response to a question by Mr. Rouse as to what objectionable
effects had been observable in the market recently, Mr. Mills stated that
the effects of the recent swaps had been only nominal, However, it was
his view that to inject into the market any extraneous influence that was
apart from the free market concept would result in throwing a haze over
the market. This could be easily avoided, he said, by refraining from
swaps which might militate against the depth, breadth, and resiliency
sought in the market.
Mr. Rouse responded that there had been no discernible effect
on dealer positions or on the willingness of dealers to take positions.
While there may have been no observable effect on the position
of dealers, Mr. Mills said he felt that the recent swaps had given the
dealer fraternity some indication that the System open market account may,
on occasion, enter the market for purposes other than providing or

12/15/53 -15
absorbing reserves or correcting disorderly markets, that this would cause
uncertainty, and that the sooner such uncertainties could be disabused,
the better.
Mr. Szymczak stated that while he attended the meeting of the execu
tive committee on November 23, he withdrew from the room before the action
was taken authorizing swaps. Had he been present at that time, he said,
he would have indicated disagreement with the proposal for such swaps.
The small amount of bills acquired in the recent operation, which admittedly
had had only nominal effects in the market, did not increase the System's
holdings of bills sufficiently to help significantly in carrying out credit
policy; and if the swaps had been in sufficient volume to have facilitated
carrying out credit policy, the swaps would have caused a disturbance in the
market. Mr. Szymczak felt there was no need for the question to have
come before the full Committee, that it would have been sufficient for the
executive committee at its meeting today to have indicated that the swaps
that had been authorized by it on November 23 should be discontinued.
Mr. Vardaman felt that the question was one to be determined by
the full Committee rather than the executive committee since, in his judg
ment, engaging in swaps amounted to market manipulation rather than opera
tions to carry out credit policy, and the authority for such activities
should definitely be removed from the executive committee. If at any time
the full Committee felt it desirable to engage in swaps, it could authorize
such transactions.

12/15/53 -16
At Mr. Johns' request, Mr. Robertson reread his motion, following
which Mr. Johns expressed the view that the first clause of the proposed
resolution, i.e., "transactions for the System account in the open market
shall be entered into solely for the purpose of providing or absorbing re
serves (except in the correction of disorderly markets)", would be repeti
tive of the position that was implicit in the Committee s action last March
in agreeing that "it is not now the policy of the Committee to support any
pattern of prices and yields in the Government securities market and
intervention in the Government securities market is solely to effectuate
the objectives of monetary and credit policy (including correction of dis
orderly markets)". While the wording was slightly different, Mr. Johns
felt that the effect was the same.
Mr. Robertson stated that he thought the action approved in March
was designed to achieve the same end, but obviously it had failed to do so
as evidenced by the recent use of "swaps"; the wording of his motion was in
tended to make specific and thus to clarify the intention of the full Com
mittee so that there could be no misunderstanding in the future.
Mr. Johns said that he was present and serving on the executive
committee at the meeting on November 23 when it authorized the swaps under
discussion, that he would be entirely willing at this time to reverse that
action and withdraw the authority. He was doubtful about the need for
Mr. Robertson's motion, however, his feeling being that the general policy
was pretty well understood and that the proposed resolution might be con
fusing rather than clarifying.

12/15/53 -17
Mr. Robertson stated that he felt it preferable to have the full
Committee's intentions explicitly stated in the minutes rather than to
leave the matter to a general "understanding".
Mr. Mills questioned whether the ad hoc subcommittee or the full
Committee had ever considered prohibiting swap arrangements except during
periods of Treasury refundings. It was his view that if the full Committee
desired to prohibit swaps, the question of authority could only be settled
by a motion such as that proposed by Mr. Robertson.
During a further discussion of this question, Mr. Erickson stated
that he felt the action taken by the executive committee on November 23 in
authorizing swaps was fully within its authority, that under the circum
stances he felt it was appropriate to authorize the management of the ac
count to engage in swaps for the purpose indicated, that he still felt
that under the same set of circumstances at a future time similar authority
should be given, and that he therefore would oppose a motion such as that
proposed by Mr. Robertson.
Chairman Martin said that unquestionably the over-all concept
embodied in the proposed prohibition of swaps permeated the ad hoc sub
committee report; if that concept would be clarified without having such
clarification preclude reopening the question at any time, he felt it
wholly appropriate to vote on Mr. Robertson's motion.
Mr. Sproul responded that while the theory embodied in the motion
probably may have permeated the whole ad hoc subcommittee report, the whole

12/15/53 -18
ad hoc subcommittee report was never accepted by the Federal Open Market
Committee in toto, The suggested resolution would go beyond what was set
forth in the ad hoc subcommittee report. In Mr. Sproul's view, the emphasis
in open market operations should be on putting reserves into or taking them
out of the market, and the ad hoc subcommittee report indicated that to be
the primary responsibility of the Committee, but the entire experience of
the Committee's operations indicated that there might be times when money
market factors (and therefore credit policy) suggested operations which were
not solely for the purpose of putting in or taking out reserves. Mr. Sproul
felt that if the Committee adopted the proposed prohibition, it would be mov
ing further into a situation of freezing itself into a position from which
it would be difficult to extricate itself; its adoption would be an attempt
to put the Open Market Committee on record in such a way that the idea of
resiliency or flexibility in its policy formation would almost disappear.
Mr. Erickson stated that he would dislike having the record show
a formal motion approving Governor Robertson's proposal and suggested
that the concept might be indicated satisfactorily by having the minutes
of this meeting show that it was the sense of the Committee that operations
ordinarily should avoid swaps.
Chairman Martin stated that there certainly was no intention on
his part or on the part of the ad hoc subcommittee of denying the validity
of flexibility of operations. He recognized that it could be argued that
either the position taken by the ad hoc subcommittee or the position

12/15/53 -19
suggested by Mr. Sproul would work against flexibility. It seemed to him,
however, that it was more appropriate to develop a philosophy and make
exceptions to that philosophy, rather than to take the view that there
should be no philosophy.
Mr. Sproul thought that a philosophy had been developed in gen
eral terms by the Committee but that Mr. Robertson's motion tended to push
that philosophy into a corner out of which the emergence of a flexible
policy would become more and more difficult.
Chairman Martin stated that it should be clearly understood by
all members of the Committee that, in the event Mr. Robertson's motion
should be voted on and carried, the Committee should have no hesitancy in
reversing the action in the event circumstances arose which made that seem
to be desirable. This could be done at any time by calling a meeting of
the full Committee or, in the event of need, by telephone.
During a further discussion of this question, Mr. Sproul again
expressed the view that step by step the Committee was building a pattern
of very limited flexibility or none at all.
Mr. Earhart suggested that it might be more disturbing to the
Government securities market if, in January, the System account were to
make outright sales of securities in order to contract the supply of re
serves, than to have swaps such as were authorized by the executive com
mittee on November 23 take place during December.
Chairman Martin responded that it was always a matter of judgment,
of balancing between a philosophy of a free market and the degree to which

12/15/53 -20
the Federal Open Market Committee assumed responsibility for the market.
In the longer run, what would produce depth, breadth, and resiliency in the
market? His own views were at the opposite pole from those expressed by
Mr. Sproul, he said, but he recognized that judgments might differ on what
would produce the kind of market that was being discussed.
Mr. Leach stated that if he were a member of the Committee he
would vote against Mr. Robertson's motion, assuming that the action that
would be taken would have to be included in the record of policy actions
to be published in accordance with Section 10 of the Federal Reserve Act.
His disposition was not to take formal actions of this sort which had to
be made a matter of public record.
Chairman Martin noted that the action of the Committee in June
in reversing by a five to four vote the action that had been taken by the
full Committee in March with respect to confining operations to short-term
securities and to refraining from certain operations during periods of
Treasury financings was one which would have to go into the policy record.
He did not feel that the concept of a free market was one on which the
members of the Committee could refuse to take a definite stand.
Mr. Sproul then moved that, without ac
cepting in any way the idea of a perpetual
policy such as was suggested by Mr. Robertson's
resolution, that motion be amended to provide
that it would be effective "until the next
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee".
Mr. Sproul stated that his reason for moving to amend Mr. Robert
son's motion was that the whole temper of the discussion of that motion

12/15/53 -21
as well as of Mr. Mills' motion which was approved at the meeting on
September 24, 1953 had been to the effect that the actions proposed
were always subject to review. While he assumed that all members of the
Committee would agree that the action proposed by Mr. Robertson would
be effective only until the next meeting, Mr. Sproul felt that it was
important enough to warrant having this point clearly stated so that the
Committee would not slide into the position of having frozen policy in
definitely.
Mr. Robertson stated that he would prefer not to have his reso
lution amended as proposed by Mr. Sproul inasmuch as such an amendment
would mean that the resolution automatically became ineffective after the
next meeting of the Committee unless positive action were then taken to
renew it.
Mr. Williams then suggested that the executive committee would
have a pretty clear indication of what the full Committee had in mind if
in Mr. Robertson's motion, the word "primarily" were substituted for the
word "solely" so that the affected part of the motion would read "......
transactions for the System account in the open market shall be entered
into primarily for the purpose of providing or absorbing reserves......"
Mr. Robertson replied that he would be opposed to the change
recommended by Mr. Williams since there was no clear understanding of what
would fall outside the realm of "primarily". Thus, such a change would,
in effect, defeat the purpose of his motion which was intended to draw a

12/15/53 -22
dividing line which, without further interpretation, would be clearly un
derstood by everyone concerned.
Chairman Martin stated that, for the reasons given by Mr. Robertson,
he would dislike substitution of the word "primarily" for "solely".
Following a discussion, Mr. Sproul's motion
to amend Mr. Robertson's motion was put by the
Chair and lost: Messrs. Sproul and Erickson
voting "aye" and Messrs. Martin, Evans, Fulton,
Johns, Mills, Powell, Robertson, Szymczak, and
Vardaman voting "no".
Mr. Robertson's motion, that transactions
for the System account in the open market shall
be entered into solely for the purpose of pro
viding or absorbing reserves (except in the cor
rection of disorderly markets), and shall not
include offsetting purchases and sales of
securities for the purpose of altering the
maturity pattern of the System's portfolio, was
then put by the Chair and carried: Messrs.
Martin, Evans, Fulton, Johns, Mills, Powell,
Robertson, Szymczak, and Vardaman voting "aye",
and Messrs. Sproul and Erickson voting "no".
Mr. Sproul stated that he had another proposal to make which
was related to the foregoing discussion. He referred to the action taken
by the Committee at its meeting on September 24, 1953 in approving the
motion by Mr. Mills that "the Federal Open Market Committee take the position
that operations for the System account be confined to short-term securities
(except in the correction of disorderly markets) and that during a period of
Treasury financing there be no purchases of (1) maturing issues for which
an exchange is being offered, (2) when-issued securities, or (3) outstanding
issues of comparable maturity to those being offered for exchange; and that

12/15/53 -23
these policies be followed until such time as they may be superseded or
modified by further action of the Federal Open Market Committee".
Mr. Sproul then moved that the last clause
of the foregoing action taken at the meeting on
September 24, 1953 be amended to read "and that
these policies be followed until the next meet
ing of the Federal Open Market Committee."
In commenting upon this motion Mr. Sproul stated that, in pro
posing the amendment, he was in no way altering his opposition to the
general purport of the whole action approved by the full Committee on
September 24, 1953 He felt, however, that the proposed language would
correctly reflect the sense of the meeting on September 24, that is, that
the action would be subject to review at the next meeting of the Committee.
He preferred the suggested wording, he said, so that everyone would know
that the action taken did not represent a permanent policy.
During the discussion that followed, Mr. Szymczak expressed the
view that those who might not vote to approve Mr. Sproul's motion would not
necessarily have any objection to considering the question at the next or
any other meeting of the Committee.
Mr. Mills raised the question whether in the opinion of the Counsel
for the Committee modification of the action taken at the meeting on Septem
ber 24 by including a specific time limitation such as suggested by Mr.
Sproul's motion was necessary to preserve the legal freedom of action for the
Committee s members subsequently to alter their views.
Mr. Vest stated that from the legal standpoint it was clear that
any member of the Committee had the right at any meeting to bring up any

12/15/53
-24
subject of the type under discussion for consideration; whether the specific
provision suggested by Mr. Sproul was included in the resolution or not, this
right was always there as a legal matter and could not be taken away by
action of the Committee,
Mr. Erickson stated that he would vote to approve Mr. Sproul's
motion since it represented the position which he had felt all along existed
and since it would not alter the views he held in voting to approve Mr.
Mills' resolution at the meeting on September 24, 1953.
Thereupon, Mr. Sproul's motion was put by
the Chair and lost: Messrs. Sproul and Erickson
voting "aye" and Messrs. Martin, Evans, Fulton,
Johns, Mills, Powell, Robertson, Szymczak, and
Vardaman voting "no".
Mr. Robertson stated that so long as the question of the action
taken by the Committee at the meeting on September 24 had been raised, he
would suggest that the wording of the motion be clarified by inserting the
words "in the open market" following "System account" so as to make it clear
that the action applied only to transactions in the open market and not to
transactions with the Treasury.
This suggestion was discussed briefly and
it was agreed unanimously that, as a matter of
clarification of the subject action taken at
the meeting on September 24, 1953, the words
"in the open market" be inserted following
the words "System account".
Secretary's note: With this change, the
action would read as follows:
"Mr. Mills then moved that the Federal
Open Market Committee take the position that

12/15/53 -25
operations for the System account in the open
market be confined to short-term securities
(except in the correction of disorderly markets)
and that during a period of Treasury financing
there be no purchases of (1) maturing issues
for which an exchange is being offered, (2) when
issued securities, or (3) outstanding issues of
comparable maturity to those being offered for
exchange; and that these policies be followed
until such time as they may be superseded or
modified by further action of the Federal Open
Market Committee."
Mr. Vardaman withdrew from the meeting at this point.
Chairman Martin then called upon Mr. Thomas who commented
briefly on the outlook for the reserve position of banks after the turn
of the year, particularly the effects of the return flow of currency from
circulation following the holiday shopping season and the easing influence
such return flow would have on the money market. (A Staff memorandum on
The Outlook for Treasury Cash Requirements and Bank Reserves had been dis
tributed to the members of the Committee under date of December 11, 1953.)
Mr. Thomas raised the question whether the Committee would wish to withdraw
funds from the market during January as a means of avoiding a large volume
of free reserves (excess reserves less discounts and advances) during that
period. It was his view that, assuming that any additional reserves supplied
by open market operations between December 10 and the year-end were made
available through the repurchase facility and assuming further that repur
chase contracts were fully repaid early in January, the System would need to
mature or sell about $500 million of Treasury bills in January if free re
serves were to average about $100 million by late January.

12/15/53 -26
Chairman Martin suggested that consideration be given at this point
to the memorandum from Messrs. Riefler and Thomas dated December 9, 1953, to
which he had referred earlier in this meeting. While he did not believe the
Committee was prepared to make changes at this time, he felt discussion of
the subject was desirable since questions had been raised regarding the
recent action of the manager of the System open market account in reducing
the effective rate on repurchase agreements to 1-3/4 per cent, a level below
that of the discount rate (2 per cent). He noted that there had also been
a question whether repurchase facilities should be extended to member banks
rather than only to non-bank dealers in Government securities. With respect
to the relationship between the discount rate and the repurchase rate, it
was Chairman Martin's view that an educational process had been taking place
in the market and that action to lower the discount rate in December and put
it back up in January would be widely misinterpreted in the business com
munity.
Chairman Martin went on to say that the action in reducing the
repurchase rate was taken under the authority given to the manager of the
System account by the full Committee, after the manager of the account had
discussed the proposed action with him (Chairman Martin).
Mr. Sproul then made a statement substantially as follows:
1. I think a repurchase rate lower than the discount rate is
peculiarly adopted to relieving temporary situations in the money
market and can effectively and most appropriately be carried out
by making it available to Government security dealers, other than
banks.
2. We have an example in the recent situation. As Governor Mills
pointed out at the last meeting of the executive committee, we

12/15/53 -27
had a relatively easy reserve position in most of the country and
relative tightness in New York. It was a money market phenomenon
of temporary character. Our job was to smooth it out, without
actual or apparent major or significant changes in general credit
policy. A reduction in the repurchase rate and an increased use
of repurchase facilities avoided a temporary undue run-up of rates
and a temporary undue tightening of credit due to increased bank
borrowing, and also avoided the substantially more permanent commit
ment of a reduction in the discount rate, and the slightly more
permanent commitment of larger outright purchases of Government
securities. It emphasized the money market aspect of the situation
as distinguished from the overall business and credit aspect.
3. Used in this way to meet temporary situations, which I think is
the way it should be used, I see no need to extend the repurchase
privilege to dealer banks nor to all banks. The banks are able to
make their necessary adjustments in large part through the Govern
ment security market by virtue of the repurchase facility afforded
to the dealers, and without resort to the amount of borrowing which
would otherwise be necessary.
4. To expand the privilege by making it available to dealer banks,
in addition to being unnecessary to make the machinery work, would
seem to me to run counter to a fundamental tenet of the Federal Re
serve Act that the affairs of each Federal Reserve Bank will be ad
ministered fairly and impartially without discrimination in favor
of or against any member bank or banks.
5. To try to overcome this difficulty by making the facility
available to all member banks would seem to me to lead us into
an error to correct an error which doesn't exist. It would be,
in effect, the establishment of a preferential borrowing or dis
count rate. And one thing I think we have learned is that no
matter how you slice it, the preferential rate becomes the ef
fective discount rate, at least for the banks that know how to
use it. I don't think we want to get back into that situation.
Repurchase agreements have been and can be used effectively as
an instrument of monetary policy geared specifically to meet
temporary situations in the money market-of which the Treasury
short term market is now the core. There is a clear difference
between the repurchase rate in its restricted use and the discount
rate in its general use, and I don't think that distinction should
be blurred.
If the repurchase rate didn't become a preferential rate, it would
be because most banks were not familiar with it, and then we would
be right back where we started, with a special facility for a few
money market banks.

12/15/53 -28
In response to a question from Chairman Martin, Mr, Sproul indi
cated that he would contemplate that the existing rate on repurchase agree
ments would be kept until about the end of this year; the usefulness of the
present 1-3/4 per cent rate on repurchase agreements would be ended with the
return flow of funds after the turn of the year when repurchase contracts
would be repaid.
There followed a general discussion of the use of repurchase agree
ments and of the question whether the rate on such agreements should be set
at a level below the discount rate of the Federal Reserve Banks. During this
discussion, Chairman Martin stated that he was in complete agreement with
the views expressed by Mr. Sproul regarding repurchase agreements. He felt
they represented an appropriate device in the money market which could be used
from time to time in helping to accomplish the objectives of credit policy,
and he noted that they had been used since the early 1920's, the Board having
then authorized the Federal Reserve Banks to engage in such transactions.
Messrs. Robertson, Bryan, and Johns expressed some doubts as to
the appropriateness of present arrangements for repurchase agreements but
were not prepared to suggest changes in the procedure for their use at this
time.
Mr. Mills suggested that, entirely apart from the procedure for
using repurchase agreements, he sensed a tendency to rely unduly on such
facilities as a means of supplying reserves over the coming year-end period.
He felt System policy should be careful not to exclude outright purchases of

12/15/53 -29
securities in the event repurchase agreements did not meet the needs of the
market for reserves.
Mr. Sproul stated that, while the question of the credit policy to
be pursued in coming weeks had not yet been acted on by the Committee, he
would agree that if conditions developed where repurchase agreements were not
taking care of the situation in accordance with the Committee s credit policy,
outright purchases of securities should not be excluded.
The discussion then turned to the credit policy to be followed
during coming weeks in the light of the economic review presented earlier in
the meeting and of the review Mr. Thomas had given of the projections for
bank reserve positions, particularly through the month of January. Chairman
Martin noted that the Committee had been pursuing a general policy of "active
ease" in the money market, which meant that reserves would be supplied to
the market to meet seasonal and growth needs of the economy. He inquired
whether, in terms of the foregoing discussion, any of the members of the Com
mittee felt there should be a modification of the Committee's existing policy.
This question was considered and there was unanimous agreement that
the over-all credit policy should continue along the lines that had been
pursued recently with, however, more emphasis on a program of actively
maintaining a condition of ease in the money market.
In this connection there was also a discussion of the possible
desirability of a reduction in the discount rate of the Federal Reserve Banks
as a means of helping to carry out the Committee's stated policy of actively

12/15/53 -30
maintaining a condition of ease in the money market.
Mr. Johns stated reasons why he felt a reduction in the discount
rate might be considered at this time, emphasizing that such a reduction
need not be thought of as something of a very temporary nature to be followed
by an increase soon after the first of the year; it was Mr. Johns' thought
that a reduced discount rate at this time might be a desirable indication of
flexibility.
Several of the other members of the Committee and Presidents of
Federal Reserve Banks who were not members of the Committee questioned the
desirability of a reduction in the discount rate at this time.
Chairman Martin expressed the view that a reduction in the discount
rate at present might "muddy the stream" in view of the fact that the Com
mittee had already started on a program of meeting year-end credit demands
by use of repurchase agreements. As to the business situation, he noted
differences of opinion on how serious the current readjustment might be and
suggested that on the whole it might be wiser to avoid changing the discount
rate at the present time.
Mr. Sproul agreed with these comments, adding the view that the
thoughts expressed regarding the discount rate in no way indicated a feeling
on the part of the members of the Committee that its credit policy should in
any sense be one of restraint during the period immediately ahead,
The meeting recessed at 1:10 p.m. and reconvened at 2:00 p.m. with
the same attendance as at the close of the morning session.

12/15/53 -31
During a discussion of the directive to be issued, it was suggested
that the clause in the existing directive which had provided that the exec
utive committee should arrange for transactions for the System open market
account with a view, among other things, "to avoiding deflationary tendencies"
should be changed in keeping with the decision at the morning session that
the over-all objective of credit policy should be one of actively maintaining
a condition of ease in the money market.
There was also a discussion of the purpose of clause (d) of the
directive which authorized that transactions be with a view "to the practical
administration of the account". Mr. Vest said that it was difficult to
state precisely what was authorized by this clause but that it gave a certain
amount of leeway for incidental transactions in the account which were neces
sary to carry out effectively and appropriately the policies otherwise pre
scribed by the Committee, within the limitations established under the
general policy or other directives adopted by the Committee. Mr. Vest noted
that the clause in its present form or in a similar form had been used in
virtually all directives of the Federal Open Market Committee and of the
executive committee since the Committee was reorganized pursuant to the Bank
ing Act of 1935.
After some discussion, Chairman Martin suggested that the clause
be retained in the directive to be issued at this meeting but that its
purpose be reviewed before the next meeting, and there was unanimous agreement
with this suggestion.

12/15/53 -32
Following a further discussion, during
which it was stated that no change in the limita
tions contained in the directive was necessary,
upon motion duly made and seconded, unanimous ap
proval was given to a directive in the following
form:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise directed
by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for such trans
actions for the System open market account, either in the open
market or directly with the Treasury (including purchases, sales,
exchanges, replacement of maturing securities, and letting maturi
ties run off without replacement), as may be necessary, in the
light of current and prospective economic conditions and the general
credit situation of the country, with a view (a) to relating the sup
ply of funds in the market to the needs of commerce and business,
(b) to promoting growth and stability in the economy by actively
maintaining a condition of ease in the money market, (c) to correct
ing a disorderly situation in the Government securities market, and
(d) to the practical administration of the account; provided that
the aggregate amount of securities held in the System account (in
cluding commitments for the purchase or sale of securities for the
account) at the close of this date, other than special short-term
certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be increased or
decreased by more than $2,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for the
purchase direct from the Treasury for the account of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York (which Bank shall have discretion, in cases
where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one or more
Federal Reserve Banks) of such amounts of special short-ter certi
ficates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time for
the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, provided that the total
amount of such certificates held at any one time by the Federal Re
serve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate $2,000,000,000.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held
during the week beginning March 1, 1954.
Mr. Robertson stated that, since the ad hoc subcommittee was being
discharged, he would not wish to have this meeting adjourn without first
saying that he felt the subcommittee was entitled to the commendation of

12/15/53 -33
the entire Federal Open Market Comittee. He felt that the job the subcom
mittee had done was of great benefit to the System, not only because of
the specific suggestions it had made, but even more particularly because
of the general interest it had stimulated among the members of the Federal
Open Market Committee in open market operations. Mr. Robertson added the
comment that he felt especially indebted to the subcommittee for the work
it had done.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned at 2:15 p.m.
Secretary.