A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the of
fices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington
on Wednesday, March 4, 1953, at 10:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Evans (latter part of meeting)
Mr. Johns
Mr. Mills (first part of meeting)
Mr. Powell (first part of meeting)
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman (first part of meeting)
Mr. C. S. Young, alternate for Mr. Gidney
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel (middle part of
meeting)
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Abbott, Peterson, Roelse, Thompson, and
Ralph A. Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Youngdahl, Assistant Director of the Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. R. F. Leach, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Mr. Arthur Willis, Assistant Secretary, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
Messrs. Gilbert, Leedy, and Williams, alternate members of
the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bryan, Earhart, and Hugh Leach, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, San Francisco, and
Richmond, respectively
Mr. Fulton, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland
Messrs. Rauber and Wheeler, Vice Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Atlanta and San Francisco,
respectively; Mr. Parker B. Willis, Financial
Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston

3/4/53 -2
Mr. Riefler reported that advices of the election for a period of
one year commencing March 1, 1953, of members and alternate members of the
Federal Open Market representing the Federal Reserve Banks had been re
ceived, that except for Mr. Gidney each newly elected member and alternate
member had executed the required oath of office, and that it was the opinion
of the Committee Counsel on the basis of advices received that the following
members and alternate members were legally qualified to serve except that
it would be necessary to receive the executed oath of office from Mr. Gidney,
a form having been mailed to him for that purpose:
Secretary's note: Mr. Gidney's oath of
office, properly executed, was received by the
Secretary under date of March 17, 1953.
Allan Sproul, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, with William F. Treiber, First Vice Presi
dent of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as
alternate member;
J. A. Erickson, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston, with Alfred H. Williams, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, as alternate member;
Ray M. Gidney, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland, with C. S. Young, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate member;
Delos C. Johns, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis, with R. R. Gilbert, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas, as alternate member;
Oliver S. Powell, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, with H. G. Leedy, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, as alternate member.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the following
officers of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee were elected to serve until the election

3/1/53 -3
of their successors at the first meeting of
the Committee after February 28, 1954, with
the understanding that in the event of the
discontinuance of their official connection
with the Board of Governors or a Federal
Reserve Bank as the case might be they
would cease to have any official connec
tion with the Federal Open Market Committee:
Wm. McC. Martin, Jr. Chairman
Allan Sproul Vice Chairman
Winfield W. Riefler Secretary
Elliott Thurston Assistant Secretary
George B. Vest General Counsel
Frederic Solomon Assistant General Counsel
Woodlief Thomas Economist
Wm. J. Abbott, Jr., Arthur A. Bright, Jr., Associate Economists
J. Marvin Peterson, H. V. Roelse
Donald S. Thompson, and Ralph A. Young
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York was selected to execute trans
actions for the System Open Market Account
until the adjournment of the first meeting
of the Committee after February 28, 1954.
Mr. Sproul stated that the Board of Directors of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York had selected Mr. Rouse as Manager of the System
Open Market Account, subject to the selection of the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York by the Federal Open Market Committee as the Bank to execute
transactions for the System account and his approval by the Federal Open
Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the selection of Mr. Rouse
as Manager of the System Open Market Account
was approved.

3/4/53 -4
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the following were selected
to serve with the Chairman of the Federal Open
Market Committee (who under the provisions of the
by-laws is also Chairman of the executive
committee) as members and alternate members
of the executive committee until the selection
of their successors at the first meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee after February 28,
1954:
Members Alternate Members
R. M. Evans M. S. Szymczak
Abbot L. Mills, Jr. J. L. Robertson
James K. Vardaman, Jr.
(To serve in the order named
as alternates for Messrs.
Martin, Evans, and Mills)
Allan Sproul Delos C. Johns
J. A. Erickson Oliver S. Powell
(To serve in the order named
as alternates for Messrs.
Sproul and Erickson)
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
December 8, 1952 were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the execu
tive committee of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee as set forth in the minutes of the meet
ings of the executive committee held on Decem
ber 8, 1952, December 23, 1952, January 6, 1953,
January 27, 1953, and February 10, 1953, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Before this meeting there had been sent to the members of the Com
mittee a report of open market operations prepared at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York covering the period December 8, 1952 to February 25, 1953,

3/4/53 -5
inclusive. Mr. Rouse presented a supplemental report covering the period
from February 25 to March 3, 1953, inclusive, commenting that in the inter
val since February 25 repurchase agreements had been entered into with
dealers in the amount of $49 million but that all of these had since been
taken back by the dealers. Copies of both reports have been placed in the
files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the transactions in the System
account for the period December 8, 1952 to March 3,
1953, inclusive, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Reference was made to the resolution adopted by the Federal Open
Market Committee on November 20, 1936 authorizing each Federal Reserve
Bank to purchase and sell at home and abroad cable transfers and bills of
exchange and bankers' acceptances payable in foreign currencies, to the
extent that such purchases and sales may be deemed to be necessary or
advisable in connection with the establishment, maintenance, operation,
increase, reduction, or discontinuance of accounts of Federal Reserve
Banks in foreign countries. Mr. Sproul stated that accounts were now
maintained with the Bank of Canada (book value $12,181, market value
$15,261), the Bank of England (book value $10,463, market value $10,540),
and the Bank of France (book value $42.79, market value $42.78). He said
that about $8 million in transactions had been run through the account
with the Bank of Canada during the past year while the other accounts had

3/4/53 -6
been kept alive for possible use. Unless there was some specific objection,
Mr. Sproul suggested that the three accounts be kept open and that the
present authority be continued without change.
It was agreed that no action should be
taken at this time to amend or to terminate
the resolution of November 20, 1936.
Chairman Martin referred to the authority granted to the Federal
Reserve Banks by the Federal Open Market Committee with respect to repur
chase agreements covering short-term Treasury obligations with nonbank
dealers in U. S. Government securities qualified to transact business with
the System open market account, as amended in July 1952. In response to
Chairman Martin's inquiry, Mr. Rouse stated that he felt the authority
should be continued but that he would suggest that the provision in sub
paragraph (c) providing that such agreements "cover all short-term
Government securities selling at a yield of not more than the issuing
rate for 1-year Treasury obligations" be changed to provide that such
agreements "cover only short-term Government securities maturing within
15 months". Mr. Rouse stated that under the present and prospective con
ditions he felt it would be preferable to have the repurchase agreements
related to short-term Government securities of a specified maximum maturity,
rather than to those bearing a certain yield.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, it was agreed unanimously
that the authority with respect to repurchase
agreements revised to include the change recom
mended by Mr. Rouse, should be continued.

3/4/53 -7
Secretary's note: Later in the meeting, the Committee
voted to abandon the procedure existing heretofore under
which it has been necessary for dealers in Government
securities to qualify to transact business with the System
open market account; and the authority for repurchase
agreements with the conditions relating thereto (as enclosed
with the letter of July 30, 1952 from the Assistant Secre
tary of the Federal Open Market Committee to the Presidents
of all Federal Reserve Banks), after being revised to delete
the words referring to such qualification of dealers and to
incorporate the change recommended by Mr. Rouse at this meet
ing, reads as follows:
CONDITIONS FOR REPURCHASE AGREEMENTS AS
PRESCRIBED BY THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
Each Federal Reserve Bank, in lieu of all similar previous author
izations, is authorized to enter into repurchase agreements with nonbank
dealers in United States Government securities under the following condi
tions:
1. Such agreements
(a) Are at a rate which shall be specified from time
to time by the Manager of the System open market
account in the light of market conditions and de
velopments and in accordance with any directives
or limitations prescribed by the full Committee
or the executive committee for the purpose of
carrying out the current policies of the Federal
Open Market Committee, but in no event shall the
effective rate be below whichever is the lower
of (1) the discount rate of the purchasing Fed
eral Reserve Bank on eligible commercial paper,
or (2) the average issuing rate on the most re
cent issue of three-month Treasury bills;
(b) Are for periods of not to exceed 15 calendar days;
(c) Cover only short-term Government securities matur
ing within 15 months; and
(d) Are used with care and discrimination as a means
of providing the money market with sufficient
Federal Reserve funds as to avoid undue strain
on a day-to-day basis.

3/4/53 -8
2. Reports of such transactions are made to the Manager of
the System open market account to be included in the
weekly report of open market operations which is sent
to the members of the Federal Open Market Committee.
3. In the event Government securities covered by any such
agreement are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant to
the agreement or a renewal thereof, the securities thus
acquired by the Federal Reserve Bank are sold in the
market or transferred to the System open market account.
In a discussion of the procedure for the allocation of securities
in the System open market account, Mr. Leedy stated that he felt the exist
ing formula which had been adopted in January 1948 and modified in minor
points upon one or two occasions since that time was not entirely satis
factory. He suggested that the present allocation procedure be continued
at this time with the understanding that at the meeting of the Committee
in June consideration be given to the adoption of a more satisfactory
formula.
Chairman Martin stated that he understood this formula was now
being reviewed by Mr. Leonard, Director of the Board's Division of Bank
Operations, and he suggested that the present allocation procedure be
continued with the understanding that a study of the formula would be
completed in time to have a discussion of any suggested changes at the
next meeting of the full Committee.
The foregoing suggestion was approved
unanimously.

3/4/53 -9
Chairman Martin suggested that the terms upon which the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York transacts business with brokers and dealers in
United States Government securities on behalf of the System open market
account, as approved at the meeting on February 29, 1944 and as renewed
from time to time since that date, be continued in their present form, with
the understanding, however, that this action would be subject to further
consideration in the discussion of the report of the ad hoc subcommittee
on the Government securities market later during this meeting and subject
to such changes as might result from that discussion.
Chairman Martin's suggestion was ap
proved unanimously.
Secretary's note: As recorded later in these minutes,
the Committee agreed, by unanimous vote, that the System of
rigid qualifications for dealers be abandoned, thus modify
ing the action above indicated.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the distribution of the weekly
report of open market operations prepared by
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was ap
proved as follows:
1. The members of the Board of Governors.
2. The Presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks.
3. The Secretary, the Economist, and the Associate
Economists of the Federal Open Market Committee,
4. The Secretary of the Treasury.
5. The Under Secretary of the Treasury.
6. The Special Deputy to the Secretary of the
Treasury working on debt management problems.
7. The Assistant Secretary of the Treasury work
ing on debt management problems.
8. The Fiscal Assistant Secretary of the Treasury.
9. The Chief of the Division of Bank Operations
of the Board of Governors.

3/4/53 -10
10. The officer in charge of research at each of
the Federal Reserve Banks which is not repre
sented by its President on the Federal Open
Market Committee.
11. Mr. Treiber, alternate member of the Federal
Open Market Committee; the Assistant Vice
President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York working under the Manager of the System
account; the Manager of the Securities Depart
ment of the New York Bank; the Vice President
in Charge, and the Manager, of the Research
Department of the New York Bank; and the con
fidential files of the New York Bank as agent
for the Federal Open Market Committee,
It was agreed unanimously that there should
be no change in the authorization given at the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on
March 1-2, 1951, authorizing the Chairman of the
Committee to appoint a Federal Reserve Bank as
agent to operate the System account temporarily
in case the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was
unable to function.
Chairman Martin referred to the action taken by the Committee at
its meeting on September 25, 1952 under which it authorized the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York to purchase direct from the Treasury for its own
account special Treasury short-term certificates of indebtedness with dis
cretion to issue participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks, rather
than to purchase such securities for the System open market account with
resulting allocation among the several Federal Reserve Banks. He then
called upon Mr. Rouse, who stated that this procedure seemed to be work
ing satisfactorily, that he would recommend that it be continued, and that
if the authority in this form was continued, it would appear to make unnecessary

3/4/53 -11
the continuation of the authority granted on June 19, 1952 for each
Federal Reserve Bank to purchase special certificates from the Treasury
when such purchases would facilitate the handling of the Treasury balance
on Saturdays and holidays.
Mr. Rouse's suggestions were approved
unanimously.
Reference was made to the action taken at the meeting of the full
Committee on June 19, 1952 at which the regulation of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee was amended with respect to purchases of prime eligible bank
ers' acceptances and setting of rates of such acceptances, at which time
the Committee also fixed the minimum buying rate on such prime eligible
bankers' acceptances at 1-3/4 per cent with the understanding that the
effective rates shall be specified from time to time by the Manager of
the System open market account in the light of market conditions and devel
opments and in accordance with directives or limitations by the full Com
mittee or the executive committee for the purpose of carrying out the
current policy of the Open Market Committee. Mr. Rouse stated that he would
recommend that the minimum buying rate on bankers' acceptances be fixed
at this time at 2 per cent, adding that at the present time the effective
rate on the shortest term acceptances was 2-1/8 per cent.
Thereupon, the Committee voted unanimously
to fix the minimum buying rate on prime eligible
bankers' acceptances at 2 per cent, subject to
change from time to time by the Committee in
order to carry out its policies.

3/4/53 -12
At this point Messrs. Garfield, Williams, and Hersey of the Board's
staff entered the room for the purpose of assisting in a visual presenta
tion of current economic conditions and policy developments. Mr. Solomon,
Assistant General Counsel, also joined the meeting at this point.
In the review of recent changes in production and prices, the com
ment was made that extensive adjustments to changing economic conditions
have been occurring and that there has been more flexibility in the economy
than has been commonly recognized. It was pointed out that the latest
developments include a downward movement in basic farm prices to support
levels and that such prices are no longer free to decline while some indus
trial commodities which have been held down by price controls such as cop
per and cigarettes are being permitted to advance in a free market. In
future months, it was stated, actual changes in prices and also in produc
tion and other relationships will depend not only on domestic developments
but also on developments abroad in both the economic and political field.
In commenting on the credit situation, it was stated that economic develop
ments suggested a continued strong demand for credit over the next several
months, that private demands for credit in the aggregate currently are
somewhat larger than a year ago, and that mortgage placements, State and
local Government financing, and corporate issues of securities are con
tinuing at a very high level. Particular attention was called to the
demand for consumer instalment credit, which is running much higher than

3/4/53 -13
last year as might be expected in view of the lengthening out of credit
terms, the increased output of automobiles and other durables, and the pressure
to sell them at prevailing prices. Questions for the future included the
rapid growth of inventory accumulation as well as the continued increase
of indebtedness of consumers for durable goods and housingthe curbing
of which would require delicate handling if at the same time restrictions
on credit were to avoid disturbing a balance in current operations.
Following the presentation, Chairman Martin stated that the economic
review highlighted the problem of whether the System should restrict credit
further, whether it should ease the situation by putting more funds in the
market, or whether it should let market forces operate without interference.
He then suggested that there be a report of conditions in each of the
Federal Reserve districts as a supplement to the over-all presentation
that had been made by the members of the staff.
Mr. Hugh Leach stated that banks in the Fifth District were exam
ining loans to automobile dealers for the purpose of carrying increased
inventories more carefully than they had been, that total loans to busi
ness had declined somewhat during the past 90 days, and that he anticipated
some further decreases might take place in business loans although there
might be increases in other types of credit which would offset such declines.
As to credit policy, Mr. Leach felt that the present amount of restraint
was just about right, that the Committee should not purchase securities
now for the purpose of supplying reserves unless a substantial outflow of

3/4/53 -14
gold continued and made that seem to be the desirable course. On the whole,
he felt modest restraint but not too much restraint was desirable in view
of the fact that economic conditions, which were now pretty well in balance,
might go either way.
Mr. C. S. Young said that in the Seventh District there was consid
erable difference of opinion among loaning offices of banks, some of them
expecting loans to increase between now and mid-April but others thinking
that they might decline. Mr. Young referred to the survey of cattle feed
ing loans requested by the Board of Governors last week, stating that banks
in the Seventh District had not called such loans and in fact were making
additional loans on cattle, that there was no lack of credit in that field,
and that if anything, banks were too willing to loan to cattle feeders who
had lost money last year. Generally speaking, farmers were not in distress
even though they had lost money on feeding operations the past year. With
respect to consumer instalment loans, Mr. Young stated that although indi
vidual bank officers expressed reasons why loans should decline and indi
cated why such loans were being restricted, the totals for the area con
tinued to rise. Mortgage loans also continued to grow. Mr. Young felt
that automobile and farm implement dealers might run into some difficulty
in obtaining credit for carrying additional inventories this spring, adding
that in the country area there were a good many clouds in the picture but

3/4/53 -15
that on the whole loaning officers appeared to be better prepared to meet
disturbances that might arise than they have been for some time.
Mr. Johns stated that demand for bank credit in the Eighth Dis
trict continued strong, particularly for real estate and consumer credit.
There was a general spirit of optimism regarding the outlook for the rest
of the first half of this year but a good deal of uncertainty as to the
second half of the year. It was his opinion that in the immediate future
the present precarious balance of economic forces was a little more in need
of watching on the inflationary side than on the deflationary side.
Mr. Leedy said that drought conditions last fall and winter in
the Kansas City District had affected the outlook greatly, even though there
had been some moisture more recently. There had been no liquidation of cattle
loans because of calling of loans by banks, Mr. Leedy said, and in fact banks
were advancing credit, many of them feeling that such loans at present prices
were on a sounder basis than they had been for some time. The general situa
tion, however, growing out of the drought conditions and decline in cattle
prices, led him to feel that there was more likelihood of a movement on
the deflationary side than on the inflationary side and it was his judgment
that the System should "go easy" in applying credit restraints, that this
was not the time to be applying the brakes.
Mr. Gilbert said that credit demand continued strong in the Dallas
District and that it looked as though it would continue that way all spring.
There had not been the seasonal liquidation of loans that had been expected

3/4/53 -16
or hoped for and banks were becoming a little more cautious in looking at
loans, particularly to sales finance companies. With respect to cattle,
while there had been a shrinkage in value of collateral, with one or two ex
ceptions banks had not sustained losses on such loans, and the movement of
cattle to market was not a reflection of the calling of bank loans but was
due to the judgment of the producers who, in view of the lack of rain and
grass, did not wish to expand feeding operations. General business senti
ment in the Dallas area is one of guarded optimism, Mr. Gilbert said, with
no excessive inventory accumulations and with department store sales hold
ing up well. It was his opinion that there was no basis for relaxation of
credit restraint at this time, the question being whether to maintain the
present degree of restraint or to make credit somewhat tighter.
Mr. Erickson stated that advances at the Boston Reserve Bank were
still much higher than last year, that commercial and industrial loans of
banks in New England had been tending upward since the first of this year
contrary to the tendency in most other Federal Reserve Districts, and that
economic activity in the First District continued at a high level with housing
and nonresidential building holding up very well in most areas. Consumer
loans are increasing and a general spirit of optimism prevails with some
caution becoming more evident than was the case a few months ago. Mr. Erick
son felt that banks in the Boston area were surveying credits more carefully
than a year ago. As to System credit policy, Mr. Erickson felt that it should

3/4/53 -17
be continued just about as it has been in the past few months.
Mr. Earhart said that more caution was evident in country areas of
the Twelfth District than had been the case but that the growth factor in
that District was still important and that general opinion was that condi
tions would remain fairly good throughout the year 1953. Commodity, com
mercial, and industrial loans have declined seasonally so far in 1953, but
this decline has been offset by increases in other loans, especially real
estate and consumer credit, and total loans have remained about unchanged.
Some of the larger banks feel fairly well loaned up for credits of the latter
type but still the totals of such loans increase. As to cattle loans, banks
have been fairly conservative and have not had occasion to push their col
lections. Mr. Earhart felt that over-all credit policy should be continued
along the lines of mild restraint that have been followed recently.
Mr. Williams said that a spirit of optimism for the year 1953 pre
vailed in the Third District but that there was a question what would hap
pen from there on. Automobile dealers are expected to be under pressure to
move inventories of new cars they are receiving, and there is some feeling
that the banks are taking the cream of the automobile financing business,
leaving the "cats and dogs" to other financing agencies. There is some fear
in the district, Mr. Williams said, of another round of wage increases.
Mr. Bryan said that loans of banks had declined in the Atlanta
District less than had been expected. Banks are policing consumer credit
loans a good deal better than they were 90 days ago but collections gen
erally are slow. Employment in the district is very tight. In the agricultural

3/4/53 -18
area, Mr. Bryan said, there is a chill in sentiment but it is not yet
serious. Also, there is a chill in feeling regarding real estate activity.
Mr. Bryan would, for the immediate time being, keep credit policy steady
on the same basis as at present.
Mr. Fulton stated that industrial activity in the Cleveland
District was very high and there appeared to be nothing to dampen
optimism. Some plant expansion which had been deferred a few months
ago is now going ahead and mortgage money is easier to obtain than
during 1952. The run-off in loans has not been as much as expected
seasonally and consumer credit continues to advance. There is no
distress because of lack of credit in cattle feeding parts of the dis
trict, although some of the loans are based as much on the value of the
farm property as on the cattle, Mr. Fulton said.
Mr. Powell said that the farm areas of the Ninth District were
suffering from the declines in farm product prices but that credits had
been quite conservative and that virtually no losses on loans had ap
peared as a result of the declines in prices. In parts of the district,
heavy Federal Government expenditures represented a continuing source
of income and the outlook was generally good for the district as a whole.
Banks are concerned about consumer credit, however, not so much because
of the local situation but because of the national trend which some of
them feel, if continued, will make repayment schedules so burdensome as
to be a damper on future purchases. Mr. Powell thought that System
credit policy would depend to some extent on whether the outward move-

3/4/53 -19
ment of gold continued and he expressed the hope that there would be
a further discussion of this point.
Because economic and financial factors converge in New York,
Mr. Sproul said, he was inclined to look at credit policy from the
standpoint of the national situation, rather than that of the district.
It was his impression, however, that banks in the New York District had
been restricting lending since the System adopted its present policy of
restraint. For the country as a whole, his analysis indicated that
high level production activity continues but that there are some signs
of maladjustment that will bear watching. These include (a) the rate
of inventory accumulations in recent months, (b) the extent to which
the very high level of consumer spending is being financed by a grow
ing volume of consumer credit and real estate debt, (c) the decline in
farm prices and the pressure for political action to sustain prices
which may be generated, and (d) indications of a new wave of wage
demands. The likelihood of sustained high level production with neces
sary readjustments taking place in an orderly fashion, Mr. Sproul said,
depends in part on continued credit restraint. Credit should not be
readily available to finance further inventory accumulations or as a
means of postponing constructive adjustments in production and prices,
nor should it be the principal means of transferring inventories to
consumers, thereby relieving pressure on business to make necessary
corrections. Mr. Sproul felt that application of a policy of credit

3/4/53 -20
restraint is becoming less easy because of delayed and indeterminable
effects in areas which are now the primary cause of concern--consumer
and mortgage credit. Mr. Sproul added that he shared the concern ex
pressed by others about a lack of aggressive action with respect to
the growth of consumer credit but that nevertheless general credit
restraint does condition the whole credit situation. Such a policy of
restraint would call for coordinated use of open market operations,
repurchase agreements, and discounting. The reserve needs of banks in
the period immediately ahead are expected to run within a range that
can be met by changes in member bank borrowing, supported by inter
mittent use of repurchase agreements, while minimizing direct inter
ventions through outright purchases. Later, if losses of reserves
are continuous and substantial, some outright open market buying might
become necessary, if credit policy is not to become more restrictive
than desired. Mr. Sproul felt that at present the policy of credit
restraint the Committee has been following does not call for a further
increase in the discount rate but that later the System might wish to
consider a further increase in the discount rate. As to the Treasury
cash position, Mr. Sproul felt that the Committee was perhaps in an
area of considerable freedom with respect to Treasury operations over
the next month or two but that a squeeze may develop in late May or
early June, and in any case the Treasury will need to obtain new money
early in July.

3/4/53 -21
Chairman Martin referred to Mr. Sproul's comment on the discount
rate and inquired whether, if the rate on Treasury bills rises persistently
for a period of time, Mr. Sproul would feel that an adjustment should be
made in the discount rate.
Mr. Sproul responded that a rise in the bill rate would be one
of the factors he would wish to consider but that action to increase the
discount rate would depend on the general situation, including whether
the Committee wished to give a signal of its desire for restraint in
credit expansion by increasing the discount rate and making borrowing for
member banks more costly.
Mr. Thomas then commented briefly on the credit situation and the
effects of the recent and prospective outflow of gold. He felt that the
gold outflow might put a desired degree of pressure on the market during
the next few months and, unless it increased substantially, would not create
any great problem. Little pressure on reserves was expected from other
factors, except for temporary variations of largely a seasonal nature. Re
purchase agreements could be used to meet such temporary money market needs.
Any further tightening or easing of money market pressures would depend on
bank credit developments. A general discussion of this subject followed
Mr. Thomas' remarks.
Mr. Evans joined the meeting while Mr. Thomas was making his com
ments, and Mr. Vardaman withdrew during the ensuing discussion.
Chairman Martin stated that on the basis of the economic and credit

3/4/53 -22
information presented and the comments made regarding conditions in the
various individual Federal Reserve districts, it appeared to be the consensus
that there was more reason to feel concern about the possibility of in
flationary developments than of a deflationary movement. He suggested,
therefore, that the instructions to be issued to the executive committee
be in the same form and with the same limitations as at present.
Secretary's note: As recorded later in
these minutes, the Federal Open Market Committee
approved a change in the wording of the general
instruction to be given to the executive com
mittee so as to eliminate from the first para
graph the requirement that transactions be with
a view "to maintaining orderly conditions in the
Government security market" and to substitute
therefor the phrase "to correcting a disorderly
situation in the Government securities market".
The direction as set forth below reflects this
change.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following direction to the execu
tive committee was approved unanimously:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise directed
by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for such trans
actions for the System open market account, either in the open
market or directly with the Treasury (including purchases, sales,
exchanges, replacement of maturing securities, and letting maturi
ties run off without replacement), as may be necessary, in the
light of current and prospective economic conditions and the
general credit situation of the country, with a view to exer
cising restraint upon inflationary developments, to correcting
a disorderly situation in the Government securities market, to
relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs of
commerce and business, and to the practical administration of
the account; provided that the aggregate amount of securities
held in the System account (including commitments for the pur
chase or sale of securities for the account) at the close of

3/4/53 -23
this date, other than special short-term certificates of
indebtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be increased or de
creased by more than $2,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to
arrange for the purchase direct from the Treasury for the
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (which Bank
shall have discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to
issue participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks)
of such amounts of special short-term certificates of indebt
edness as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total amount
of such certificates held at any one time by the Federal
Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate $2,000,000,000.
Mr. Sproul referred to the memorandum on "Some Principles
for Debt Refunding" as revised under date of February 27, 1953, copies
of which had been distributed before this meeting. He said that it was
a good memorandum and that he had no comments to make on it.
Chairman Martin noted that the statement as revised set out
general principles of debt management, that it was distributed as a
matter of information, and that no action was called for by the Committee.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held during the week beginning June 8, 1953.

3/4-5/53 -24
The meeting then recessed and reconvened at 2:20 p.m. on March 4,
with the following attendance:
Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Evans
Mr. Johns
Mr. Mills
Mr. Powell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman (latter part of session)
Mr. Young, Alternate for Mr. Gidney
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Craft, Technical Consultant
Messrs. Gilbert, Leedy, and Williams, Alternate members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bryan, Earhart, and Leach, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, San Francisco,
and Richmond, respectively.
Mr. Fulton, First Vice President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland
Copies of the report of the ad hoc subcommittee on the Government
securities market and of the appendices to the report had been sent to all
members of the Federal Open Market Committee and to all Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks who were not then members of the Federal Open Market
Committee on December 29, 1952.
Chairman Martin made a statement substantially as follows:

3/4-5/53 -25
I would like to start the meeting on the ad hoc subcommittee
report on the Government securities market by giving a little back
ground on the report. At the time of the meeting of the executive
committee on January 27, 1953, I asked the Presidents of all the
Reserve Banks to come in because we had the problem of Treasury
financing at our door, and I thought it would be desirable to have
them in then for a discussion of our relations with the Treasury.
At this time I would like to discuss the report in terms of the
System itself, and comment on how the report came about.
The origin of the ad hoc subcommittee report started when I
was still in the Treasury. I saw things from the Treasury side of
the picture for about two years during which we had a pegged mar
ket in Government securities, which is quite different from a free
market. There seemed to me to be quite a bit of misunderstanding
in the Treasury as to the extent to which the Federal Reserve should
be depended upon to make the market at all times, even if something
got outside the peg. As we approached the period when the Treasury
Federal Reserve accord was put together, I am sure there was upper
most in the minds of some of the Treasury people the question whether
it was ever going to be possible to have a really free market again.
They felt that if we moved in that direction, it was something that
would have to be pursued very carefully, and there was some feeling
that with a Government debt of its present size, we could never
again have confidence in a public market. You all recall the dif
ferences of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve and whether the
market should be pegged at 1/32 above par and what would happen if
it went to 99.
When the unpegging of Government securities came, I was again
subjected to many comments on both sides of the picture as to whe
ther we were handling the operation in the best way. It was during
that period that was born within me the feeling that we in the Sys
tem (I was now in the System) ought to make a real investigation
of what the market process was, and how we interpreted that process.
So I asked the full Committee at its meeting on May 17, 1951 to
authorize a subcommittee to explore the operations of the market and
our relation to the market. There were many changes taking place,
there were refundings by the Treasury, and I was not sure of my
judgments in all of the things going on at the time. I talked with
many dealers and I found there was a good deal of criticism and
doubt. I felt we should consider the question not in terms of any
policy matters but in terms of the operations and whether there
was developing a market with depth, breadth, and resiliency, to
use the phrase that appears in the subcommittee report.

3/4-5/53 -26
As time went on I thought we should have more experience with
the unpegging of the market and the study was delayed until the
spring of 1952 when the ad hoc subcommittee got to work. You know
the work done, the framing of the questions and the outline, our
bringing in of Mr. Craft as technical consultant, of how he pre
sided at the conferences with the dealers, and of how he helped
to determine what weight to put on facts and advices given by
the dealers. He also gave those of us on the subcommittee an
educational experience in dealing with the problem. The confer
ences with the dealers were extensive and we were slow in draw
ing our conclusions from those discussions. I do not want to say
that any member of the subcommittee or of the staff who worked
on the report was particularly influenced by the dealers, but
it was important to get the reaction of the market to the opera
tion as it was being conducted.
The initial part of the subcommittee report is directed
particularly to discussing what the Government securities mar
ket is. We have tried to give some perspective in terms of
the Federal Reserve System, but the philosophy to which we
gradually moved was the desirability of minimizing interven
tion on the part of the Committee with the market.
We were very much helped in our report by receiving a
document from the New York Bank which was studied by all of
the members of the subcommittee. I have had individual com
ments from a number of the Presidents who have now had ade
quate time to study the ad hoc subcommittee report. I think
I speak for all of the subcommittee in saying that none of us
approaches this discussion with the feeling that we have the
final answers to the problem with which we are struggling, or
that this is a problem that you can put down in a one-two-three
order. What we are certain of is that this is something that
is always at the heart of System operations and that all of
us are going to have to continue to study it.
We feel that we should have a minimum of secrecy in the
market, but secrecy is different from privacy with which we
don't want to interfere. The more people who understand the
purposes and ends that the Federal Reserve is trying to
achieve in dealing with a securities market that rolls on
in time of war, when we use it as a means of inflation for
paying for the war, the clearer the picture for all of us.
And therefore the greater the chance that we will have depth,
breadth, and resiliency in the securities market on a sound

3/4-5/53 -27
basis. You all know the inconsistencies we get into when
we talk about a given objective, and how we are going to use
the free market--but not too far. That is what we have been
grappling with in this report. The subcommittee puts it forth
as something we think is crucial in our thinking and objec
tives, but not as any indication we have come to a final
point in our thinking.
Chairman Martin then referred to the informal discussion at the
time of the meeting of the executive committee on Tuesday, January 27,
1953, to which all members of the Board of Governors and all of the Presi
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks were invited and at which there had
been considered that part of the report of the ad hoc subcommittee having
to do with relations with the Treasury, as set out on pages 76-78 and on
page 86 of the report. Chairman Martin said that, as he recalled the dis
cussion on January 27, the language of a memorandum which Mr. Rouse read
at that time on behalf of Mr. Sproul who was unable to attend that discus
sion, met the spirit of the recommendation of the subcommittee. What the
subcommittee had in mind, the Chairman said, was that there should be
understanding and cooperation with the Treasury in working on matters of
mutual interest. Its specific recommendation in this respect was as fol
lows:
F. Relations with the Treasury
The Subcommittee finds that the Federal Open Market Committee is
frequently placed in an inconsistent position by its present practice
of initiating advice to the Secretary of the Treasury with re
spect to decisions in the area of debt management. It recommends
that the Committee inform the Secretary of the Treasury that hence
forth it will refrain, as an official body, from initiating regu
larly proposals with respect to details of specific Treasury of
ferings, and will confine itself officially to providing information

3/4-5/53 -28
currently on its monetary policies and to counseling on the credit
and monetary implications of debt management suggestions advanced
for its consideration by the Treasury.
The memorandum of Mr. Sproul which had been read by Mr. Rouse on
January 27 was as follows:
Like some of the other recommendations in the report, the
recommendation with respect to relations with the Treasury is
really a recognition of a changed situation; a situation in which
we have shed as much as possible of the role of price fixing in
the Government security market. So long as we were maintaining
a pattern of rates, and so long as we were the established under
writers of all Treasury issues, there was a basis for our having
some initiative with respect to the terms of the securities is
sued. The locus of primary responsibility had already been
blurred. This was particularly so in view of the attitude of
the Treasury toward monetary policy during this period.
Now that we are no longer pegging prices and are trying to
shrink our underwriting function, the new approach to relations
with the Treasury seems to me, in general, to be the appropri
ate one.
We do not want to become too doctrinaire about this matter
of areas of responsibility, however, With a Federal debt which
is so large a part of all debts, public and private, which per
meates and dominates to some extent the whole securities market,
and which has become a principal medium for adjusting portfolios
of financial institutions, and the reserves of banks and others,
we are not and won't be wholly free to administer credit policy
without regard to the Government security market, and without re
gard to Treasury financing requirements. It won't be enough to
say to the Treasury, here is the credit policy we are going to
follow; now you manage the debt. These are areas of overlapping
secondary responsibilities and opportunities.
While the Secretary of the Treasury can and should consult
with whomever he wants, inside and outside the System, therefore,
I don't think we should demote the Open Market Committee to the
status of the ABA or the IBA or any other groups or individuals
when it comes to debt management. Nor do I think we should com
mit ourselves to never taking the initiative. We are a statu
tory public body with public responsibilities in a field closely
related to debt management, and there should be a maximum of
coordination consistent with the primary responsibilities of
the Treasury and the Committee.

3/4-5/53 -29
It seems to me that it would be consistent with the spirit
of the subcommittee recommendation, to have the Chairman and
Vice Chairman of the Open Market Committee inform the Secretary
of the Treasury.
1. Of the desire of the Committee to work with him as
closely as possible.
2. Of the intention of the Committee to keep him informed
of the credit policies of the System, and particularly
of open market policy.
3. Of the willingness of the Committee to have its repre
sentatives consult with him concerning credit policy
or debt management problems whenever he requests such
consultation.
4. Of the intention of the Committee to have its repre
sentatives bring to his attention, if and when it
seems desirable, matters which may be of mutual in
terest.
I think this can be done quite naturally, orally with the new
people at the Treasury, without in any way perpetuating the situa
tion which the subcommittee seeks to correct.
There was unanimous agreement that the
above quoted recommendation in the report and
the statement in Mr. Sproul's memorandum repre
sented the Committee's general approach to the
Treasury.
Chairman Martin next referred to recommendation E, Organization of
the Open Market Committee, appearing on pages 85-86 of the subcommittee's
report. This recommendation related to the "housekeeping" functions of
the Committee and read as follows:
E. Organization of the Open Market Committee
The Subcommittee finds many anomalies in the structure and
organization of the Federal Open Market Committee, particularly
(a) the absence of a separate budget covering its operations,
(b) the absence of a separate staff responsible only to the
Committee, and (c) the delegation of the management function to
an individual Federal Reserve Bank. It recommends that the Com
mittee re-examine and review its present organization, and in
particular that it consider the advantages and disadvantages

3/4-5/53 -30
that would ensue, were the Manager of the Open Market Account
made directly responsible to the Federal Open Market Committee
as a whole, and not, as at present, responsible through the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Chairman Martin said that, as the recommendation indicated, this
problem had given the ad hoc subcommittee considerable difficulty; the sub
committee did not profess to have the answer and its report presented the
question as a continuing problem which should be considered further. He
suggested that this recommendation be eliminated from the discussion at
this meeting and that the ad hoc subcommittee be continued and instructed
to meet with Mr. Sproul at an appropriate and convenient time for the pur
pose of discussing with him the housekeeping arrangements covered in the
report, with a view to determining whether it would be worth while to make
further exploration of the subject.
Mr. Sproul stated that this procedure would be agreeable to him,
Thereupon, Chairman Martin's suggestion
was approved unanimously.
At Chairman Martin's suggestion, the Committee proceeded to a dis
cussion of the other recommendations in the report of the ad hoc subcommittee
as presented in the summary of conclusions and recommendations on pages 79-85
of the report under the four heading.
A. Relations with the Market
B. Relations with Dealers
C. Operating Techniques
D. Federal Reserve Reports

3/4-5/53 -31
These recommendations were discussed at three sessions of the Committee,
including the one which convened at 2:20 p.m. on Wednesday, March 4, 1953
and which recessed at 4:50 that afternoon; at another session which com
menced at 9:30 a.m. on Thursday, March 5, 1953, and recessed at 10:30 that
morning; and at a final session which started at 12:10 p.m. on March 5
and lasted until 12:35 p.m. that day.
Mr. Vardaman joined the meeting on the afternoon of March 4 at
3:15 p.m., and the attendance at the three sessions mentioned was the same
except that Mr. Evans withdrew at 4:45 p.m. on March 4; and Messrs. Mills,
Powell, and Vardaman were not present at the final session which convened
at 12:10 p.m. on March 5.
The summary of recommendations by the subcommittee, pertinent parts
of the discussion of these recommendations, and the actions taken with re
spect to each are set forth below in the order in which the recommendations
were presented in the ad hoc subcommittee's report.
A. Relations with the market
Recommendations
The Subcommittee finds that a disconcerting degree of uncer
tainty exists among professional dealers and investors in Govern
ment securities with respect both to the occasions which the Fed
eral Open Market Committee might consider appropriate for inter
vention and to the sector of the market in which such intervention
might occur, an uncertainty that is detrimental to the develop
ment of depth, breadth, and resiliency of the market, In the
judgment of the Subcommittee, this uncertainty can be eliminated
by an assurance from the Federal Open Market Committee that
henceforth it will intervene in the market, not to impose on the

3/4-5/53 -32-
market any particular pattern of prices and yields but solely to
effectuate the objectives of monetary and credit policy, and that
it will confine such intervention to transactions in very short
term securities, preferably bills. The Subcommittee feels most
strongly that it would be wise to give such an assurance.
The Subcommittee finds two outstanding commitments that may
require intervention by the Federal Open Market Committee in
other than the very short-term sectors of the market, and that
may add to or substract from reserve funds available to the mar
ket for purposes other than the pursuit of monetary policies
directed toward financial equilibrium and economic stability.
These commitments are, first, the directive to the management of
the Open Market Account to "maintain orderly conditions" in the
market for U. S. Government securities, and second, those aris
ing from the practice of purchasing rights on maturing issues
during periods of Treasury financing, and also on some of these
occasions of purchasing when-issued securities and outstanding
securities of comparable maturity to those being offered for
cash or refunding.
With respect to the first of these commitments, the Sub
committee recommends that the Federal Open Market Committee
amend its present directive to the executive committee by
eliminating the phrase "to maintain orderly conditions in the
Government securities market", and by substituting therefor
an authorization to intervene when necessary "to correct a
disorderly situation in the Government securities market."
It has indicated in its report the conditions it would con
sider sufficiently disorderly to require correction. The Sub
committee recommends also that such intervention be initiated
by the executive committee only on an affirmative vote after
notification by the Manager of the Account of the existence
of a situation requiring correction.
With respect to the second, the Subcommittee recommends
that the Federal Open Market Committee ask the Treasury to
work out new procedures for financing, and that as soon as
practicable the Committee refrain, during a period of Treasury
financing, from purchasing (1) any maturing issues for which
an exchange is being offered, (2) when-issued securities, and
(3) any outstanding issues of comparable maturity to those being
offered for exchange.
The Subcommittee feels that such qualifications as are
implicit in these two recommendations would not seriously im
pair the constructive effect of a general assurance from the
Committee that its intervention henceforth will be limited to
the effectuation of monetary policies and will be executed in
the very short sector of the market. It recommends most strongly
that such assurance be given as soon as its existing commit
ments have been appropriately modified.

3/4-5/53 -33
At Chairman Martin's request, Mr. Craft reviewed the comments in
the subcommittee report and particularly in appendix "C" to the report
relating to the proposed formulation of a general set of "ground rules"
by the Federal Open Market Committee to cover its transactions in the
market. Mr. Craft stated that even today many of the more sophisticated
people in the Government securities business were still not convinced
that the Federal Open Market Committee had abandoned the theory that the
Government securities market must continue to be controlled within limits.
This was illustrated, he said, by the fact that purchases by the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York of Government securities for Treasury trust ac
counts might be the cause of rumors that the Open Market Committee was
"back in the market". Mr. Craft emphasized what he conceived to be the ad
vantages of confining transactions for the System account normally to Treas
ury bills as a means of permitting greater flexibility in open market account
operations, with a minimum of disturbance to prices and yields on longer
term securities. He said that would permit the market (a) to reflect the
natural forces of demand and supply and (b) to furnish a signal of the
effectiveness of credit policy aimed primarily at the volume and availability
of bank reserves. He suggested that in practice acquisition by the Federal
Reserve System of any issues except Treasury bills tended to result in a
permanently frozen System portfolio and served to restrict flexibility in
open market operations for the purpose of effectuating general credit

3/4-5/53 -34
policies. He felt that adoption of a guiding principle that, for normal open
market operations, transactions should be confined to Treasury bills would
go far toward eliminating the handicaps that attach to intervention by the
System account in the market. Mr. Craft also brought out the view that it
was desirable to limit intervention by the System outside the bill market to
periods when it seemed desirable to correct disorderly conditions in the
market. It was his view that this was desirable so as to avoid imposing
on the market any particular pattern of prices and yields, and he felt that
assurances along the lines recommended in the subcommittee's report should
be given by making known to the dealers the "ground rules" which would govern
System operations in the market. This would mean, he said, that better
market behavior could be expected in the technical sense, and the results
of credit and monetary policy could be appraised more accurately. While he
recognized that Federal Reserve credit policies must be based on many con
siderations and that they could not be governed by a rigid formula, it was
his belief that such policies could best be effectuated under a set of simple
rules that are fully understood by all participants in the market.
Following Mr. Craft's statement, at Chairman Martin's request, Mr.
Sproul commented on the proposed "ground rules" suggested by the report and
on the proposal that some sort of assurance be given to the market by making
these general rules known.
Mr. Sproul said that the suggestion for making such ground rules pub
lic involved the question whether System operations should be confined to the

3/4-5/53 -35
short area of the market. He felt that such suggestions were based on what
had happened in the past, when the System was supporting the Government
securities market, and on the situation existing at the moment, where the mar
ket apparently still has not, after two years, found out what it might have
been expected to find out by observing the System's performance, Formula
tion and announcement of ground rules along the lines suggested showed, per
haps, too much concern for the dealers in Government securities who naturally
and properly are primarily interested in the protection of their capital
and making a profit on their operations. He thought this situation could
not be improved, having regard for our primary interest which is credit
policy, by publication of "ground rules"; that a "norm" could be established
only by what the Committee did over a period of time. He said that the
principal reason why the Government securities market did not have depth,
breadth, and resiliency at all times is now due to uncertainties regarding
general credit policy and the Treasury's debt management program, rather
than because of any concern that the Federal Reserve might intervene in the
market, and pointed to the present condition in the market as supporting
this view. What the market wants to know, he said, is whether interest
rates and, therefore, security prices are going up or down; this is tied in
with the whole question of credit policy.
With respect to the proposal for confining open market operations
to the short-term sector of the market, Mr. Sproul said that there might be
times when the System would wish to intervene in other than the short-term

3/4-5/53 -36
area in order to get direct effects on the availability and cost of credit
in the capital market or the mortgage market, as a means of effectuating
credit policy. He did not agree that acquisition of longer term securi
ties necessarily meant that the System account would be frozen in as a
holder of such securities. And quite apart from what the Committee might
decide as a matter of current policy on the suggestion that operations be
confined to the short-term area, Mr. Sproul said that public assurance as
to the continuance of this policy could not be given to the market, as
proposed, without misinterpretation and misunderstanding and without seeming
to bind future open market committees, which could not be bound by statements
made by predecessor committees.
In response to a question from Chairman Martin, Mr. Sproul stated
that at the present time he thought it was desirable to operate only in
the short-term sector of the market as far as that was possible, but that
he could not say what would be desirable next year or two years from now.
He could conceive of wanting to operate in the long-term market in terms of
credit policy because of the possible effect on interest rates and the
availability of funds for investment. He illustrated this by suggesting
that a more direct effect might be had on mortgage rates in this manner
than by operating in the short-term market. While at the present time there
was no argument in the Open Market Committee, that dealing in the short
term market met the needs of the Committee, Mr. Sproul felt that it was
unnecessary and undesirable to try to give assurance by publishing "ground
rules", for all time to come on this or any other point having to do with
credit policy. He did not think the Committee should issue any statement

3/4-5/53 -37
or ground rules which might seem to,but could not,tie the hands of future
committees; and he did not feel assurance of the type suggested in the sub
committee's report was necessary in order to get the desired depth, breadth,
and resiliency in the market. This would come, so far as we have an in
fluence, he said, from our actions over a period of time; not from public
statements. We should always remember, he said, that while the proper
functioning of the Government securities market is most important to the
Federal Reserve System, the primary concern of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee is credit policy and the Committee should not try to give assurances
which might result in a frozen credit policy.
Chairman Martin said that the idea that the Open Market Committee
should carry on operations having to do with the supply of reserves by
operating in the long-term market was entirely inconsistent with having a
good Government securities market, that a dealer could not be expected to
stay in the business if he felt that the Federal Reserve in its judgment
would attempt to effectuate credit policy by intervening in the long-term
market. He said that he was not interested in the Government securities
dealer per se but that he was greatly interested in the Government securities
market, that over a period of time there must be a reasonably good Govern
ment securities market in order that the Committee might effectuate its
credit policies, and that while general credit policies which might be
adopted by the Committee would affect prices and yields on Government securi
ties, the additional uncertainties that might be caused by the threat of

3/4-5/53 -38
Committee operations on a large scale in long-term Government securities
might destroy the market.
Mr. Sproul thought dealers could and would stay in business even
though the possibility of Federal Reserve intervention in the long-term
market continued; that the subcommittee report made too much of the differ
ence between changes in prices and yields in the long-term market brought
about by intervention in the short-term market and similar changes brought
about by direct intervention in the long-term market. He also said that
he was talking about preserving freedom of action for the Committee in the
future. He thought the Committee could say, in season and out, that its
purpose and policy now is to effectuate credit policies through supplying
or absorbing reserves and not to support any pattern of rates or prices or
yields in the Government securities market, but he did not think the Com
mittee could give any other assurance which would be worth while in terms
of its effect in the market or in terms of what the Committee might or might
not do at some future time.
Mr. Bryan stated that there was a fundamental difference between
operating in the short-term and the long-term market, that when the Com
mittee operated directly in the long-term market for the purpose of affect
ing prices it was substituting its judgment for that of the market as to
what such interest rates ought to be.
Mr. Sproul responded that whenever the Committee put funds into or
took funds out of the market it necessarily affected interest rates and

3/4-5/53 -39
that the Committee must have a judgment as to how its operations would
affect the costs as well as the availability of credit whether it operated
indirectly or directly on long-term rates. Any form of assurance as to
how the Committee would operate in the future would, Mr. Sproul said, tend
to bring about a frozen credit policy.
Mr. Szymczak brought up the question that had been referred to by
Mr. Craft regarding uncertainties caused in the market by purchases by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York of long-term Government securities for
Treasury trust accounts. He wondered whether such purchases should not be
distinguished from those made for the System account for the purpose of
effectuating credit policy.
Mr. Sproul responded that if it seemed desirable to separate those
transactions, there was no reason why that could not be done.
In a further comment on relations with the market, Mr. Szymczak said
that there were two questions involved -- the extent to which the Com
mittee might need to operate in the market, and the extent to which it should
inform the market where and how it was going to operate. On the first
question, his own feeling was that the Federal Open Market Committee should
go into intermediate and longer-term securities only when that was necessary
to correct a disorderly market condition. On the second question, Mr,
Szymczak could see no good reason for not informing the market of the general
basis on which the Committee would operate.

3/4-5/53
Chairman Martin stated that he did not think there could ever be
a contractual sort of assurance given to the Government securities market
by anybody but that it seemed to him to be an unnecessary, disturbing
element for those in the Government securities market to feel that such
an important element as the open market account might step in and operate
directly in long-term securities because it decided to do so. He thought
that the Committee would not be making a contract and would be free to
change its credit policy on any day if it gave to the market a statement
of the general framework within which it intended to operate. The financial
community should have such an assurance, he said; there was a misunderstand
ing of the extent to which the Open Market Committee might "play God",
Mr. Robertson suggested that it might be helpful to have a draft
of a statement giving assurance along the lines outlined by Chairman Martin
as a means of helping in further consideration of this question, to which
Chairman Martin responded that he felt it would be premature at this time
to draft such a statement, that what the Committee was seeking was fuller
understanding of the market, that it was clear that the whole question needed
further study, and that in the course of such a study it might be desirable
to draft a statement such as Mr. Robertson suggested.
In further discussion, Mr. Mills said that it was his understand
ing that the difference of opinion on the proposed ground rules was on

3/4-5/53 -41
whether the Committee should give public assurance, that he understood
it to be the sense of the group that it agreed with the philosophy of the
ground rules, that operation in the short end of the market is the practice
that is now being followed, and that this practice should justifiably be
continued into the future unless there is a change in the market or in the
policy of the Committee.
Chairman Martin commented that Mr. Mills had stated clearly and
effectively his understanding of the Committee's view.
Mr. Sproul agreed with Mr. Mills, assuming that he was referring to
the present situation in the market and present open market policy, and not
to a permanent philosophy with respect to nonintervention in the long-term
market.
There was further discussion of the various
suggestions made in the subcommittee's recommenda
tions regarding relations with the market in the
course of which unanimous agreement was reached
on the following points:
1. Under present conditions, operations for
the System account should be confined to the short
end of the market (not including correction of dis
orderly markets).
2. It is not now the policy of the Committee
to support any pattern of prices and yields in the
Government securities market and intervention in
the Government securities market is solely to effec
tuate the objectives of monetary and credit policy
(including correction of disorderly markets).
3. Further study should be given by the ad
hoc subcommittee to the suggestion that the Com
mittee adopt a continuing policy of confining its
intervention in the market to the short-term area,
and to the questions whether some type of assur
ance regarding the Committee's procedure in this
respect should be given and, if so, how such as
surance should be made available.

4. The directive of the Federal Open Market
Committee to the executive committee should be
changed to eliminate the phrase regarding the
maintenance of orderly conditions in the
Government security market, and there should be sub
stituted therefor an authorization to intervene when
necessary "to correct a disorderly situation in the
Government securities market". In approving this
change, it was understood that intervention to cor
rect such a situation would be initiated only upon
the affirmative vote of the executive committee
after the existence of a situation seeming to re
quire correction had come to its attention through
notice from the manager of the account or otherwise,
but it was recognized that in the event of an
emergency, such as an international crisis, it might
not be possible to canvass all members of the exec
utive committee before initiating such intervention.
5. It was understood that, pending further
study and further action by the Committee, the Com
mittee approved the subcommittee's recommendation that
it should refrain during a period of Treasury financing
from purchasing (1) any maturing issues for which an
exchange is being offered, (2) when-issued securities,
and (3) any outstanding issues of comparable maturity
to those being offered for exchange.
B. Relations with Dealers
Recommendat ion
The subcommittee finds no present or prospective justification
for continuing the present system of rigid qualifications for deal
ers with whom the account will transact business, and recommends
that the system be dropped.
Chairman Martin stated that the subcommittee felt it would be desir
able to eliminate the dealer qualification system as a means of removing any
basis for the charge that the Open Market Committee favored certain dealers
in Government securities in carrying on its transactions. The subcommitte's

3/4-5/53 -43
thought was that if this were done the manager of the account would then do
business on the basis of the best price available in the market.
Mr. Sproul stated that he felt the most satisfactory situation was
not to have the present rigid qualification system but to have the manager
of the System account given discretion to do business with whatever dealers
seemed best suited to carry out the policy of the Comittee. Be said that
as a matter of practical administration as well as of policy it would not
be possible for the account to do business with anyone who might offer to
sell securities to or buy securities from it and that, therefore, the
manager of the account should have discretion.
Chairman Martin said that the subcomittee recognized that the
manager of the account would have to have some discretion but that it felt
that no opprobrium would be placed on anyone if dealings were on the basis
of the best price, assuming the dealer was responsible.
Mr. Sproul stated that he agreed with this within the limits of
practical administration in ascertaining the best price, and that the logical
conclusion was to put the whole matter at the discretion of the manager of
the account.
There followed a long discussion of what criteria might be used to
guide the manager of the account in his dealings, Mr. Rouse expressing the
view that there might be some dealers for whom he would have "personal
distrust", or who were not "personally respectable", and that he would not
wish to do business with such dealers.

3/4-5/53 -44.
Mr. Sproul did not feel that the element of "personal trust" or
"personal respectability" should have anything to do with trading, that it
was a question of whether the dealer was "responsible" in the sense that
he could carry out commitments.
Chairman Martin stated that what the subcommittee was trying to do
was to get away from saying that any individual or firm was precluded from
access to the trading desk who was otherwise contributing to the Government
securities market. He did not think the account should undertake to do
business with someone who only occasionally got into the Government secur
ties market; he did feel that the firm or individual must be in the business
of dealing in Government securities, and that the executive committee
could deal with any problems that might arise in this connection.
Following the discussion, unanimous approval
was given to the recommendation that the present
system of rigid qualifications for dealers with
whom the account will transact business be aban
doned, with the understanding that henceforth
transactions would be carried on with any persons
or firms actually engaged in the business of
dealing in Government securities, and that price
would be the main criterion for such transactions.
C. Operating techniques
Recommendations
The subcommittee finds that many of the present operating tech
niques of the account are upsetting to the smooth functioning of the
market. In general these techniques were prescribed by the Federal
Open Market Committee at a time when it was attempting to peg mar
ket prices and yields of United States Government securities. With
respect to market techniques, the subcommittee recommends specifically:

3/4-5/53 -45
(a) That "reluctant buying" be completely abandoned, and that sup
porting operations in the market, if undertaken at all, be
executed through a technique of aggressive rather than reluc
tant purchasing.
In response to a question by Chairman Martin, Mr. Rouse stated that
the reluctant buying technique had been abandoned but that in his opinion
it had been useful in the past and that there might come a time in the
future when it would again be useful. In Mr. Rouse's opinion, that tech
nique had been more useful during the period of pegging of Government securi
ties prices than a procedure of "aggressive buying", since the Committee had
to consider its willingness to put reserves in the market. On the whole,
however, Mr. Rouse felt that it was an undesirable practice and that under
present conditions it was desirable to abandon the reluctant buying technique.
Mr. Sproul stated that he would dislike to see the Committee commit
itself to a policy of "aggressive buying", rather than "reluctant buying",
at all times in the future, and that while he had no objection to abandoning
reluctant buying--it had already been abandoned--he felt there was no need
to go to the other extreme of saying that the Committee would at all times
in the future engage in aggressive buying.
Mr. Powell questioned whether the term "aggressive buying" was what
was intended for the future, asking whether abandonment of "reluctant buy
ing" did not mean that the Committee would follow "normal" buying procedures.
Mr. Szymczak said that, as he understood it, "aggressive" purchas
ing had nothing to do with credit policy, that it referred only to the
operating technique. He recalled that "reluctant" purchasing had developed

3/4-5/53 -46
at a time when the System was supporting and, later, pegging the Government
bond market, and that it had been abandoned with the abandonment of the
supports in a pegged market. He assumed that the technique of "aggressive"
purchasing would apply to the operating procedure when the Committee found
it necessary to go into the market to correct a disorderly condition. In
other words, the operating technique would be not to allow a disturbing
overhang in the market, but to take a position to carry out whatever the
Committee policy was at the time.
Chairman Martin said that as he understood it, Mr. Powell would say
that this was "normal" purchasing, and there was no indication of disagree
ment with this comment.
Following a brief further discussion, it was
agreed unanimously that having abandoned the tech
nique of reluctant buying, which was used at times
during the period of supported markets, it should
not be resumed without further consideration by the
executive committee of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
(b) The subcommittee recommends that agency transactions be aban
doned and that the account conduct its transactions with deal
ers as principals on a net basis.
Mr. Rouse expressed the view that it was much more satisfactory to
work with dealers as principals rather than as agents, although there might
be times in the future when the Committee would wish to revert to an agency
basis. He added that transactions were now conducted with dealers as prin
cipals as they were all of a short-term character.

3/4-5/53 -47-
Thereupon, unanimous approval was
given to the foregoing recommendation
that agency transactions be abandoned
and that the account conduct its trans
actions with dealers as principals on a
net basis, with the understanding that
if it seemed desirable to do so at same
future time the executive committee would
consider a proposal to revert to an agency
basis.
(c) The subcommittee recommends that if rights are acquired dur
ing refundings they be purchased from dealers without regard
to whether or not they come from the dealers' position.
Approved unanimously, it being noted
that while the Committee was in full agree
ment with the spirit of this recommendation,
it was inoperative at the present time in
view of the fact that, as recorded under No.
5 on page 42 of these minutes, the Committee,
pending further study and further action by
it, had agreed that it would refrain from
purchasing rights on maturing issues during
periods of Treasury financings.
(d) The subcommittee recommends that refusal to buy bills acquired
by dealers on a cash basis be discontinued.
Approved unanimously, it being under
stood that the practice referred to had al
ready been discontinued.
(e) The subcommittee recommends that nonbank dealers be informed
adequately in advance when repurchase facilities will be made
available.
Approved unanimously, it being under
stood that the adequacy of the advance
notice would depend on the availability of
information indicating to the manager of
the System open market account the need for
such facilities.

3/4-5/53 -48
(f) The subcommittee recommends that repurchase facilities at an
appropriate rate and with appropriate limitation as to volume
be made regularly available to nonbank dealers over weekends.
Mr. Rouse said that he had very little sympathy with this proposal,
that he felt it would be putting the Committee right back in the business
of pegging Government securities to a certain extent. He thought money
for the purpose indicated should be obtained through the market as a normal
thing and that it should not be available regularly from the Federal Reserve
System.
Mr. Mills wondered whether such a procedure would not work out much
the same as the discount mechanism does with banks so that nonbank dealers
would thus have access to funds the same as bank dealers in Government secu
rities now have access to such funds through discounting. Mr. Mills also
suggested that such an arrangement would not put an undesirably large
amount of reserve funds into the market and that the procedure would not
impose any particular problem on the Open Market Committee.
Mr. Sproul said that it was a question whether the System put credit
policy ahead of improving the Government securities market. He felt credit
policy should be put first, that this was the reason the System had gotten
out from under the peg and away from the position of making reserve funds
available to banks at their initiative, rather than at the initiative of the
Federal Reserve. Mr. Sproul added that whenever dealers really needed funds
over weekends they should get them but it was not desirable to arrange for
them to have automatic access to Federal Reserve credit.

3/4-5/53 -49
Chairman Martin agreed that it was credit policy the Committee was
primarily concerned with, but he said that the Committee should not be
shortsighted to the extent that it would disregard something that might have
a significant bearing on the Government securities market. He thought
careful consideration should be given to the relative position of bank and
nonbank dealers in being able to carry bills, having in mind that modest
help to the bill market in this manner might be warranted.
Mr. Sproul responded that if the initiative were retained by the
System and discretion were provided by an action of the Committee, the
dealers should get funds under repurchase agreements in circumstances where
they could not get them outside for the purpose of carrying bills over
weekends. However, for the Committee to announce that any dealer could come
in over any weekend and automatically obtain funds from the Federal Reserve
would relieve the banks of the necessity of taking care of dealers and would
set a bad precedent, regardless of whether the amount of credit thus ex
tended was small or large.
Mr. Szymczak doubted the advisability of making Federal Reserve
credit automatically available to nonbank dealers through repurchase agree
ments, just as he felt it was undesirable to make Federal Reserve credit
available to member banks at their initiative. He felt, however, that
dealers had a right to expect to be able to get funds through repurchase
agreements when they needed them.

3/4-5/53 50
Mr. Craft said that he was concerned about the increasing reluc
tance of dealers to bid in the weekly offerings of bills, that those with
whom the subcommittee conferred last summer complained unanimously regard
ing their inability to carry a position in bills.
Mr. Sproul suggested the possibility of the Treasury changing the
days of the week on which bills are bid for and delivered so that the dealer
problem of carrying bills over the weekend might not bulk so large.
Chairman Martin said that there was a real problem in connection
with this recommendation of the subcommittee and suggested that the
subcommittee be requested to review it further in terms of the problem of
orderly markets and of making reserve funds available on an automatic basis.
This suggestion was approved unanimously.
Recomendation
The subcommittee finds that relations between the Open Market
Account and the dealers are not as impersonal as is desirable now
that the Committee is no longer trying to peg prices and yields on
Government securities by maintaining a tight rein on the activities
of dealers.
(a) It recommends that the Open Market Account make known to the
dealers the "ground rules" which henceforth will govern the
occasions for its transactions with dealers.
It was agreed unanimously that, as indicated
by the action taken in connection with the subcom
mittee's recommendation as to giving an assurance
under "Relations with the Market", further study
should be given to this recommendation. In taking
this action, it was understood that the subcommittee
would consider the matter in terms of what ground
rules might be agreed upon, and whether and how such
rules might be made known.

-51-
Mr. Szymczak stated that his understanding of the foregoing action
was that there had been conclusive agreement that, unless changed by the
Committee, operations would be conducted in accordance with the practices
set forth in the "ground rules"; this action, therefore, related to how the
import of such rules should be made known to the public.
(b) The subcommittee recommends that the individual morning dealer
conference be abandoned.
Mr. Rouse stated that he could not understand the reason for the
suggestion that the morning conferences be discontinued, that they were more
convenient for the dealers and for the representatives of the account than
if appointments were not made, that the conferences had been useful to both
the manager of the account and the dealers, that no dealer had to attend a
conference, that the dealers had been the ones who had sought the meetings
in this manner. Mr. Rouse went on to say that while he found the confer
ences very useful, he would not want any dealer to feel that he was not be
ing treated fairly, and that he would be glad to terminate the present
arrangements for the conferences and permit them to start over if the
dealers wanted them on their own initiative.
Thereupon, unanimous approval was given
to the subcommittee's recommendation, it being
understood that if any dealers wished to con
tinue the morning conference, it would be on
the dealers' initiative.

3/4-5/53 -52
(c) The subcommittee recommends that the information obtained by
the trading desk from dealers be so restricted as to eliminate
the possibility of identification, directly or by inference,
of individual customers.
This recommendation was approved unanimously,
Mr. Rouse noting that the recommended practice was
one which he had been trying to follow.
(d) The subcommittee recommends that reports on individual dealer
positions and activity be collected by an officer of the System
other than the manager of the account, that the individual re
ports be kept confidential, and that only aggregates compiled
from the individual dealer reports be disclosed to the manager
of the account.
At Chairman Martin's request, Mr. Rouse commented on this proposal
stating that to the best of his knowledge the information received had never
been used to the disadvantage of any dealer, that the information on individ
ual dealers' positions was most helpful to the manager of the account and
that to take it from him would be like asking him to handle the account "with
one hand tied behind him", that the information was supplied voluntarily, and
that he felt it should continue to be made available to the account manager.
In response to a question from Mr. Sproul as to whether there was
widespread objection from dealers to giving this information, Chairman Martin
said that the recommendation was not based on the views of dealers so much as
the feeling of the subcommittee that it would be a protection to the manager
of the account against any charge of misuse of the information.
Mr. Sproul then said the information is most useful from time to time,
and that aggregates which might conceal individual long and short positions

3/4-5/53 -53
would not be so useful and could be misleading. He suggested that, if the
information were furnished on a voluntary basis, there should be no objection
to its collection, and Chairman Martin agreed.
Mr. Bryan felt that it was important to have the information avail
able in aggregate form and that there might be a real question whether volun
tary reports would provide satisfactory totals.
Mr. Sproul suggested that it be understood that, if the dealers were
willing to furnish the reports on a voluntary basis, there would be no objec
tion to continuing to collect the information in that manner.
Mr. Sproul's suggestion was approved unani
mously. In taking this action, it was understood
that if the reports received on a voluntary basis
did not seem to provide satisfactory aggregates,
further study would be given by the executive com
mittee to the question of the reporting procedure,
(e) The subcommittee recommends that the present practice of asking
dealers to report transactions currently during the trading day
in sufficient detail to permit the computation of current indi
vidual dealer transactions sheets be discontinued.
Mr. Rouse stated that it was not and had not been the practice of the
New York Bank to ask dealers to report during the trading day in sufficient
detail to permit computations of current individual dealer transactions. He
said that traders on the desk do receive information on supplies of securities
in the market which goes to the manager of the account and to the Committee's
staff in Washington as a basis for judging the state of the market. Sometimes
that information indicates that supplies are from savings banks or commercial
banks, but ordinarily the information is of a general nature only.

3/4-5/53 -54
There was unanimous agreement with Chairman
Martin's statement that there appeared to be no
objection to the practice described by Mr. Rouse;
and that the practice referred to in the subcom
mittee's recommendation should be avoided.
Recommendation
The subcommittee finds that there is a serious gap in the
structure of the money market as it affects the functioning of
the market for Government securities. Continuously in recent
months, funds available to dealers to carry portfolios have been
inadequate in volume and available only at rates higher than the
yield of their portfolios. This deficiency could not exist so
continuously in a central money market equipped (1) to attract
temporary idle funds from over the country to New York, and (2) to
make these funds available on call to dealers in the money market.
The subcommittee recommends that the feasibility of re-establishing
a central call money post for dealers be explored.
Approved unanimously.
D. Federal Reserve Reports
Recommendation
The subcommittee finds that the Federal Reserve System can
improve the data which it makes available to inform the market
on its operations. It recommends that the following information
be shown henceforth on the weekly condition statement of the Fed
eral Reserve Banks:
(a) Securities held on repurchase agreement.
(b) Special certificates of indebtedness held by the System.
(c) Weekly averages of member bank borrowing.
In response to a question by Mr. Rouse, Chairman Martin and Mr.
Craft stated that the idea of publishing such additional information had
the general approval of the dealers with whom the subcommittee conferred
last summer on the grounds that the segregation of repurchase figures would

3/4-5/53 -55
be helpful and should be a part of the information regularly made available
through System publications, It was stated, however, that one of the 17
dealers who commented on the suggestion expressed hesitancy in having the
information on repurchase agreements published, his feeling being that
publication of the data might be open to misinterpretation.
Mr. Sproul stated that if the dealers did not object to disclosure
of the extent to which they were using Federal Reserve credit in carrying
bills, the Committee should not object.
Mr. Robertson felt that the information should be made public
even though there were objections on the part of some of the dealers.
Thereupon, the subcommittee's recommenda
tions regarding the weekly condition statement
of the Federal Reserve Banks were approved
unanimously.
This concluded the consideration of the recommendations in the
report of the ad hoc subcommittee. In a discussion of the procedure to
be followed in connection with the actions that had been taken, Chairman
Martin suggested that the staff be instructed to review the actions and
report on the steps that would be necessary in the way of changing direc
tives or issuing new directives to carry out changes in procedures agreed
upon. It was understood that this procedure would be followed.
Mr. Bryan stated that he was somewhat disappointed in the discus
sion of the subcommittee's report because he felt there had been an inade
quate discussion of the problems and underlying philosophies involved.

3/4-5/53 -56
He said that he might wish to send to the individual members of the Com
mittee a memorandum expressing his personal views on some of the underlying
points which he felt had not been clearly or completely dealt with.
Chairman Martin stated that the Committee would be glad to receive
from Mr. Bryan or any other members of the Committee or any President of a
Federal Reserve Bank who was not now a member of the Committee additional
comments he might wish to submit in writing.
Chairman Martin, in referring to the assistance which Mr. Craft had
given to the ad hoc subcommittee in its work, stated that he would like to
have it understood that Mr. Craft would be continued as a consultant so
that his services would be available in the future work of the subcommittee
from time to time.
This suggestion was approved unanimously
and, at Mr. Evans' suggestion, it was agreed
that Chairman Martin should express the appre
ciation of the Federal Open Market Committee
to Mr. Craft's employer, Guaranty Trust Company
of New York, for the services he had given in
connection with the study of the Government
securities market.
Mr. Robertson suggested that it be understood that recommendations
in the subcommittee report on which final action had not been taken be
studied further by the subcommittee and brought before the Federal Open

3/4-5/53 -57-
Market Committee. It was understood that this suggestion would be carried
out.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary