A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Wednesday, September 22, 1954, at 10:07 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Miller
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Williams
Mr. C. S. Young
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Bopp, Mitchell, Rauber, Roelse, Tow,
and R. A. Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Youngdahl, Assistant Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. D. C, Miller, Economist, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Securities Department, Federal Re
serve Bank of New York
Messrs. Leach, Fulton, Johns, and Earhart, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Erickson, Powell, and Irons, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Minneapolis, and
Dallas, respectively
Mr. 0. P. Wheeler, Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, Messrs, Miller and Balderston

9/22/54 -2
were selected to serve as alternate mem
bers of the executive committee for the
remainder of the year ending February 28,
1955, it being understood that in the ab
sence of Messrs. Martin, Szymczak, or
Robertson, alternates for any one of those
three would be, in the order named, Messrs*
Vardaman, Mills, Miller, and Balderston.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on June 23, 195, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the actions of the execu
tive committee of the Federal Open Market
Committee as set forth in the minutes of the
meetings of the executive committee held on
June 23, July 7, July 20, August 3, August
24, and September 8, 1954, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Before this meeting there had been sent to the members of the
Committee a report of open market operations prepared at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York covering the period June 23 to September 17, 1954, in
clusive. At this meeting there was distributed a supplementary report
covering commitments executed September 20 and 21, 1954. Copies of both
reports have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee,
Mr. Rouse commented briefly on the supplementary report, particu
larly with respect to the sale of $25 million of bills from the System
account on Monday of this week, and on the reaction of the securities
market to the announcement made earlier this week of the offering of $4
billion of 1-5/8 per cent Treasury notes to be dated October 4, 1954, and
to mature May 15, 1957.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market

9/22/54 3
transactions during the period June 23,
1954, to September 21, 1954, inclusive,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Chairman Martin withdrew from the meeting at this point, and
members of the Board's Division of Research and Statistics and Division
of International Finance entered the room for the purpose of assisting
in the presentation of a review of the economic and credit situation,
illustrated by chart slides. A copy of the text of the review, which
was sent to the members of the Committee following the meeting, has been
placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Following the economic review, there was a discussion of the out
look, including reference to mortgage lending, the length of time during
which the economy might move "sidewise" as contrasted with showing a
definite upturn or downturn, and factors relating to the sharp rise in
the average level of securities prices in recent months. At the conclusion
of the discussion of securities prices, Mr. Sproul commented that perhaps
the thing to be gotten out of the discussion was that the policy of active
ease pursued by the Federal Open Market Committee has not brought about
an inflationary and dangerous rise in stock market prices, but has helped
maintain a stable economic and business situation which, in turn, has given
encouragement to investors.
The members of the staff who entered the room to assist in pre
senting the economic review then withdrew.
Mr. Sproul asked for comments regarding recent open market opera
tions by the members of the Federal Open Market Committee and Reserve Bank

9/22/54 -4
presidents who were not currently members of the Committee.
Messrs. Erickson, Irons, and Leedy expressed general approval of
the handling of the account in terms of the general policy of active ease
authorized at the June meeting of the Committee, and Mr. Earhart concurred
in this view, stating, however, that there had been some complaint from
dealers in Government securities who faced losses on a substantial port
folio. Mr. Earhart commented on the fact that aggregate excess reserves
had been ample but that early in August there bad been slowness in their
reaching the money markets where they might be used. In his view this
indicated that the Committee might well give more consideration to rates
in the money market along with such other considerations as the amount of
excess reserves and free reserves. Furnishing reserves by buying Treasury
bills at a time when dealers ' portfolios were low was a factor in the de
cline in the bill rate to a point where many banks were no longer interested
in bills at the prevailing rates and it became necessary to reestablish an
interest.
Mr. Powell said that during the past few months there had been a
"stickiness" of excess reserves at country banks, and such reserves had not
flowed into central money markets as rapidly as had been contemplated by
figures on which Committee operations were projected. In other words, some
of the aggregate amounts of free reserves which served as a guide to opera
tions for the System account simply were not effective in the market. He
questioned whether, when central reserve city banks were deficient in re
serves early in August, it had been wise for the System account to sell bills

9/22/54 -5
and then find that it had to take them back. In hindsight, Mr. Powell
thought it might have been better to have allowed the larger total of
free reserves to remain until there was evidence they were doing damage.
Mr. Rouse stated in response to a question from Mr. Erickson
that there had been a tendency on the part of some central reserve city
banks to overinvest, which had been a factor in their accumulating a
deficiency in their reserves. This had resulted in an atmosphere in the
market different from that indicated by the over-all reserve position
which had existed immediately following the effective date of the reduction
in reserve requirements for member banks at the end of July. Mr. Rouse
also commented on the lag in movement of excess reserves from country
banks to reserve and central reserve city money markets, a factor for
which some allowance had been made in arranging for transactions for the
System account in trying to comply with the instructions of the executive
committee. This factor, he said, together with unexpected fluctuations
in the Treasury's balance in August, had created a most difficult period
in which to handle open market operations.
Mr. Johns said that he had no intention of being critical of the
handling of the System account but that he had sympathy with the views
expressed by Mr. Powell at this meeting and those expressed by Mr. Mills
as recorded in the minutes of recent meetings of the executive comittee.
He felt August had been an unfortunate time to raise a question in the
minds of a good many persons as to whether Federal Reserve policy had
turned from one of active ease to one of tightness. He was inclined

9/22/54 -6
to think that an unnecessary risk of doing harm had been run, even though
it was not apparent that any harm actually had been done.
Mr. C. S. Young felt that operations for the System account had
been carried on in accordance with the understandings at recent meetings
of the executive committee and that they should be continued about on this
basis, although he would suggest that after the current Treasury financing
was out of the way, consideration be given to a further reduction in the
System portfolio by way of a reduction in reserve requirements, if that
should prove feasible. Mr. Young also noted that country banks were not
the only banks which had been slow to put their free reserves to use: a
good many reserve city banks were equally slow in making use of free
reserves.
Mr. Leach told of discussions which he had had with bankers re
cently who were in general agreement that everything the System account
had done recently was about right, although some regretted that the bill
rate had been permitted to go as low as 5/8 per cent. Mr. Leach said that
he would not have wanted the situation any easier than it had been; on the
whole, he thought the Committee s policy and operations had been about
right.
Mr. Vardaman stated that, as he had indicated at recent meetings
of the executive committee, he personally would prefer to have as a target
figure for free reserves an amount of $800 million rather than a range
of $400-700 million. This, he felt, would counteract in some measure the
failure of country banks and many city banks to use their free reserves

9/22/54
more promptly. He indicated that his general philosophy of open market
operations at this time was along the lines expressed by Messrs. Powell
and Johns, and by Mr. Mills at recent meetings of the executive committee.
Mr. Mills then made a statement substantially as follows:
I have rather grave misgivings about the recent han
dling of the account, not having a bearing on either easy
or tight money, but on what may be the consequences of our
withdrawals and injections of reserves. It has already
been touched upon. It could be we have been engrossed too
much in an effort to maintain a target volume of free re
serves and that in doing so we have prevented the natural
forces in the market having their effect. It may be we have
confused the market as to what our intentions may be or what
they were intended to be. Going back three weeks, we have
withdrawn reserves, then supplied them, then withdrawn them
again. It would seem very difficult for those in the market
to reach judgments on the basis of this behavior as to how
they should react to policy in making their own purchases
and sales. Beyond that, the matter that can prove to be
of serious concern is the result these injections and with
drawals can have over a period of weeks by tending to set
a pattern of interest rates, which could be fraught with
danger because it allies itself very closely with a pegged
market. It would be very difficult from the outside to
look at our operations without having the impression they
are aimed at a pegged rate. Now if the market should come
to the view that we have a set rate, and if we should wish
to make an abrupt change in policy, it will have a greater
impact on the market than would be the case if we had per
mitted the natural forces to have their effect. To il
lustrate, it seems to me that within the next few days we
face the fact we have withdrawn reserves; the Treasury will
withdraw more reserves; float will withdraw a further amount;
and the Treasury will come into the market before October
6, The consequence is that we now must inject a very sub
stantial amount of reserves at a time when the market can
only regard the action as a very palpable support of Treasury
operations. We should support them. But to give the im
pression that that is a main objective of Federal Reserve
policy could be a danger.
Mr. Sproul commented that the executive committee had never set
a specific figure as a target for free reserves, that its target had

9/22/54 -8
always been a range and had been understood and interpreted with some
flexibility, depending on developments in the banking situation and in
the market. As a matter of fact, he said, over the past several weeks
the volume of free reserves had tended to be above the upper level of the
range indicated by the executive committee, rather than in the middle or
lower part of the range, whereas at times, such as in August, a majnrity
of the members of the executive committee had expressed the hope that the
level of free reserves could be kept nearer the lower limits of the range.
Swings in reserves during the last few weeks had been of the order of
$500 million, Mr, Sproul noted, and it was felt that open market opera
tions should be in terms of moderating these swings but not offsetting
them entirely. Mr. Sproul thought that operations had been in the direction
of such moderation.
Mr. Robertson said that to his way of thinking the only way in
which open market operations properly should be conducted was in accordance
with the needs of the economy as a whole. He felt operations in the recent
past had been good. It was true, he said, that the reserves provided coun
try banks early in August did not flow back into the money markets promptly,
a factor which had been taken into .onsideration by the executive committee
in giving a range to be used as a guide for the operation of the account.
As the free reserves at country banks come into the market, he would hope
that the total level of free reserves could move to the lower limits of
the range rather than to the higher side. So far as general policy was con
cerned, he hoped it would continue as at present.

9/22/54 -9-
Mr. Bryan then made a statement substantially as follows:
I would in general associate myself with the comments
made by Messrs. Powell and Johns and, certainly with the
statement by Mr. Mills of deep misgivings. This is said
with modesty because I am not certain I would have handled
the situation any better,
As I see the problem, it has been one in which the
distribution of free reserves, in combination with our
policy, has allowed a very considerable increase in short
rates, which has at times carried over into longer rates.
The result can be explained on many grounds; but the effect
has been that we have permitted a policy of monetary ease
to some extent to be contravened by the holders of free re
serves, who have wanted liquidity, I am puzzled to know
whether this partial contravention of a policy of monetary
ease was a result that was wanted or desirable.
The effect, as I see it, has been somewhat dangerous
because the increase in rates came in an economic situation
in which broad-scale and continuing economic recovery was
far from assured. Among the adverse effects was the down
ward drag on the value of capital assets. There is a ques
tion, in my mind, whether we did not produce a result, not
realized in a dangerous degree, but one that was contra
indicated in the light of all the economic circumstances.
We ought not overlook the possibility that the banks clinging
to their free reserves may have been doing so for reasons
to which we have given insufficient emphasis. They may
regard theeconomic situation with less optimism than we
have been inclined to do,
We have had demonstrated in the discussions of the
economic situation before the Presidents' Conference and
here at this meeting, the fact that no one can say with
certainty where we are going. The best that can be said is
that, at the moment, we are fairly stable at a fairly high
level.
In a situation of that sort it has not seemed to me
that it was appropriate policy to permit an increase in
interest rates. At the same time, when the banks of the
country who were holding the free reserves were showing that
they had a preference for cash liquidity as against an in
crease in earning assets, we were saying to them by our dis
count rate that they could not restore their cash position
except under the danger of considerable penalties. I thus
also doubt the wisdom of our rate policy.

9/22/54 -10
I think our discount rate policy at this time encour
aged banks to hold liquid assets rather than to use them.
This was a period in history when I think they should have
been used. I say this with a repetition of the statement
that I am not certain I would have done any better if I had
been making the decisions; but I think the rediscount rate
should have been in much closer relationship to the short
term rates,
Mr. Williams stated that he felt the results of the Committee's
recent operations had been generally satisfactory. The Committee had been
faced with a problem of a maladjustment of free reserves and had been
working on a range for the country as a whole, playing by ear from week
to week. Mr. Williams doubted whether recent developments had given any
widespread adherence to the theory that the System was trying to achieve
a pegged market. He questioned Mr. Bryan's assumption that the behavior
of country banks in holding on to free reserves indicated a judgment as to
the future course of business. Mr. Williams felt there was a large element
of inertia in the situation and that it would be desirable for the Committee
to obtain information through use of the field forces of the Federal Reserve
Banks so that it would pursue its operations without the need for specu
lation as to what the thinking was among country banks.
Mr. Irons reported on a check made during the first part of August
in the Dallas District among some 40 or 45 country banks which indicated
that the overwhelming majority had a neutral feeling regarding the recent
reduction in reserve requirements, which had come at a time when they were
not getting an increase in loan demand, and that 80 per cent of the banks
contacted said they did not plan to employ their funds in the Government

9/22/54 -11
securities market since it was not worth their while to buy Treasury
bills yielding less than 1 per cent. Mr. Irons thought that the frequency
with which this comment was heard, stressing 1 per cent as a marginal rate,
was significant.
On the matter of rates, Mr. Sproul remarked that the downward ad
justment of bill rates in the spring had reflected the market's analysis
of what our policy moves implied, and this analysis had overshot the mark,
assuming greater ease than we had intended. Rates may be said to have
moved down too far at that time and the recent rate recovery has brought
bill yields to a level that probably is more consistent with the general
kind of policy the System is attempting to pursue. He added that he would
not place as much emphasis on the degree to which rising rates in the short
term market have "slopped over" into the capital markets as had Mr. Bryan.
Chairman Martin reentered the meeting at this point.
Mr. Fulton stated that in the Cleveland District there was some
indication that to a considerable extent country banks were in an over
loaned position and that when these excess reserves came into their posses
sion early in August they held on to them. The only criticism of System
operations which he had heard among banks was that the bill rate had been
permitted to go to a point below that which they liked.
Mr. Szymczak said that under the circumstances he felt recent opera
tions for the Open Market Account had been very well handled. Such opera
tions could not be perfect and must be based on the best information avail
able at the time. The executive committee had used a range of $400-700

9/22/54 -12
million of free reserves as a rough guide to its operations and while
he personally had not liked the idea of supplying reserves through a
reduction in requirements and then withdrawing them from the market,
under the circumstances the operation had worked out very well as a means
of providing a sort of stability in the market.
Mr. Thomas made a statement in which he brought out the view that
a technical factor had affected the situation in recent months. The
volume of money in the market measured by free reserves had been fairly
stable. One of the factors in the market had been the performance of
dealers, Mr. Thomas said, who had bought bills in May and June and helped
to put the bill rate down and who had been selling bills since July, thus
doing the opposite of what dealers might be expected to do. Another
factor, Mr. Thomas pointed out was that the Treasury retired short-term
securities from March to June and put out additional short-term securities
since July.
Mr. Sproul then made a statement substantially as follows
1. All during 1954, in the face of a declining or sidewise
movement of the general economy, we have followed a credit
policy labeled a policy of "active ease". It has involved
the use of all of the three main instruments of credit
management - open market operations, discount rates, and
reserve requirements. Its objective has been to encourage
the free use of credit and an active capital and mortgage
market. Its main technical guide has been the maintenance
of a substantial volume of "free reserves" in the banking
system*
2. While the use of such a guide has raised problems of central
banking technique, which have been discussed here, the
general policy has served the economy well. The ready
availability and low cost of bank credit and of capital

9/22/54 -13-
funds have maintained a monetary climate favorable to
business expansion and high employment, recognizing that
credit policy is only one part of the whole complex.
The present economic outlook suggests to me a continuance
of existing credit policy, relying on open market opera
tions to make it effective.
3. We appear to have been on an economic plateau for the
past three or four months following upon the decline in
economic activity which began in the summer of 1953.
It is possible to view this record doubtfully, if we do
not have a substantial upturn during the fall, The ex
pectation of a substantial upturn may have caused a
check to the previous liquidation of inventories and re
duction of working forces, which could be resumed if
anticipated gains are not forthcoming, and private capital
outlays might begin to show signs of fear of a prolonged
slump.
4. It is also possible to view the record, hopefully. The
downturn was checked while the economy was still operating
at a high level, the recession has shown no signs of
feeding on itself in a way which would bring on a cumu
lative downward movement, and the economy appears to have
elements of strength which should prevent such a movement
developing. While inventory liquidation does not seem to
have been completed, the rate of liquidation has slowed
down. While Government defense outlays may decline further,
the decline will be small compared with that of the past
year. Private capital investment and State and local
capital outlays are holding up to earlier estimates. Con
sumer spending, on which much of the rest of the economy
depends, has remained high, encouraged by the present and
prospective stability of prices and evidently not too fear
ful of spreading unemployment and loss of income,
5. I prefer and hold the hopeful view. Despite the dangers
of economic forecasting, we must make some judgments, and
I believe that a generally sidewise movement of the economy
is more likely during the next few months than a pronounced
and cumulative movement either up or down.
6. This hopeful view is supported by the prospect of deficit
financing by the Federal Treasury. The recent mid-year re
view of the budget estimated a cash deficit of 1.8 billion
in fiscal 1955. We estimate that it may be nearer 4 bil
lion, with lower receipts and higher expenditures than in
the official figures. These net figures for the fiscal year
as a whole are the result of a much larger deficit in the
July-December 1954 period and a surplus in the January-June

9/22/54 -l4-
1955 period.
7. The Treasury has already borrowed 4 billion of new money
in this half-calendar year and will need to borrow about
6 billion more, including the 4 billion offering just
announced. The rest of the program might call for 1 bil
lion of cash financing in late November and the sale of
1 billion of CCC participation certificates, or the
Treasury might be able to get by with no additional di
rect new money financing. The present new money financing
is directed toward the commercial banks, and the banks
will need additional reserve funds in order to play their
part, if the amount of bank credit available to the private
economy is not to be restricted,
8. Adding this need growing out of Treasury financing to the
needs of a moderate seasonal expansion of private busi
ness, and the reserve effects of usual fall increase in
currency circulation, suggests that the member banks will
require about 3/4 billion to 1 billion of additional re
serve funds between now and the end of the year if our
policy of "active ease" is to be continued. The first
substantial injection of reserve funds will be needed
during the statement week ending October 6, when payment
for the new Treasury issue falls due. The next big drain
will be during the months of November and December when
seasonal factors will gradually absorb reserves and
another Treasury offering or CCC certificates may be ex
pected to come to the market. In order to carry on existing
credit policy, I would provide these reserve funds as
needed, by open market operations.
9. For the immediate present, we have just passed a peak of
excess reserves and free reserves well above the usual
range. These additional reserves evidently were considered
temporary by the market, as, of course, they were. Con
sequently they did not express themselves in a sloppy money
market. While they will be substantially reduced during
the coming statement week by ordinary market factors, their
presence has relieved some of the strain of meeting the re
serve demands of the Treasury financing in the following
week.
10. I should say we shall have to make some purchases during
the statement week ending September 29 to maintain our
position, and more substantial purchases during the week
ending October 6.
Chairman Martin expressed the view that the Committee had success
fully been operating on a policy of active ease. His own thinking was

9/22/54 -15
that the Committee wanted a flow of money and credit that was like a
stream with a ripple on it; it wanted to maintain a flow so that the
water would not go over the banks and when the flow built up in force,
to have had a chance to build an adequate channel in which to retain the
volume of water without having it flow over the banks. Chairman Martin
did not think the Committee should give too much attention to minor
fluctuations over short periods of time. He thought the Committee's
policy and operations had more or less generated confidences in the busi
ness and financial world and in the community at large. The Committee
now had before it the problem of how to achieve a continuation of the
policy of active ease which it had been pursuing, unless there was a view
that this policy should be changed.
In response to Chairman Martin's question, none of the members of
the Committee indicated that there should be any modification of the general
policy of active ease which was being pursued by the Federal Open Market
Committee.
Chairman Martin then said that for the guidance of the executive
committee it would be his thought that in the immediate future it should
continue to supply reserves to the market in accordance with the general
policy of active ease, and that any errors it might make in the period
of the next few weeks should be on the side of ease rather than the reverse.
Chairman Martin also recalled that in August he had felt that if the
Committee were to err in supplying reserves, it was wiser to lean on the
side of tightness, whereas his view now was that with the seasonal

9/22/54 -16
developments ahead, operations should be shifted so that they would lean
on the side of ease. Without guaranteeing any particular prices in the
Government securities market, there should be an adequate supply of re
serves available to assure that the current Treasury financing would be
successful.
In response to a question from Mr. Bryan as to the difference in
the situation in August when Chairman Martin would have leaned on the side
of tightness and at the present time when he felt the Committee should lean
on the side of ease, the Chairman stated that he felt the difference in
timing was of real importance. This related to the delicate area of busi
ness psychology. In August, it was generally expected that the business
situation would be in the doldrums, a common occurrence for that time of
year, and as long as there was no clear indication that things would be
going hog-wild in either direction there was no serious psychological im
pact on the economy in carrying on operations as had been done. On the
other hand, as September receded into October and October into the general
fall pickup of activity in many lines, it was Chairman Martin's judgment
that a definite degree of ease in the market would exert a favorable
psychological impact on the situation.
Mr. Szymczak felt that the full Committee should continue the
policy of active ease under which it had been operating. There should be
no change in the discount rate at this time nor should there be a further
reduction in reserve requirements at present. To the extent additional
reserves were required during the latter months of this year, they should

9/22/54 -17
be supplied through open market operations or through the discount window.
Mr. Sproul said that he was in general agreement with Chairman
Martin's statement as to policy and the way it should be carried out in
the immediate future. He felt that the risk of erring on the side of
greater ease in this immediate future period was less than the risk if
errors were made on the side of tightness. He would not contemplate aiming
toward tightness in any case, he said, and not having an exact science to
work with, that meant the Committee s operations should be directed so that
to the extent errors were made they would be on the side of ease.
There was general agreement with the views expressed by Chairman
Martin and Mr. Sproul.
Mr. Mills added the comment that he would hope the open market
account would not intermittently interfere in the market in a way that
would upset the play of natural factors, and that interference by the
Committee would solely be to cover the longer run need for reserves which
could be expected to follow during the next three months.
Mr. Sproul felt that Mr. Mills overemphasized the effect of buying
and selling securities for the System account. He had not been able to
observe any misunderstanding growing out of that procedure on the part of
businessmen or bankers. The principal criticism had come from those who
were playing in the market and who had attempted to make profits out of
market moves. When they had guessed wrong they attempted to create a
misunderstanding as to the Committee s policy. Mr. Sproul reiterated that
he did not see evidence of the misunderstandings to which Mr. Mills

9/22/54 -18
referred growing out of the Committee's purchases and sales.
Chairman Martin said that he shared Mr. Sproul's views on this
point, based on talks he had had with people in the business and financial
community; the only misunderstandings he had observed were those based on
wilful misunderstanding.
Mr. Mills responded that if the Committee was going to be con
tinually in and out of the market it was going to create a misunderstanding
as to policy.
Mr. Rouse stated that the recent period of operations for the account
had been unusual, resulting from an over-supply of reserves in the market
as a consequence of the reduction in reserve requirements and the need to
absorb that supply until there was a need for the additional reserves.
Chairman Martin said that he favored the minimum intervention of the
account in the market at all times in order to acheive its objectives.
Mr. Robertson felt the Committee should continue to follow a policy
of active ease but that it should not intervene unnecessarily in the market.
During the period immediately ahead, he felt the Committee should resolve
doubts in favor of ease rather than tightness in the market.
Mr. Bryan said that he was, of course, in favor of a policy of
ease in the market. He wished to say again, however, that he felt dis
count rate policy at the present time was out of gear with open market
policy so that in effect the System was saying to the financial community
that its reserves could be replaced only through the investment account

9/22/54 -19
of the Open Market Committee. He felt that the policy of active ease
applied only to those banks who could receive reserves through the flow
of the market. If there were to be a policy of ease generally applicable
to member banks the discount rate should be reduced, preferably to 1 per
cent and at least to a level of 1-1/ per cent.
Chairman Martin suggested that there be a discussion of the views
expressed by Mr. Bryan as to lowering the discount rate.
Mr. Williams stated that Mr. Bryan's earlier discussion of the role
of discounting and of the relationship between the discount rate and open
market rates raised important questions that were being considered by the
Special System Committee on the Discount and Discount Rate Mechanism.
With respect to a reduction at this time, he felt that such a reduction
could be misinterpreted as indicating that the System judged economic
developments to be weaker than the System actually believed them to be.
Mr. Fulton agreed completely that the discount rate should come
down, especially since this would give smaller banks access to reserve funds
other than through the open market.
Mr. Szymczak felt that a reduction at this time would be misunder
stood by everybody and he did not think that the banks, particularly the
smaller ones, were in need of additional funds.
Mr. Sproul said he could not understand what is the obstacle to
banks securing funds through the discount window at a rate of 1-1/2 per
cent if they had a demand for loans or wanted to make investments, or if
they felt they needed access to more reserves in order to assure their

9/22/54 -20
liquidity. He felt that the Committee s policy of maintaining a sub
stantial volume of excess and free reserves-not the level of the dis
count rate-had relegated the discount window to a minor position in
terms of actual use. So long as banks as a whole have substantial free
reserves, maintained through open market operations, most of the reserve
adjustments may be expected to take place in the money centers and in the
market for Government securities, Mr. Sproul said, and in these circum
stances and with existing market rates, the present discount rate may be
said to be effective: it is close enough to market rates to keep banks
on the threshold of borrowing but it encourages them to make most of
their adjustments in the market. It isn't possible to pin down exactly
the relative costs of borrowing and making adjustments through the market
in all transactions, Mr. Sproul said, but the advantage now seems to be
only slightly on the side of market adjustments. It was his view that
if the present discount rate is fairly well adjusted to market rates, if
reserve funds are readily available either by reason of open market opera
tions or through the discount window, and if the System had no emphasis
or change of policy it wished to signal or symbolize, it should reserve
this major policy instrument for more effective use at a more appropriate
time.
Mr. Erickson said that banks in the Boston District were reluctant
to borrow and he could see no reason for reducing the discount rate at the
present time.
Mr. Irons did not favor a reduction in the discount rate now and

9/22/54 -21
had not favored the reduction made last April, His reason for not
favoring a reduction now was the possibility that the differential between
the market rate (i.e., the bill rate) and the discount rate might reappear
as was the case when the discount rate was lowered in April. In his view,
the actual level of the discount rate was not so important as was the
spread between the discount rate and the market. He said, in response to
a question from Chairman Martin, that if the discount rate were reduced
to 1 per cent and the bill rate remained at its present level of just
under 1 per cent, borrowing at the Dallas Bank might be expected to in
crease, but that if the bill rate remained appreciably below the discount
rate, borrowing would probably not increase.
Mr. Leedy could see no purpose to be served by reduction in the
discount rate at this time. There was no evidence that banks were hesitating
to use the discount facilities because of the possible cost relationship
and he felt that by making a further reduction in the discount rate at this
time the System might be helping to get the level of interest rates down
to a point where it would not be healthy for the credit situation. Mr.
Leedy also thought such action might be misinterpreted as indicating con
cern on the part of the System regarding the economic outlook.
Mr. Earhart felt that, while in the past discount rate policy had
not been kept fully in line with open market policy, at the present time
the discount rate was at a sufficiently low level and he would prefer to
reserve any further lowering of that rate for a time when a reduction
might do more good.

-22-
Mr. C. S. Young thought that a reduction in the discount rate
at this time would be misinterpreted and he would not now favor taking
action.
Mr. Leach did not think the discount rate should be changed now
to implement an active ease policy, his concept of the policy of active
ease in the bank credit field being a situation where any reasonably eli
gible borrower could go to a commercial bank and readily obtain a loan
at a reasonable rate. That condition now existed and lowering the discount
rate would not make bank credit more readily available; on the other hand,
if it resulted in other rates moving downward, this would produce inequities
without being of benefit to the economy.
Mr. Powell could see no immediate reason for lowering the discount
rate, feeling that banks would borrow at existing rates if they had any
real need for funds.
Mr. Johns concurred in the views expressed by Mr. Bryan for about
the same reasons as had been stated by Mr. Bryan.
Mr. Vardaman felt it would be bad policy to reduce the discount
rate at the present time since he could see nothing in recent developments
which required such a reduction over the entire System. However, he stated
that a reduction in the Atlanta District might possibly be advisable, and
that conditions in the southern half of the St. Louis District were such
as might require consideration of a reduction in that District. The same
might apply to the Dallas District, but he was not sufficiently informed
as to current conditions there.

9/22/54 -23
Mr. Thomas referred to the situation that exists when additional
reserves are needed for short periods of time. He noted that the dis
count facility was one device for taking care of those temporary needs
without making outright purchases or sales for the System account, and
that another device was the use of the repurchase agreement. For these
methods to operate smoothly, however, he said it was essential that rates
be not too far above the market rate. Hence, some reduction in the dis
count rate or the repurchase rate might be helpful.
Mr. Robertson said that he was very much in favor of revitalizing
the discount facility as an instrument of monetary policy and that he did
not feel it to be essential that the discount rate be uniform in all
Federal Reserve districts.
The discussion of this matter closed with the statement by Chairman
Martin that it would be desirable for members of the Committee and Presi
dents of Federal Reserve Banks who were not currently members of the Com
mittee to continue to study the comments made by Mr. Bryan regarding the
discount facility and discount rate, and with the understanding that the
Committee's general policy of active ease would be continued along the
lines suggested by Chairman Martin earlier during this meeting.
Messrs. Sproul and Rouse stated in response to Chairman Martin's
inquiry that they had no suggestions for change in the directive to be
issued by the full Committee to the executive committee concerning open
market operations.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following directive to the
executive committee was approved unanimously &

9/22/54
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for such transactions for the System open market account,
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury
(including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of ma
turing securities, and letting maturities run off without
replacement), as may be necessary, in the light of current
and prospective economic conditions and the general credit
situation of the country, with a view (a) to relating the
supply of funds in the market to the needs of commerce and
business, (b) to promoting growth and stability in the
economy by actively maintaining a condition of ease in the
money market, (c) to correcting a disorderly situation in
the Government securities market, and (d) to the practical
administration of the account; provided that the aggregate
amount of securities held in the System account (including
commitments for the purchase or sale of securities for the
account) at the close of this date, other than special
short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased from time
to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury,
shall not be increased or decreased by more than $2,000,000,000.
The executive committee is further directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for the purchase direct from the Treasury for the account of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (which Bank shall have
discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue par
ticipations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) of such
amounts of special short-term certificates of indebtedness as
may be necessary from time to time for the temporary accommo
dation of the Treasury, provided that the total amount of
such certificates held at any one time by the Federal Reserve
Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate $2,000,000,000.
Chairman Martin referred to memoranda on bankers' acceptances
which had been distributed during the spring of this year and which had
been included on the agenda for consideration at this meeting. He sug
gested that, for reasons he stated, consideration of these memoranda be
deferred until the next meeting of the full Committee.
Mr. Szymczak suggested that it would be of assistance to the
Federal Open Market Committee if the Special Committee on Foreign

9/22/54 -25
Operations of American Banks (Mr. Alfred E. Neal, First Vice President
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Chairman) be asked to look into
the question of bankers' acceptances and the suggestions made in the
several memoranda prepared by members of the staff, and there was agree
ment that Mr. Neal be asked to have his committee study the matter, and
that the subject be placed on the agenda for the next meeting of the full
Committee.
Mr. Sproul stated that in view of the fact that a situation might
arise early in October in connection with the Treasury's financing when
the System would wish to put funds into the market on a temporary basis,
he contemplated proposing at the meeting of the executive committee to be
held immediately following this meeting that that committee authorize the
Federal Reserve Banks to enter into repurchase agreements at a range of
rates of 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 per cent for a temporary period. This action, he
felt, would support open market policy and would not do damage to the dis
count facility. The discount facility, he noted, was one under which banks
could obtain a relatively unlimited amount of reserves at a price (with
reluctance on the part of borrowers to remain continuously in debt a
limiting factor); whereas the open market window, including the repurchase
facility, represented a means by which the banking system obtained the
amount of reserves the Committee wanted to give it, for as long as the
Committee saw fit, at going market rates. Mr. Sproul could see no incon
sistency, when policy is one of credit ease, in providing these reserves,
either through open market purchases, or infrequently and temporarily through

9/22/54 -26
repurchase agreements, at a rate below the discount rate; and he felt that
such a relationship might be desirable in the course of the next two weeks.
Mr. Robertson stated that he did not agree with this position, and
it was understood that the matter would be considered at the meeting of the
executive committee to be held later today, inasmuch as the executive com
mittee was authorized by the action of the full Committee at its meeting on
June 23, 1954 to direct the Federal Reserve Banks to enter into repurchase
agreements at such rates or rate ranges as the executive committee might
prescribe, subject to certain conditions established by the Committee.
Reference was made to a draft of letter which had been prepared at
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York relating to the procedure to be fol
lowed for securing Federal Reserve notes by the pledge of participations in
obligations held in the System Open Market Account, in the event a Federal
Reserve Bank other than New York were appointed to operate the System Open
Market Account in an emergency. Copies of the letter from Mr. Tiebout,
Vice President and General Counsel of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
and of a draft of letter which might be sent by the Board of Governors to
the individual Federal Reserve Banks had been distributed before this meeting.
In response to a question from Mr. Leedy, Mr. Riefler stated that the draft
of letter had been distributed for information only and that it was a matter
to be considered by the Board of Governors and, if the Board so agreed, to
be sent to the individual Federal Reserve Banks for their consideration.
In a discussion of the time for the next meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee, it was tentatively agreed that such meeting would be

9/22/54 -27
held during the period December 6-8, 1954, subject to change if it seemed
desirable to change the meeting to another date.
Mr. Sproul stated that at the next meeting of the Committee he would
like to call up for discussion the actions taken in December 1953 and in
March of this year when it was voted that transactions of the System Open
Market Account shall be entered into solely for the purpose of providing
or absorbing reserves (except for disorderly markets). Mr. Sproul said he
thought this represented much too narrow a view of central banking, was mis
leading to the public, and should have the Committee's early consideration.
He did not believe that open market operations could be entered into without
concern for the costs and availability of credit. This was well stated, he
said, in a recent stimulating memorandum on the discount mechanism which
said that open market "purchases and sales were made in the full knowledge
(of the Open Market Committee) that they would have noticeable effects upon
(a) the volume of member bank borrowing, (b) the level of rates in the money
market, and (c) on the margin between those rates and the discount rate."
Mr. Bryan suggested that Mr. Sproul circulate a memorandum on the
subject between now and the next meeting of the full Committee, and Chairman
Martin stated that the members of the Committee would be glad to receive
such a memorandum if Mr. Sproul wished to distribute it.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary