A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held In
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, December 7, 1954, at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Williams
Mr. C. S. Young
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Mitchell, Rauber, Roelse, Tow, and
R. A. Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Miller, Economist, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Securities Department, Federal Re
serve Bank of New York
Messrs. Leach, Fulton, Johns, and Earhart, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Erickson, Powell, and Irons, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Minneapolis,
and Dallas, respectively
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on September 22, 1954, were ap
proved.

12/7/54 -2
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the
minutes of the meetings of the executive
committee held on September 22, October 5,
October 20, November 9, and November 23,
1954, were approved, ratified, and con
firmed.
Before this meeting there had been sent to the members of the
Committee a report of open market operations prepared at the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York covering the period September 22 to December 1,
1954, inclusive, and at this meeting there was distributed a supplementary
report covering commitments executed December 2-6, 1954. Copies of both
reports have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee. Mr. Rouse commented briefly on developments during the period
covered by the supplementary report.
Upon motion duly made and secoded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period September
22-December 6, 1954, inclusive, were ap
proved, ratified, and confirmed.
Members of the staff presented a review of the economic and credit
situation and outlook, illustrated by chart slides. Copies of the script
of the review subsequently were sent to all members of the Committee, and
a copy has been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
In commenting on the economic situation, Mr. Ralph Young stated
that the big question with which business observers are now concerned is
whether a recovery movement is definitely taking form. Following the
staff presentation of evidences of recovery, both foreign and domestic,

12/7/54 -3
Mr. Young stated that judgment as to the recovery outlook would depend
in considerable part on what one thought about expenditure prospects
in the area of recent expansion--State and local government outlays,
residential building, and consumer takings of both nondurable and dura
ble goods--and also about prospects for outlays in categories which had
held down gross national production this past year. Mr. Young thought
it possible that national defense outlays would decline much more slowly
than had been the case over the past year or so; that expenditures for
producers durables would no longer be going down, and that inventories
might be accumulated rather than liquidated. Also, it seemed possible
that residential construction would be at least maintained and that con
sumer takings would rise. In addition, Mr. Young noted that Federal
fiscal policy since early this year had been on the stimulative side with
tax payments by businesses and individuals down more than Federal ex
penditures, and it was indicated that the Treasury would show a moderate
cash deficit in the calendar year 1955 compared with an approximate bal
ance of cash income and outlays in the current calendar year.
Mr. Thomas commented upon credit developments, stating that Fed
eral Reserve policy needed to be in a position of maneuver with respect
to the possibility of either a slow recoveryover the next twelve months,
reaching the 1953 peak level of industrial production by the end of the
year; or the possibility of a rapid recovery with second quarter 1953
levels of industrial production reached and even exceeded before mid-1955.

12/7/54 -4
The first alternative would find the economy with still some margin of
unemployed resources while the second alternative would no doubt bring
problems of unhealthy inventory accumulation and strong upward pressure
on prices.
Mr. Thomas stated that one approach might be a shift in policy
from one of active ease, which has meant keeping banks generally out of
debt to the Federal Reserve, to something like the so-called policy of
neutrality followed in 1951 and 1952. That policy meant some bank bor
rowing to cover temporary needs and larger amounts of borrowing as credit
expansion accelerated.
Mr. Thomas also presented data with respect to bank reserve posi
tions in the period immediately ahead, stating that the level of free re
serves may continue during the current and following week below or only
a little above $400 million. Over the remainder of December additional
bank reserves would be supplied by float and other factors but there
would be a further increase in required reserves and, in the absence of
further open market purchases, average free reserves would probably rise
to around $500 million in the last week of the month. Mr. Thomas noted
that a large volume of reserves would be supplied by the usual post
Christmas return of currency, that required reserves might also decline
substantially, and that free reserves would probably range around $1-1/2
billion by the end of January, unless offset by Federal Reserve open mar
ket operations. During February, little further net change in bank re
serves was expected. During the next three months ahead there might be

12/7/54 -5
an underlying element of expansion in the economy. Because of the exist
ing low level of interest rates and because recent Treasury refunding
operations have so materially reduced the liquidity position of banks,
any material tightening that might be permitted to occur or be brought
about would probably bring prompt response in the interest rate structure.
Question may be raised, therefore, not only as to a shift in the direction
of policy but also as to some elements of administering that policy.
Chairman Martin stated that the presentation by the staff provided
a splendid background for a discussion of open market operations and,
while he did not feel that the Committee should be unduly influenced by
projections of developments either on the upside or on the downside, he
suggested that it have in mind the fact that it had been using the phrase
"active ease" in describing its credit policy for some time. At this
stage, the Committee should carefully consider the extent to which it
wanted to allow the forces of the market to operate. His own thinking,
Chairman Martin said, was running in the direction that it was time to
re-examine the "active" part of the phrase, "active ease". If there were
to be a change in the Committee's policy, any shift in operations should
be gradual if it were to be most useful.
Chairman Martin then called upon Mr. Sproul, who made a statement
substantially as follows:
1. There is now a basis for mild optimism concerning the
economic situation during the next 3 to 6 months. Con
suers are taking this view according to the most
recent survey of their intentions, and have the income

12/7/54 -6
and the savings to make it effective. The plans
for business capital expenditures, in the aggregate,
seem to he set at or slightly above the levels of
the last months of this year. The plans for State
and local expenditures show an increase. The build
ing boom is expected to continue, and a new flood of
mortgages will help to keep savings at work. The
Federal Treasury is out of the market as a borrower
of new money for two or three months (except in
directly through FNMA), but will be running down its
balances, and will have to come to the market for
new money sometime before the end of the fiscal year.
2. In terms of open market operations, the problem which
now faces the System is whether to continue aggressively
seeking to promote a condition of ease in the money
market, or whether we should take up some of the slack
in the credit situation now that the economy seems
definitely to have turned upward, or whether we should
shift to a policy of restraint. The choice seems
to me to lie with the two latter courses; the danger in
continuing to pursue the first course is that it might
now encourage speculative forces in the economy which
could lead to a brief burst of activity and another re
.apse.
3. There are some surface manifestations of speculation in
the economy, for example in the stock market and, per
haps, in the building industry and in the automobile in
dustry in terms of borrowing present sales from future
demand. We have been able to find little or no evidence
in credit data, however, to support fears of generally
unsound speculative developments. Business loans of
commercial banks were declining during the first three
quarters of 1954, and the relatively modest expansion
in the fourth quarter is no more than a reflection of
the improved business situation. The investment bank
ing market, in which corporate security issues have been
substantially smaller this year than last, has shown no
tendency toward a speculative psychology. Real estate
credit will probably increase about $12 billion this
year compared with less than $10 billion in 1953 and 8.5
billion in 1952. It is possible that the present rate
of new construction, stimulated by Government housing
policies, may not be sustainable and may be a potential
element of weakness. At the same time, real estate credit
figures do not seem to signal a speculative situation
real estate values and material and labor costs have re
cently been no more than steady.

12/7/54 -7
Total consumer credit outstanding after in
creasing $4.4 billion in 1952 and $3.7 billion in
1953, is expected to increase only slightly in 1954.
There is yet little indication that consumers are
using consumer credit in a speculative manner.
Stock market credit has been going up but is
still at historically low levels. We have only
figures which indicate trends in the use of credit
in the stock market, to be sure, but the figures we
have do not give cause for serious concern, even
though we feel pretty sure that some speculative
fever is getting into the market.
If we seek support for a finding of speculative
forces in the economy, therefore, which might bring
about a short-lived upturn to be followed by a dan
gerous set-back actually and psychologically, we
have to find it in guesses as to the future, not in
present credit conditions.
4. Making some guesses as to the future, in order to
formulate timely credit policies, despite its hazards,
is part of our job. It is not enough to know what has
happened. My own present view is, however, that we
do not want to make a guess about the future which is
itself too speculative. We are just coming into a
recovery phase of economic activity, in which wew ant
to avoid a false speculative upturn, but in which we
also want to avoid nipping the bud of real recovery.
In such a period no drastic nor dramatic change in
credit policy is desirable; whatever change we make
should be made so gradually as almost to escape detec
tion. We no longer need to push out reserve funds as
aggressively as we have been doing, but we do want to
maintain a situation in which credit is readily avail
able and the present or prospective cost of capital is
not a deterrent to capital expenditures.
5. The prescription for doing this, I would say, is
(a) An instruction from the F.O.M.C. to the executive
committee which takes out of the present direc
tive the command to be aggressive in maintaining
a condition of ease. We should now be aiming at
taking some slack out of the market, but not at
restraint.
(b) An instruction from the executive committee to
the Manager of the System Open Market Account which
aims at a smaller volume of free reserves than we
have tried to maintain during the past several
months.

12/7/54 -8
(c) Action by the Manager of the System Open Market
Account which responds to the feel of the mar
ket, within the limit of these authorities, rather
than being too closely bound by particular figures
of reserves. And the feel of the market will in
volve responsiveness to signals given by interest
rates as to where pressure may be building up,
and to signals given by the temper of lenders
and borrowers which might influence production,
employment, and price levels.
6. If we adopt a policy of taking up some of the slack in the
credit situation, we shall have to be particularly careful,
I think, not to bring undue pressure on the long-term
capital market. Long-term market rates of interest have
been rising and are expected by the market to rise some
what further over the near term. At this stage of economic
recovery, a credit policy which discouraged high levels of
capital investment would not be warranted. Its effect on
employment and unemployment, where the outlook is not too
promising in any case, might be dangerous. We want to be
alert but not nervous in working the controls.
Mr. Szymczak concurred in the views expressed by Mr. Sproul. The
situation was such that the Committee's operations might have to go either
way. Therefore, under the Committee's policy of flexibility, to the ex
tent it reduced its sights as to free reserves, that would help carry out
monetary policy. However, such a step might have to be reversed as the
Committee obtained a clearer view of the economic situation, since at
this stage it was not possible to know whether indications of recovery
would be sustained. Mr. Szymczak felt that no announcement of a change in
the Committee's policy would be desirable at this time, that any reduction
in the amount of free reserves from recent levels should be made slowly,
and tnat such reduction should not be of an extent to indicate that the
Committee had adopted an entirely different policy which would become
evident in the rate structure. In response to a question from Mr. Williams,

12/7/54 -9
Mr. Szymczak stated that, by avoiding an announcement, he did not mean
that the word "active" should not be eliminated from the full Committee's
directive, that what he wanted to avoid was an announcement at this time
or action of a magnitude which would indicate to the public that there
had been a change in policy.
Chairman Martin said that he felt there was entirely too much
general discussion in the Government of policy and possible changes in
policy. He illustrated this by reference to stock market margin require
ments, saying that he felt that under conditions such as existed today,
the Federal Reserve had a real responsibility not to discuss this subject
outside System circles. He went on to say that in several instances he
had responded to recent requests for comment on the stock market by stating
that he had no comment whatsoever, because he did not see how any comment
other than that could help but be misconstrued to the advantage or dis
advantage of some individuals. He felt that a similar approach should be
applied to open market policy and that any discussions of current policy
should be kept strictly within System circles.
Mr. Sproul stated that as far as margin requirements were con
cerned, the New York market was full of rumors regarding margin require
ments and possible changes in such requirements, and Mr. Rouse stated that
he felt the fact that people in the market were discussing the subject
had its healthy aspects as indicating a realization of some of the implica
tions of recent stock market activities.

12/7/54 -10
Chairman Martin responded that he felt it very healthy for per
sons outside the Federal Reserve System to discuss all aspects of the
matter, but that his point was that it was incumbent on representatives
of the Federal Reserve System, since it was the System's responsibility,
to keep their observations strictly within the family. Otherwise, com
ments would be misconstrued by the public, and at all times the System
should do everything possible to avoid having members of the public in
dicate that they had obtained information through "leaks" from headquarters.
Mr. Earhart said that Mr. Sproul had very well expressed the views
which he (Mr. Earhart) held. His observations, confined largely to the
Twelfth District, found widespread optimism among businessmen and the
public generally. Demonstration of that optimism, however, was largely
confined to the stock market and apparently had not been translated into
any undue accumulations of inventories or forward buying. Mr. Earhart
noted that some firms such as glass concerns had found that demand was
exceeding supplies and that additional orders could not be filled as
quickly as desired, with the result that some had gone abroad to obtain
supplies. For the most part, however, optimism as to business had been on
the conservative side. Even among builders, some caution was evident, and
Mr. Earhart cited deferment of plans for shopping centers which might ulti
mately be built but which were not being put forward at this time because
some of those already constructed had not proved as profitable as had been
anticipated. Mr. Earhart stated that there was evidence that new houses

12/7/54 -11
were being sold as completed. Vacancies were developing somewhat rapidly
in older commercial buildings.
Mr. Erickson said that he had been unable to find any evidences
of undue inventory accumulation in New England. On the other hand, he
could not find any great evidence of optimism. The textile industry
was still not in good condition, and machine tool manufacturers were just
getting along. Shoe manufacturers anticipated good business next spring
and construction was continuing active. But for the area as a whole, Mr.
Erickson said, he could not find indications of enthusiasm such as was in
dicated by the economic review presented this morning. With respect to
credit policy, Mr. Erickson said that he did not disagree with Mr. Sproul
and that he felt any transition from existing policy should be very gradual.
Mr. Johns said that the views already expressed were quite ap
plicable to the Eighth District. Laying aside some aspects of stock mar
ket activity, he found no evidences of speculative fever in business at
titudes or decisions of businessmen in the Eighth District. Some felt
the stock market had gotten too high, and there was a little evidence of
speculation in real estate lying in the path of residential subdivisions.
Speculation was not of major importance, however, and generally the at
titude seemed to be that business for 1955 would be somewhat better than
during the current year but not as good as in 1953. As to credit policy,
Mr. Johns concurred generally in the views already expressed, stating
that it was too soon seriously to consider dropping from the full Commit
tee's directive any reference to "ease" but that he would seriously

12/7/54 -12
consider eliminating the word "active" from the directive. Mr. Johns
also felt it was too soon to begin talking again about an inflationary
threat.
Mr. Leedy associated himself completely with the views Mr.
Sproul had expressed in appraising the economic situation. He was unable
to find any real evidence of speculation going on in the Tenth District;
there was some optimism but probably less than in other parts of the
United States because of the importance of agriculture in the Tenth Dis
trict and the continued unfavorable effects of the drought. With respect
to credit policy, Mr. Leedy felt that the views already expressed covered
the subject. The Committee had gone as far as it should with the policy
of "active ease" but to "slam on the brakes" suddenly would be a mistake,
and any reduction in the amount of ease should be gradual.
Mr. Irons said that his views, based on conditions in the Eleventh
District, would vary only in degree from those already expressed. He had
been unable to find any tangible evidence of speculation in that district;
people were generally optimistic but with a degree of caution, particularly
with respect to inventory accumulation. In making the survey which had
been suggested by the executive committee at its meeting on November 9,
businessmen reported that inventories currently were about in balance with
sales and that if sales went up they hoped inventories would not be in
creased but that there would be a more rapid turnover of stocks. To say
that the agricultural situation is either "good" or "bad" as a whole is

12/7/54 -13
not very meaningful because in some sections of the district it is bad
and in others fairly good. It looks as though total farm receipts in
the district for this year will be only a little below receipts of last
year. Mr. Irons could see no evidence of speculation which would favor
a reversal of current credit policy although a moderate transition from
aggressive active ease would seem appropriate. Such a shift should
avoid dramatics and should be made as gradual as possible.
Mr. Powell stated that his survey in the Ninth District brought
out nothing to call for a different opinion than that already expressed.
He had found nothing that looked like inventory speculation in his area,
and goods seemed to be flowing to final consumers without backing up to
any extent. Pointing out that the Ninth District was largely agricul
tural, Mr. Powell said there was remarkably little concern about the re
duction in farm income, noting that that district had escaped the drought
which had affected some other sections severely in 1954. As to credit
policy, Mr. Powell thought no action should be taken which would make it
appear the System was afraid of recovery: the economy must reach new
high levels through growth if it is to keep resources employed, he said,
and the System should follow policies which would help to that end with
out speculative excesses. At this stage the System should take no steps
to indicate it was "running for cover" before it needed to. He could see
no evidence in the Ninth District that a move to raise margin requirements
was necessary, but if the Board of Governors felt the stock market was too

12/7/54 -14.
active it had power to act in that field. This, however, need not affect
open market operations and, in general, Mr. Powell favored little or
no change in open market policy although it might be desirable to remove
the word "active" from the directive in its reference to ease.
Mr. C. S. Young mentioned the resurgence of optimism among farmers
in the Seventh District, stating that land prices which had been going
down since 1952 were now rising and sales transactions were increasing.
Optimism had become apparent among cattle feeders and other agricultural
producers during the past ninety days, and businessmen generally felt
very optimistic. However, there was no movement in the Seventh District
so far as he had been able to discover showing increases in inventories;
his reaction to the recent inquiry as to whether a feeling of speculative
activity was developing was that the Board of Governors had the authority
to increase margin requirements if that seemed necessary. Mr. Young would
go along with the views expressed earlier regarding credit policy, em
phasizing that the word "restraint" should be used very sparingly at this
stage.
Mr. Leach noted that in 1953 the Committee's policy had been di
rected toward avoiding deflation and later toward actively bringing about
recovery. This had been done and we were now just where we wanted to be.
In surveying conditions in the Fifth District there was little indication
of speculative activity, although there was optimism as to the outlook.
The building industry was active but unsold houses were not accumulating
and there was no reason to think that there was any undue speculation in

12/7/54 -15
inventories of materials or otherwise. Mr. Leach said that if the Com
mittee was not now leaning against deflation, and if it felt that there
was an upward movement which called for a change in credit policy, the
minimum change he would make would be to leave the word "active" out
of the directive in its reference to ease; he would consider eliminating
the reference to "active ease" and simply have clause (b) in the direc
tive refer to promoting "growth and stability". As to the discount rate,
Mr. Leach would make no change at this time. and he was certain that
nothing indicating restraint should be in the directive of the Open Mar
ket Committee or in the policies of the System at present.
Mr. Vardaman stated that he had recently talked with a number of
top-level businessmen and that he found an attitude of hopefulness,
rather than a spirit of real optimism. He agreed with Mr. Sproul's
general presentation, but he felt it would be a mistake to do any "snub
bing" at this stage. The System should stand ready to prevent any increase
in speculative activities or in inventory speculation which, if permitted
to develop, would necessitate a sudden movement by the System to restore
balance; but he would dislike any change in the wording of the directive
from the full Committee to the executive committee at this time, unless
there was more evidence than had been presented of speculative activity
in the economy. Mr. Vardaman felt strongly that there should be no re
straint and it was his view that the existing directive provided all the
flexibility needed to maintain proper conditions of ease.

12/7/54 -16
Mr. Mills said that he interpreted the comments made this
morning to mean that the System must make a continuous study of how much
slack could be taken out of the market without hindering the legitimate
loan and investment functions of the commercial banks. He shared this
feeling. He was very conscious that there was a time lag between System
action and public reaction, but he felt that an abrupt movement in Sys
tem operations might cause needless concern about System policy and in
tentions, and that this should be avoided. If the System found that
there was a build-up in inventories on the shelves of securities dealers
or if there was a tendency for deferment of new security offerings, that
could very well be an indication of an undesirable tightening in the.
market and an indication that the System was cramping the very sources
of expansion that it would like to foster on a reasonable basis. Relative
tightness in the market has been a normal phenomenon during much of
December because of seasonal factors, but with the turn of the year it
was possible that a very sensitive condition might develop. There would
be need to replenish some of the inventories withdrawn during the Christ
mas season and some of this would be desirable. If it became necessary
to retard that stocking at a later period the System could take action to
do so. If a restrictive policy were to be taken during the first few
weeks of 1955, there was real danger that the System might be cramping
back the planning and the expansion implicit in that planning at the very
time when business programs for the remainder of 1955 were being determined.

12/7/54 -17
Mr. Mills felt that a restrictive policy at that time along with seasonal
contraction in deposits just after the liquidity position of the banks
had been reduced would be undesirable. One possibility of being too
severe would be to cause undue alarm on the part of the business com
munity and to leave the banks in a position where they could not function
normally which, in turn, would aggravate the alarm of the business com
munity. Mr. Mills felt that the problems over the next six to eight
weeks should be resolved on the side of not taking out too much slack
from the market, which would mean that there should be no fixed volume
of member bank free reserves or member bank borrowings.
Mr. Robertson felt that differences in the views already expressed
were mostly a matter of degree. He commented that he had heard more pes
simism among the comments given this morning than he had heard anywhere
else recently. Mr. Robertson felt the Committee should be in a position
to move in either direction, depending upon how the situation developed.
It should be in a position to discourage expansion if that seemed neces
sary, and it should be in a position to make certain that there was no
shortage of credit for legitimate business expansion. In studying the
directive of the full Committee, he said, he had come to the conclusion
that perhaps the best solution was to delete from the phrase of the di
rective which provided that operations should be with a view "to promot
ing growth and stability in the economy by actively maintaining a condi
tion of ease in the money market" all of the words following "economy".

12/7/54 -18
He felt this would leave the executive committee in a position to lean
either way, depending on developments, which was desirable in view of
the fact that no one could tell at this stage just which way the econom
would go. In operations, he felt, it would be desirable to strive to
ward a much lower volume of free reserves than had existed recently and
to place greater reliance on use of the discount window. However, he
said that it would be undesirable to lay down specific plans at this
stage for a period of as long as three months since this was a period in
which it was necessary to have flexible responsibility placed in the
executive committee with authority for it to meet conditions as they arose.
Mr. Balderston felt that the existing policy of the Committee
should be continued with an attempt to take up the slack in the money
market. He was concerned, however, that any change in the wording of the
directive to the executive committee might be misinterpreted by the pub
lic, and this was the reason why he would make no change in the wording
of the directive at the present time. He would be willing to instruct
the executive committee to take whatever action was required with the un
derstanding that whatever was done would be almost imperceptibly gradual.
It was better for any shift to become evident as a result of action rather
than words.
Mr. Fulton agreed strongly with Mr. Balderston. Optimism in the
Fourth District resulted when the steel rate moved up from 60 to 80, he
noted, but there was no evidence of speculation in inventories or in any
other phase of activity. Residential building was high but there was no

12/7/54 -19
evidence of "stickiness" in sales of new houses; many persons were look
ing at new automobiles but sales were not too good, partly because of
old balances on instalment contracts. Bankers considered it much too
early to begin putting on the brakes, and were not concerned about
speculation even in the stock market. Mr. Fulton said that, in his
opinion, the present wording of the directive of the Committee would not
seem to preclude any proper action that would need to be taken if spec
ulation began to be apparent.
Mr. Williams said there was general optimism in the Philadelphia
area--he described it as "group" optimism--and it was greater than ap
peared to be warranted by specific items of economic information. Mr.
Williams thought the Committee should not speculate about the future and
it should increase its efforts to obtain evidence as to just what trends
were in the economy. Mr. Williams would eliminate the word "active" from
the full Committee's directive and would rely on a direction to maintain
"ease". He would be entirely ready to explain such a change, notwith
standing the reasons suggested by Mr. Balderston as to why any change in
wording might be misinterpreted.
Mr. Bryan said that the differences of opinion indicated by the
discussion seemed to him more largely differences of emphasis than of
substance. His own emphasis would be in line with his understanding of
points made by Messrs. Vardaman and Mills. He felt that reliable evi
dences of recovery are of very recent date and the extent of economic re
covery thus far is well within the limitations imposed by the materiel and
manpower of the economy.

12/7/54 -20
Mr. Bryan said he thought our use of the word "active" may have
over-emphasized in our own minds the degree to which Reserve System
actions had contributed to monetary ease. He felt that the appearance
of monetary ease may in considerable part have resulted from the liquida
tion of inventories and the fact that the economy has been operating at
less than full capacity. After noting that he had heretofore questioned
the usefulness of "free reserves" as a tool for regulating the money
supply, Mr. Bryan said that in his opinion the additions to total reserves
in the past few years had not been excessive when considered in relation
to the growth of reserves needed in the light of historical experience
and the growth of the country's manpower and general economic potential.
He concluded that little or no change of policy was thus needed at this
time and said that if a broad, strong eccnomic recovery is now in process
he assumed credit would tighten automatically, even though the System
continued providing net additions to total reserves at about the same
rate as in the past 24 months. Mr. Bryan said that he could not now see
much speculation in the economy. He questioned whether there should be
any change in the wording of the directive and felt certain that there
should be little or no change in the monetary policies of the Committee.
Mr. Bryan went on to say that while he may have misunderstood
Mr. Sproul's suggestion about giving the Manager of the System Open Market
Account authority to operate more on the basis of the "feel" of the mar
ket, he would like to express the judgment that a directive to feel the

12/7/54 -21
market is not the sort of directive that a principal can appropriately
give to his agent or that an agent can wisely accept from his principal.
Chairman Martin stated that the question of action to be taken
was a matter of degree and of emphasis. He referred to the difficulties
experienced in using projections of business and of quantities of re
serves; yet, the Committee could not get away from at least an implied
projection of the business situation in considering changes in credit
policy. The Committee had to make some estimate of the future in reaching
its decisions. It could not assume that all the evidence would be in if
it would wait a few weeks. Chairman Martin felt that the Committee had
done well in its operations recently and that the economy was more robust
than Mr. Bryan had suggested. He had more confidence in the growth of
the economy than some had indicated at this meeting, but this did not
mean that he was taking an optimistic position to the extent of "going
out on a limb" as to the immediate future.
Chairman Martin strongly disagreed with Mr. Balderston on the
question of a change in the wording of the directive, stating that to
make no change would leave the System in the position of maintaining a
policy of "active ease". In Chairman Martin's judgment, the outside
situation just did not warrant continuing the same program that had been
followed in past months, if the System was talking about a flexible policy.
Essentially, Chairman Martin said, the Committee wished to promote growth
and stability in the economy. There was no formula as to what the rate
of growth should be and it was something that obviously was going to

12/7/54 -22
vary with the conditions from time to time. The System had an obligation
not to perpetuate waste and inefficiency in the economy, Chairman Martin
said, and he did not believe that inflation provided jobs for people on
a sustained basis although it might temporarily promote jobs. He felt
the Committee should be very careful about leaning too far on the side of
easy money, and he expressed the view that on the basis of the comments
made at this meeting, it appeared to be the majority view that some change
in the directive to the executive committee would be desirable at this
time.
There followed a general discussion of possible changes in the
wording of the directive to be given the executive committee.
During the discussion, Mr. Sproul moved
that clause (b) of the existing directive to
the executive committee with respect to ar
ranging for open market transactions be
amended to delete the word "actively" so that
it would read that such transactions were to
be with a view "(b) to promoting growth and
stability in the economy by maintaining a
condition of ease in the money market".
During discussion of this motion, reference was made to the sug
gestions contained in Mr. Sproul's statement earlier in this meeting,
namely, that there be taken out of the present directive the command to
be aggressive in maintaining a condition of ease and, instead, to aim at
taking some slack out of the market, but not at restraint. Some of the
members of the Committee indicated that they felt a program of this sort
could be carried on without change in the wording of the present direc
tive. Others felt that the directive preferably should be changed to

12/7/54 -23
eliminate all reference to maintaining ease in the market, and to provide
in clause (b) only that transactions be with a view "to promoting growth
and stability in the economy." In connection with both these points of
view, it appeared to be the consensus that some shift from the existing
policy of "active ease" was desirable but that any change between now
and the next meeting of the full Committee would be gradual and would
not amount to restraint.
Mr. Sproul recalled that in past years the Committee's general
directives had been sufficiently general in nature to cover whatever
program was contemplated at the time of the meeting, with the result that
the wording of the directive had shown little or no change over considerable
periods of time even though there were major changes in policy. Subsequent
to 1951, he noted, the Committee had decided that it was preferable to
spell out a little more definitely the policy to be followed between meet
ings and, since it now seemed to be the consensus that the Committee con
templated a change in policy, even though it was to be ever so mild and
ever so gradual, he felt it desirable that a change be reflected in the
wording of the directive.
Mr. Leedy said that he would be somewhat disturbed by a change in
the directive which eliminated all reference to ease, and which would pro
vide only that operations were to promote growth and stability in the
economy. To make the directive so general in nature would be to return
to the type of directive that Mr. Sproul had mentioned had been used a few
years ago; such a directive would provide no definite guide to the executive

12/7/54 -24
committee but would be so broad in its terms that it would never need to
be changed no matter how policy might change. Mr. Leedy questioned the
desirability of resuming the use of directives so general in nature. On
the other hand, he felt that since some change in policy was contemplated,
a change should be evident in the wording of the directive and he, there
fore, would be inclined to favor Mr. Sproul's motion.
Chairman Martin stated that he was impressed with the points
made by Mr. Leedy and that, while he felt the general purpose of the Com
mittee was to promote growth and stability in the economy, it probably
would be undesirable to change clause (b) of the directive so that it
provided only for this objective.
Following further discussion in the
light of the alternative suggestions re
ferred to and of Mr. Leedy's comments, Mr.
Sproul's motion that clause (b) of the
directive be changed to delete the word
"actively" so that the clause would read
"to promoting growth and stability in the
economy by maintaining a condition of ease
in the money market" was approved by unani
mous vote. In taking this action, it was
understood that the Committee contemplated
a gradual reduction in the amount of ease
in the market without approaching a policy
of restraint.
In a reference to his suggestion that the executive committee might
instruct the Manager of the System Open Market Account to operate on the
"feel" of the market, Mr. Sproul stated that Mr. Bryan must have misunder
stood the suggestion when it was first made. His thought, Mr. Sproul said,

12/7/54 -25
was that the Manager might be instructed by the executive committee to
take into account the "feel" of the market as well as the volume of free
reserves, money rates, and other factors. In other words, "feel" was to
be only one of the factors to be considered in determining open market
operations within whatever limits were prescribed by the full Committee
and the executive committee.
In response to a question from Chairman Martin, Mr. Rouse stated
that he had no suggestion for change in the limitations in the directive
to be given by the full Committee to the executive committee.
Thereupon, upon motion duly
made and seconded, the following
directive to the executive commit
tee was approved unanimously:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for such transactions for the System open market account,
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury
(including purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of
maturing securities, and letting maturities run off with
out replacement), as may be necessary, in the light of
current and prospective economic conditions and the gen
eral credit situation of the country, with a view (a) to
relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs
of commerce and business, (b) to promoting growth and
stability in the economy by maintaining a condition of
ease in the money market, (c) to correcting a disorderly
situation in the Government securities market, and (d)
to the practical administration of the account; provided
that the aggregate amount of securities held in the System
account (including commitments for the purchase or sale of
securities for the account) at the close of this date, other
than special short-term certificates of indebtedness pur
chased from time to time for the temporary accommodation
of the Treasury, shall not be increased or decreased by more
than $2,000,000,000.

12/7/54 -26
The executive committee is further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee,
to arrange for the purchase direct from the Treasury
for the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
(which Bank shall have discretion, in cases where it
seems desirable, to issue participations to one or more
Federal Reserve Banks) of such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treas
ury, provided that the total amount of such certificates
held at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall
not exceed in the aggregate $2,000,000,000.
Chairman Martin suggested that Mr. Robertson commenton the sub
ject of repurchase agreements, concerning which he had raised questions
in his memorandum of October 20, 1954, and with respect to which the
New York Reserve Bank had furnished a memorandum dated November 9, 1954.
Mr. Robertson stated that he had prepared an additional memoran
dum with respect to this matter since reading the memorandum prepared at
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York under date of November 9, 1954, and
that he would suggest that copies of his additional memorandum be dis
tributed with the thought of postponing discussion of the matter until
the next meeting of the full Committee. Mr. Robertson stated that in
the meantime he would have no objection to continuing the existing pro
cedures with respect to repurchase agreements.
There was agreement with this
suggestion.
Mr. Szymczak stated that he had received copies of a report by
the Special Committee on Foreign Operations of American Banks on Bankers
Acceptances, prepared pursuant to the suggestion made at the meeting of

12/7/ -27
54
the full Committee on September 22, 1954. Since the report had come to
him only yesterday afternoon and members of the Committee had not had
an opportunity to study it, it was suggested and agreed that the full
Committee ask the executive committee to study the report and give some
indication at the next meeting of the executive committee as to its views
concerning the report. If necessary, a meeting of the full Committee
could be called to consider changes in the procedure with respect to
bankers' acceptances.
There was agreement with
this suggestion.
Mr. Rouse then stated that at the present time no authority
existed for executing repurchase agreements covering bankers' acceptances,
and he raised the question whether it would be desirable to extend the
existing authority covering repurchase agreements for Treasury securities
so as to include bankers' acceptances.
Mr. Robertson stated that he would be averse to extending the
authority as suggested by Mr. Rouse, that in his view the whole question
of bankers' acceptances should be considered before making a change of
the type proposed, and that he would, therefore, suggest that the pro
posal be carried over until the next meeting of the executive committee.
There was agreement with
this suggestion.
In an additional comment on this subject, Chairman Martin stated
that he felt the year 1955 might be much more important as a year in

12/7/54 -2
terms of what was done in the foreign trade field than seemed probable
in terms of domestic trade. He felt, therefore, that the proposals re
garding bankers' acceptances merited consideration.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the full Committee would
be held during the week beginning February 28, 1955.
Mr. Sproul stated that as indicated in his letter to the members
of the Committee dated November 24, 1954, he would carry over until the
meeting in March discussion of the actions taken by the Committee in
December 1953 and in March 1954, to which he had referred at the close
of the full Committee meeting on September 22, 1954, to the effect that
transactions of the System open market account will be entered into
solely for the purpose of providing or absorbing reserves (except for
disorderly markets).
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.