A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, January 11, 1955, at 10:45 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Williams
Mr. C. S. Young
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Bopp, Roelse, and R. A. Young,
Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Fulton and Earhart, Alternate Members of
the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Erickson, Powell, and Irons, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Minneapolis,
and Dallas, respectively
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on December 7, 1954, were
approved.

1/11/55 -2-
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee as set forth in the min
utes of the meeting of the executive com
mittee held on December 7, 1954, were ap
proved, ratified, and confirmed.
Before this meeting there had been sent to the members of the
Committee a report of open market operations prepared at the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York covering the period December 7, 1954, to January
6, 1955, inclusive, and at this meeting there was distributed a supple
mentary report covering commitments executed January 7 to January 10,
1955, inclusive. Copies of both reports have been placed in the files
of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period December 7,
1954, to January 10, 1955, inclusive, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Young made a statement with respect to the current economic
situation, presenting substantially the information contained in a staff
memorandum distributed under date of January 7, 1955. He said that the
upturn in economic activity, dramatized by the 3 point rise in November
in the index of industrial production, had been confirmed by a further
rise for the December index probably amounting to 2 points, and by a
broadening of expansive indications to a wider range of activities and
markets. Substantial recovery in industrial activity and further expan
sion in record levels of construction have been accompanied by moderate
strengthening of prices of a number of industrial and building materials.

1/11/55 -3
Prices of most finished goods at wholesale have generally continued stable,
while prices of goods in retail markets have continued to ease somewhat
under the influence of ample supplies and intensified competition. Mr.
Young noted that over the past year and a half the economy had successfully
transferred a large amount of productive resources from defense to civilian
purposes as well as weathered a major readjustment related primarily to
business inventory holdings. Adjustments on both counts seem to have about
run their course, he said, as defense outlays have stopped declining and
productive activity and final demands are now in a better functional balance.
Mr. Sproul stated that he was in general agreement with the descrip
tion of recent developments given by Mr. Young and as set out in the staff
memorandum, except perhaps for some of the adjectives such as "dramatic".
He had in mind the special difficulties of interpreting recent data because
of changed seasonal factors, particularly the earlier model changeover in
automobiles which accounts for much of the drama. In other fields of in
dustrial production than those connected with automobiles, increases have
been relatively modest. If the advanced seasonal is important, Mr. Sproul
felt that continued increases in total industrial production at the recent
pace would not seem likely, particularly as there is little evidence in
current price statistics that there will be a substantial shift to inventory
accumulation at this time. The increase in production schedules for auto
mobiles should not be linked too closely to current sales, since some of
the present high production might be partly precautionary because of strike

1/11/55 -4
possibilities. If such a strike takes place the automobile companies
would be in a position to meet demand for cars, but if a strike does not
take place current production levels would leave a very large inventory
problem. Mr. Sproul also had some doubts about the staying power of the
construction boom and some concern about the employment situation in the
light of the gap between increased output and employment opportunities
that were developing with increased productivity and the rising labor force,
Mr. C. S. Young then made a statement in which he said that in
dustrial activity appears to have scored a sharper advance in the Midwest
than in the nation as a whole in recent months, largely due to the spec
tacular upsurge in new automobile production. This development has affected
not only Michigan centers, but also many other district cities where parts
plants and materials suppliers are located. The higher rate of automobile
output and related activities will continue at least through March, Mr.
Young said, since firms have tentatively scheduled output of nearly two
million units during the quarter, which is 40 per cent more than in the
first quarter of 1954. If this schedule is met and inventories are to be
kept in reasonable bounds, dealer sales will have to be at least one-third
higher than in early 1954 and ten per cent above the record first quarter
volume of 1-1/2 million sales reached in 1951. Even with such a favorable
sales experience, inventories would rise from an estimated 400,000 units
at the end of December to about 650,000 units at the end of March, Con
sumer acceptance of new-model automobiles apparently has been very good so
far and retail deliveries in December are estimated at about 550,000 units,

-5
1/11/55
half again as large as last year and about the same as the December
1950 all-time high. As to other retail lines, Mr. Young commented that
while department stores in Chicago did not regard inventories in most
lines as unduly low, activity at the recent Chicago Furniture Show was
reported to be higher than last year, and a majority of firms reporting
to the trade association anticipated an increase in volume averaging 5 per
cent for the first half of 1955.
Mr. Young also said that, despite the pickup in the automobile in
dustry, the labor supply is ample in virtually all cities of the Seventh
District and unemployment is estimated at about 5 per cent of the entire
labor force. It might be that things are not quite as rosy as they appear
on the surface and that some of the automobile companies are borrowing
from the future in maintaining current production schedules.
Mr. Thomas made a statement with respect to capital market develop
ments, the Treasury's cash position, recent changes in the volume of bank
credit, and member bank reserves and money rates. These comments were sub
stantially in accord with those contained in the latter part of the staff
memorandum dated January 7, 1955, which had been sent to all members of
the Committee before this meeting. In particular, he pointed out that
practically all categories of bank loans increased further in December and
bank deposits and currency holdings showed a more than seasonal increase.
For the year 195 as a whole total loans and investments of commercial banks
showed the largest increase of any postwar year, and demand deposits and

1/11/55 -6.
currency increased by 3 per cent, with a seasonally adjusted annual rate
of increase of nearly 6 per cent in the last half of the year.
Mr. Thomas also presented a sheet containing an estimated pattern
of reserve changes, by weeks, during January-April 1955. This showed that,
in the absence of Federal Reserve open market operations, daily average
free reserves might be expected to increase approximately $250 million
during the statement week ending January 12; $410 million during the
statement week ending January 19; and $129 million during the statement
week ending January 26. The tabulation also indicated that on the basis
of these projections, if the volume of free reserves were to be kept from
rising above the $300 million level after the week ending January 5, it
would be necessary to engage in open market operations (through letting
bills mature or making sales) in the amount of about $400 million in each
of the weeks ending January 12 and 19, and perhaps in an amount somewhat
in excess of $100 million during the week ending January 26.
Chairman Martin then made a statement substantially as follows:
I would like to explain why we have called the full Open
Market Committee together at this time. One of the things
that has worried me is that the line between operations and
policy gets very thin at times, and the line between what
responsibilities the executive committee can legitimately
take and the line that shows when it ought to consult the
full Committee is a very fine one. Perhaps we ought to have
more meetings of the full Committee, particularly when there
are changes in the general situation such as we have been
having lately. It is perfectly obvious that there are dif
ferences among us in the evaluation of the changes, and it
is important that we review these changes in the scene as
they are taking place.
We have talked a lot about "nipping the recovery in the
bud". We now have a very happy situation so far as our

economic activity is concerned. What we are wrestling with
at the moment is the possibility that inflationary seeds
may be germinating, and that when they come to full bloom
it will be exceedingly difficult to restrain them. As a
Committee, we ought to do everything we can to permit the
development of the prosperity we are all seeking. But
these words mean different things to all of us. I have
looked through some of the records of meetings in the past
few years and there obviously have been shades of degree
and emphasis in the minds of all of us; that is why all of
us should meet from time to time and review the shades of
emphasis. I was a little worried because I know the manage
ment of the account has been trying faithfully to carry out
the directives given it, and it has found it difficult at
times to be sure of just what these different shades of
emphasis called for in operations. We have talked about
$400-700 million of free reserves at times and about re
solving doubts on the upside and not on the low side, and
we have talked about a lower range of reserves and whether
there should be less active ease. I have wondered whether
the shifting scene has not taken these figures and terms
out of focus, when you talk about "ease" and "active ease"
and when you remember that there are these different shades
of meaning in our discussions that are not spelled out in
our directives. It may be that no change is called for in
the directive of the full Committee at this time but at
least I felt we should meet to go over the current situation.
My own thinking has been along these lines: the point
Mr. Sproul has made about seasonals is a very real one, par
ticularly for the automobile industry. All of us have to
realize, however, that when we talk with businessmen when
things are going very well, businessmen are inclined not to
get too rosy in their comments. Also when they are pessi
mistic they are apt to be more pessimistic in their comments
than they actually feel. I recently talked with the head of
a large steel company who is so optimistic that I would not
dream of selling stock in his company if I had any. He
feels we are going through the roof. I think the figures
Mr. Thomas has cited on the money aspects place upon us some
responsibility for the conditions of ease that exist in the
securities market. We have different views around this
table about what action is appropriate in that direction and
about what could be done. I want to emphasize that selective
controls are never alternatives in my thinking to general
controls. They are supplementary, but they are not alternatives.

-8-
We have to have a coordinated program and if the blackness
that may be in the future (I happen to be on the optimistic
side at the moment) is to come, it is all the more impor
tant that we use flexible monetary policy during a period
when we are not trying to bring the horses to a halt, but
to let the horses know that they cannot go off in any direc
tion they want. Never in my experience have I seen a solider,
stronger securities market. It is not coming from margin
purchases; it is coming from certain shifts in holdings, re
capitalizations, and so on. We cannot absolve ourselves
from responsibility by saying that we will increase margins
another 10 per cent or more. To continue to use in our
directive the word "promote" in speaking of ease seems to
me to be uncalled for at this time. We ought not to be "pro
moting" ease now. Granting the seasonal conditions Mr. Sproul
has pointed out, and granting the basis for the apprehension
Mr. Young has pointed out in speaking of conditions in the
Chicago District, I think that the economic future of the
country is moving forward rapidly. It seems to me that in
place of the word "promote" we ought to substitute the word
"foster". We might change the phrase to "fostering growth
and stability in the economy" and we might include something
about avoiding unsound conditions or inflation. We are in
the dilemma of not wanting to "nip recovery in the bud" but
we want to "nip inflation in the bud". We want to see that
we don't have too much "fluff", I was delighted that General
Motors decided to go to the market for equity financing but
we want to show in our monetary policy that we are not so
wedded to the conditions of ease that we promote a psychology
that becomes uncontrollable.
We have a particularly difficult problem with the Treas
ury's financing. I had some discussions with them at the
time the margin requirement change was made. They are consid
ering a long-term bond. We certainly don't want a weak market
while they are doing their financing. There is a relatively
limited period of time in which we can operate. I think we
ought to show, during the time the Treasury is doing its fi
nancing, that we are on the constructive side. It is because
of the conjunction of all these problems that I feel it is
desirable to have the full Committee get together. We need
to get the benefit of the thinking of all of you and to con
sider whether there is anything to my point of substituting
the word "fostering" for promoting and of putting something
about "avoiding unsound conditions" into the directive to the
executive committee. We have been operating under a directive
that calls for ease and we have gone as high as $900 million

or a billion dollars of free reserves and have said that
was active ease. Now I think we have a reverse trend. I
don't think we ought to be talking too much about the future.
We ought always to be thinking about the present. I don't
want to be misled by phraseology. I think Mr. Sproul's
point is well taken on the seasonal factor, but that sea
sonal influence has been with us for a long time and it is
now highlighted by the automobile industry in particular.
If there is to be a glut in the automobile industry we
ought to have some leeway so that we can operate in the
opposite direction. I sincerely think we have gotten too
far out on the limb of easy money. Our position has been
interpreted that there will be an endless stream of reserves,
and when you get to the point where an insurance company
hocks a large block of its mortgages I think we ought to be
extremely watchful about the current situation. It may well
be that my judgment is not correct, but I think it important
we continue to view these problems. We ought to try to have
a coordinated policy. We ought to be considering, if this
goes on, tightening the money market, and we ought to be con
sidering the possibility of another signal to the stock mar
ket either through a further increase in the margin or,
preferably, through the discount rate. We ought to be con
sidering something of a cautionary nature.
I am not going to call on everyone here today, I would
like to have Mr. Sproul give us the benefit of his thinking
and would like to have whoever feels called upon to do so
make whatever contribution he feels would be helpful in our
discussion.
Mr. Sproul then made a statement substantially as follows:
1. First, I would like to say that I think the action of the
Board of Governors in raising margin requirements last week
was a timely and appropriate move, as a warning concerning
the use of credit in the stock market, and having in mind
the possible effect of movements in the stock market on the
whole economy. I also think that it was a proper use of a
selective credit control in the sense of supplementing
over-all credit policy; it was in accord with the action
taken by the Federal Open Market Committee at its last
meeting changing the wording of its directive to the execu
tive committee from one calling for the maintenance of
active ease in the money markets to one calling for the
maintenance of ease.

1/11/55 -10
2. Second, I agree that economic recovery is no longer in the
"bud" but I question whether such inflationary pressures
as exist now need to be or can be nipped in the bud by
general credit controls. We have an economy in which long
term growth factors and cyclical recovery factors are com
bining to produce a vigorous upturn, which seems likely to
persist for some time, and I would not want to see it hin
dered at this stage by general credit restraints.
3. To discuss this question, in terms of open market policy,
it seems to me that we may need to have a clearer under
standing of some of the terms we have been using to label
open market policy. In our discussions we have gotten into
the habit of using such terms as "active ease", "ease",
"neutrality", and "restraint", but we seldom try to define
what these terms mean. We need also to recognize that they
only label broad general policies, and that there can be
numerous gradations of policy within broad general policies.
Changes are ordinarily made gradually within the limits of
a broadly defined policy, not by abrupt movements from one
policy to another. That is a difficulty in catching in a
phrase, of a directive, these refinements of policy and the
thinking of each of twelve individuals which led to those
refinements.
4. To assist my own thinking, and as a rough approximation of
present meaning I have tried to give some definition to the
terms we have been using.
"Active ease"
(a) Maintenance of a volume of excess reserves
large enough to assure ready availability
of bank credit, in ample volume for all
borrowing needs meeting ordinary standards
of credit worthiness. This ease should be
expected in time to pervade all credit and
capital markets.
(b) The discount rate at a low level.
(c) Relatively low interest rates at all maturi
ties, with a tendency toward a continuing
decline of rates whether or not continued
declines are desired as a matter of policy.
(d) Short-term money market rates ordinarily
far enough below the discount rate so that
access to reserve funds will be cheaper
through the open market than through the
discount window.
(e) Member bank borrowing from the Federal Re
serve Banks only intermittently, and in
small volume by reason of individual bank
situations.

1/11/55 -11-
"Ease"
(a) Bank reserves and bank credit continue
readily available to meet credit-worthy
demands; no need of allocation of funds,
on part of banking system as a whole, to
particular uses because there is not
enough credit to go around; but no pres
sure on the banks to find uses for a con
tinuously increasing supply of reserves.
(b) Discount rate continues at a low level.
(c) Tendency toward decline in other rates
of interest (existing during period of
"active ease") is checked and some rates
advance.
(d) The more sensitive money market rates
Federal funds, dealer loans, and Treasury
bills - move up toward discount rate so
that, at times, borrowing reserves through
discount window may be more advantageous
than obtaining them through the open
market.
(e) Individual member banks borrow with some
frequency in initial response to expand
ing credit needs but a sustained and
growing aggregate volume of borrowing is
soon relieved by open market operations.
"Neutrality"
(a) Volume of bank reserves still ample to
meet credit-worthy demands. Market factors
allowed to express themselves in the re
serve position of banks. This would mean,
in most instances, no continuous cushion
of excess reserves and the elimination of
free reserves in the aggregate.
(b) Any appreciable change in economic condi
tions or over-all credit demands would have
a fairly prompt reflection in more sensitive
rates of interest and, if there were tighten
ing tendencies, the sensitive money market
rates would be expected to move above the
discount rate.
(c) At some stage, if these tendencies continue,
the discount rate would be moved up toward
what might be considered the middle of its
range.

-12-
(d) A moderate volume of member bank borrow
ing might be outstanding much of the time,
but continuing pressure on the banking
system as a whole to meet its needs by
heavy borrowing would eventually be re
sisted by open market operations.
"Restraint"
(a) Through absorption of reserves or reluc
tance to provide reserves through open mar
ket operations, general awareness would be
created that bank credit is not available
in sufficient volume to meet all of the
demands that are being made upon it.
(b) Pressure of an excess aggregate demand of
credit upon a limited over-all supply
would be expected to cause higher rates of
interest, and there may be a tendency for
rates to rise whether or not intensifica
tion of pressure is desired. (Our experi
ence in early 1953 is an example, perhaps.)
(c) The discount rate would be raised in con
firmation of the general policy of re
straint, to the higher levels of its range.
(d) Sensitive money market rates would be close
to or above the discount rate at all times.
(e) A substantial growth of member bank borrow
ing should take place, as a result of ex
cess credit demands, which would only be
moderated by open market operations if the
apparent degree of restraint was becoming
too great.
(f) Reserves continue available at all times at
a price - the objective is not to shut off
bank credit or even a net reduction, but to
limit growth so as to avoid inflationary
pressures from the monetary side.
5. In these terms, the present economic situation still seems to
me to call for a policy of "ease", call it minimum ease if
you want, rather than a neutral or restrictive policy. Cyclical
recovery from the recession of 1953-54 has shown additional
vigor in the last two months and the economy seems likely to
continue strong during the next few months. But it still re
mains true that the revival reflects more a cessation of de
flationary influences than the emergence of new and continuing
expansionary forces. The most recent dynamic factors in the

-13-
recovery - the early date of model change and the upsurge
of automobile production, and the continuing stimulus of
very liberal credit terms in the home construction industry
are not new expansionary forces and may possibly carry the
seeds of their own deflation later in the year. With in
ventory liquidation only now coming to a halt, with non
farm prices generally stable and farm prices still declining,
with high productive capacity facing increased competition,
with the possibility of a continuing problem of unemploy
ment and major labor conflicts, and with the Treasury taking
funds out of the economy instead of putting them in as during
the past six months, there seem to me to be economic (and
political) dangers in trying to reach, by general credit
measures of a more restrictive nature, whatever spots of
speculation or inflation may seem to be developing at the
moment.
6. So far as credit policy is concerned, it should be empha
sized that right now we want to meet the credit requirements
of cyclical recovery as well as secular growth. Without
creating a general inflationary bias or the need for a neu
tral or restrictive credit policy, this combination of
demands might lead to a less than "seasonal" decline in the
use of bank credit during the first half of 1955, or might
even result in some desirable expansion of such credit. We
should not be led, therefore, by shaky figures of "normal,
seasonal" declines in the use of credit to adopt a more
restrictive policy than the economic situation justifies.
7. With a continued policy of "ease":
(a) I would expect banks, and particularly money
market banks, to be in a well-balanced posi
tion - no longer under pressure, as they were
last year, to seek new investments continu
ously in order to avoid carrying excess re
serves, but still ready and eager to meet
legitimate loan demands.
(b) I would expect sensitive short-term money mar
ket rates to fluctuate only a little way be
low the discount rate most of the time.
(c) And I would expect the discount window to be
come more of a factor in providing bank re
serves.
This would seem to me to be a healthy situation.
8. Just where free reserves fit into this picture is hard to
pinpoint. We have to remember that we are in the process of
weaning the banking system from a condition of active ease,
and that we want to put on the brakes gradually, and maybe
even take them off from time to time. We also have to remem
ber that the distribution of reserves is a variable which can

1/11/55 -11
be important. So far as free reserves can be used as a
guide, therefore, I think we shall have to feel our way
down. We may find that over a period of several week: we
can and should get rid of the idea of free reserves, and
of free reserves themselves, but I still want to move
gradually rather than abruptly at this stage of our economic
recovery. A change in the directive of the Federal Open
Market Committee to its executive committee, which would
call for credit restraint as contrasted with our present
policy of less ease, would seem to me to be a mistake.
Mr. Sproul concluded by remarking that he would not wish to
see the intent of the directive changed at this time. As regards Chair
man Martin's suggestion, Mr. Sproul said that he had no objection to sub
stituting "foster" for "promote" in the directive so long as the Commit
tee understood that our operations were still aimed at the lower end of
a condition of "ease".
Chairman Martin stated that he felt all of the members of the Com
mittee had benefited from Mr. Sproul's comments and that he hoped each
of them would read Mr. Sproul's statement on the definition of terms. In
his (Chairman Martin's) opinion, one of the biggest problems of the Com
mittee was understanding the terms that were used in describing credit
policy and in translating those terms into instructions or directives con
tained in the minutes of the meetings of the Committee. Chairman Martin
went on to say that there obviously was a difference of judgment between
Mr. Sproul and himself in connection with the economic situation and the
credit policy that should be followed, although he did not think it very
large. He said that he regretted very much the "leak" that developed in
the policy of the Committee immediately following its meeting on December 7,

1/11/55 -15
1954 when the word "actively" was removed from the full Committee's di
rective to the executive committee in describing the program to be fol
lowed in maintaining ease in the market. However, it is necessary to
put into the annual record of policy actions of the Federal Open Market
Committee a statement with respect to the policy decisions reached at at
least four meetings a year-in fact, Chairman Martin said, there was a
likelihood that a bill would be introduced in the Congress to require a
statement of open market policy decisions each quarter of the year. It
was Chairman Martin s view that the Committee should issue its directives
in terms that followed as closely as possible the views and words on which
there was a meeting of the minds of the members of the Committee This
was difficult but every effort should be made to follow such a procedure.
His own personal view as to the current situation was that the use of the
word "promote" in the Committee's directive was not appropriate under
present circumstances. Chairman Martin said that he was not talking
about apprehensions as to the future: that what might happen in the future
was partly dependent on what the Committee did in the present. While he
did not wish to stress the word "inflation" it was Chairman Martin's judg
ment that the forces of easy money in the market had gotten out of pro
portion to what the Committee has been trying to do in the way of promoting
growth and stability in the economy. This did not mean that he felt the
Committee should go to a policy of restraint but it did involve the problem
of the exact meaning of such words as "ease", "active ease", "neutrality,
and "restraint". While there had been a time when he felt "neutrality"

1/11/55 -16
was quite an important word, Chairman Martin said he was not sure of its
meaning. He was sure, however, that the psychological reaction of the
market was different at different times. He was convinced that the Com
mittee recently had been operating with much too high a level of reserves
and that, whatever the words used to indicate a change, flexible monetary
policy called for a recognition of this situation. If the Committee after
discussion did not feel that any change should be made in the directive,
then the directive should remain unchanged. But it was important to make
the directive reflect whatever the Committee felt fitted the situation at
a given time. Chairman Martin did not think that he and Mr. Sproul were
far apart on the level of free reserves that would be desirable but if
open market operations were to be such that there would be "zero" free re
serves for a time, he would prefer as a member of the executive committee
that the directive from the full Committee be changed at this meeting to
recognize a shift in emphasis,
Mr. Mills said that he would like to express a midpoint view. He
thought the Committee was thinking of a "firm" money policy, not a policy
of tightness or of ease. While he did not have the concern regarding the
wording of the directive that had been expressed earlier in the meeting,
he said that he was concerned as to how the directive of the Committee
would be interpreted by the management of the account as it carried out
operations under the continuing directives of the executive committee. Mr.
Mills felt the present period was one of economic flux which deserved a
cautious approach to future policy. The Committee had moved from its

1/11/55 -17
policy of active ease to a climate of "firmness". While the Committee
wished to slow down investment activities, as in the long-term mortgage
field, it would wish, if possible, to avoid choking off legitimate activ
ities. Mr. Mills felt that whatever directive was decided upon, it would
be desirable to vest the executive committee with an authority which would
avoid a too rigid interpretation of the instruction: the instruction
should be flexible enough to permit, if the executive committee found it
was moving too severely toward a situation of tightness, relaxing from
that position without need for going back to the full Committee.
Chairman Martin said that Mr. Mills had made an excellent contri
bution to the discussion, that it was particularly appropriate in view of
the Treasury's position. Also, he noted that Mr. Mills had added the
word "firmness" to the group of words Mr. Sproul had commented on in his
statement. It was these different shades of meaning and emphasis that
should be thought through, he said, in terms of the objectives of the
Open Market Committee and the contribution that monetary policy could make
under any given conditions.
Mr. Leedy felt that continuation of the word "ease" in the full
Committee's directive might subject the Committee later on to an appraisal
which it would not desire. It was evident, he said, that there were some
excesses in the present situation, as in the securities market, and it was
his view that at this juncture the Committee s record should indicate a
directive to the executive committee to be moving in the direction of
firmness, rather than to be continuing with wording that had gotten into

1/11/55 -18
the directive at a time the Committee was actively promoting ease, Mr.
Leedy suggested that clause (a) of the full Committee's directive might
well be amended by adding to it words which would make it read that open
market operations should be with a view"to relating the supply of funds
in the market to the needs of commerce and business by effecting an or
derly reduction in the monetary supply responsive to seasonal requirements."
He also suggested that clause (b) be changed so that the Committee s di
rective would not call for "promoting" or even "maintaining" a condition
of ease. He questioned whether a program of operations such as Mr. Sproul
had outlined could be carried out under the existing directive without
violating the ordinary meaning of its terms.
Mr. Robertson, after stating why he felt it desirable to have
meetings of the full Committee as frequently as might be called for be
cause of differences of opinion, said that while he did not think the Com
mittee was fighting inflation today, it was trying to prevent development
of inflation. With that in mind and with the thought of a progression from
a state of "active ease" to "ease" to something else, he would suggest that
clause (b) of the Committee's directive be changed to indicate that open
market operations should be with a view "to promoting long-term growth and
stability in the economy by maintaining for the time being a condition of
mild restraint." He did not care so much what the precise wording of the
directive was and would have no objection to the wording Chairman Martin
had suggested indicating that the Committee wished to avoid unsound condi
tions, but he did feel that the directive should show that the Committee

1/11/55 -19
was now moving from a condition of ease to something like mild restraint.
Mr. Williams stated that for purposes of perspective he would
like to approach the problem of credit policy from another angle. During
the past week, he said, he had been in touch with five individuals who
had complained about the unusual competition that existed in business
and about the pressures that existed on prices. He also cited complaints
of automobile dealers that manufacturers were failing to protect dealers'
territories. In another instance, the head of a large corporation had
caused a survey to be started in his plant with a view to effecting all
possible economies. Mr. Williams also stated that real estate firms had
expressed concern about recent tendencies in credit policy and that one
member of the Philadelphia Bank's Board had predicted that later this year
there would be considerable weakness in the market for older houses, so
much so that the advantages of going into an old house would be so great
that many persons would turn from purchases of new houses which could be
bought with no down payment and would instead purchase the older houses.
Mr. Williams thought these factors added up to saying that the spirit of
optimism which seemed so unanimous might grow out of special factors, rather
than influences that were generally present in the economy. He could see
nothing to indicate an incipient boom, and he did not think the Committee
should go on record by inserting the words "mild restraint" in its directive.
He would accept "fostering" in place of "promoting" and he would be agree
able to inserting a phrase that would suggest the avoidance of unsound

1/11/55 -20
conditions, but he did not think the existing policy of the Committee
should be changed very much. While he would be willing to see the Com
mittee working down a little in the amount of ease, it should not actually
work in the other direction, that is, in the direction of restraint. In
response to Chairman Martin s question, Mr. Williams agreed that what he
was suggesting was working a little further toward the middle-ground in
credit policy.
Mr. Balderston said he thought the recovery taking place was one
which needed to be sustained and that this required attention to two in
cipient trends: (a) impairment of the quality of mortgage debt and auto
mobile instalment paper, and (b) the climate of speculative activity that
stemmed from conditions in the market. This led him to favor some change
in the wording of the directive, preferably along the lines Chairman Martin
suggested. More importantly, Mr. Balderston said, he would favor a change
in target to a zero amount of free reserves and bill rates approximating
or perhaps exceeding the present discount rate. Mr. Balderston said he
was thinking of the problem that would face the System in the future of
perhaps making an adjustment in the discount rate-he wished it were now
1-1/4 per cent instead of the existing 1-1/2 per cent rate.
Chairman Martin then summarized the several suggestions made, namely,
Mr. Leedy's suggestion for a change in clause (a) of the directive which
would call for effecting an orderly reduction in the monetary supply re
sponsive to seasonal requirements; his own suggestion which would call for
a change in clause (b) of the directive so as to provide for the conduct of

1/11/55 -21
operations with a view to "fostering" (rather than "promoting") growth
and stability in the economy and avoiding the development of unsound con
ditions; Mr. Robertson's suggestion which would include insertion in the
directive of "long-term" before "growth and stability" and of words indi
cating that the Committee was moving from a policy of ease to one of mild
restraint; and Mr. Williams' caveat that whatever the change, the Committee
avoid any wording of its directive which would indicate it was moving to a
policy of mild restraint.
In a brief discussion of Mr. Robertson's suggestion that "long-term"
be inserted before "growth and stability", it was the consensus that the
idea of long-term was inherent in the objective of promoting or fostering
growth and stability in the economy and, accordingly, that the addition of
the words "long-term" was unnecessary. Mr. Thomas commented that the use
of the words "growth and stability" as a part of the Committee s directive
implied a sustained growth but that growth could not be sustained if it
proceeded too fast.
Mr. Szymczak suggested that regardless of the wording chosen for
the directive, the important thing was to discuss the policy which the
Committee wished to follow to see if there could be a meeting of minds as
to what the Committee meant when it used different terms. This would help
when the executive committee and the Manager of the System Account came to
interpreting directives given to them.
Chairman Martin stated that he felt the framework of what the
Committee was trying to do at this time was fairly clear, but he doubted

1/11/55 -22
whether agreement could be reached at this meeting on definitions of
terms.
Mr. Szymczak responded that he felt a study of the suggestions made
by Mr. Sproul and of the changes proposed in the directive by Messrs. Leedy
and Robertson would help in the future.
Mr. Earhart suggested that the Committee at least take the word
"ease" out of its directive at this time. He could see no harm in taking
it out and felt it would make a better record since it appeared the Com
mittee did not now wish to be "pushing" reserves into the market.
In the course of further discussion, Mr. Robertson suggested that
in place of the words "mild restraint" which he had suggested earlier it
might be preferable to use the term Mr. Mills had used--"firmness"--as
indicating the kind of policy the Committee had in mind.
Mr. Sproul stated that he did not think the wording of the direc
tive made too much difference if there was general agreement on what the
Committee proposed to do and if the Committee knew what the executive com
mittee was expected to do. With gross national product still $5 billion
below what it was in mid-1953 and thinking in terms of an economy that
would grow over the long term, Mr. Sproul could see no basis now for intro
ducing the word "firmness" into the Committee's directive. This would
indicate a policy of restraint, and he felt the economy was still in that
part of the quadrant of a circle calling for ease but working gradually
toward the next step. However, so long as there was understanding as to

1/11/55 -23
the meaning of the words used and so long as the Committee understood
that it was gradually feeling its way and not adopting a policy of re
straint, he would not be concerned about the wording of the directive
although he would prefer that it not be changed.
Chairman Martin then read a statement which Mr. Riefler had pre
pared indicating that the various views expressed all amounted to saying
that the Committee wanted credit policy to be carried out with a view "to
fostering growth and stability in the economy by effecting for the present
an orderly reduction in the supply of free reserves."
Mr. Rouse said that this was about the conclusion he had come to:
that the Committee had in mind gradually contracting the volume of free
reserves from its present level.
No disagreement was indicated with the statements of Messrs. Riefler
and Rouse as reflecting what the Committee had in mind as to policy for
the immediate future, but Mr. Szymczak thought it would not be desirable
to inject the words "free reserves" into the directive.
There was a further discussion of the several suggestions made for
change in the wording of the directive and of the desirability of having
wording which applied to the immediate situation, rather than a statement
of a general objective of credit policy good for all time to come. In the
course of this discussion, Mr. Szymczak again suggested that it might be
desirable to make a further study of the suggestions made by Mr. Sproul
as to the definitions of terms; in the meantime, without changing the

1/11/55 -24
directive of the full Committee, the executive committee could work within
the framework of a policy along the lines discussed at this meeting
Chairman Martin responded that if the Committee was going to act
now to authorize a policy along the lines of the discussion, he felt the
Committee should agree at this meeting on a phrase which was representative
of the shade of opinion on which there was agreement at the meeting today.
Mr. Irons then suggested that while he was not a member or alternate
member of the Committee, the tenor of the discussion indicated to him that
clause (b) of the Committee s directive would be given a meaningful wording
if it were to provide that operations should be with a view "to promoting
growth and stability in the economy by maintaining conditions in the money
market so as to avoid the development of unsustainable expansion".
After discussion of Mr. Irons' sugges
tion, Mr. Sproul moved that the Committee
modify clause (b) of the first paragraph of
its directive to the executive committee to
read, "to fostering growth and stability in
the economy by maintaining conditions in the
money market that would encourage recovery
and avoid the development of unsustainable
expansion".
Mr. Sproul's motion was put by the
Chair and carried. On this motion, Mr. Bryan
requested that he be recorded as "not voting".
In connection with his request that he be re
corded as not voting, Mr. Bryan made a state
ment substantially as follows:
I should like to be recorded as not voting. This request
is made because I came to this meeting prepared to discuss the
economic situation, and prepared to discuss appropriate policy
in terms of reserves and money rates. I find myself ill
prepared to discuss textual changes in the directive of the

1/11/55 -25-
Committee, and least of all prepared, in the light of the
discussion we have had to appraise the significance of the
textual changes actually adopted, or the magnitude of the
policy changes contemplated by the changes of language.
In view of this lack of preparation and understanding on my
part, I believe that it is wisest for me not to vote either
for or against the proposal.
It seems to me that there is a difference of opinion,
or a substantial difference of emphasis, as to what our
actual policy should be in the light of current economic
events. We have not, I believe, come to grips with that
fundamental and basic difference of opinion in terms of
free reserves, total reserves, or money rates but have de
voted ourselves to a textual change in the directive that
conceals rather than reveals our differences. That textual
change is apparently intended to signal a change of policy
but not in a way that makes reasonably clear to the executive
committee and the agent for the account what actual policy
is intended. Please forgive the opinion that we have attained
a semantic solution that does not set forth what it is that
we want to do, and does not clearly enough tell our agent com
mittee and agent bank what we have in mind.
If I were the agent bank, or the agent executive commit
tee, charged with the responsibility of effecting the inten
tions of the full Committee, I would be fearful of so vague
a directive. I would have no way of certainly proving that
I had discharged my responsibilities and would thus court the
danger of being second-guessed and falsely suspected, which
is a human tendency in any event and almost inevitable when
the principal is a committee and the agent is given a direc
tive that conceals differences of opinion regarding the proper
policy, or the proper extent of policy change, or both.
An important source of our difficulty in writing a di
rective, and an important source of danger to the agent
executive committee and agent bank, I believe, is that we have
been trying to use terms that are qualitative in nature.
Qualitative terms have great use in certain fields, but I
doubt if they are of much help to any of us here in saying
what we want to do, unless, as Mr. Sproul has commendably
attempted, we define those terms with considerable precision,
Unfortunately, qualitative terms run into the difficulty
that they must usually be defined by other terms that are
qualitative in nature. Thus, we have many terms such as
ease, active ease, firmness, restraint, mild restraint, and
so on. It may be that these terms can be sufficiently defined

1/11/55 -26
that there is a minimal room for difference of opinion as
to the policy intended, the authority delegated, and the
discharge of the delegation; but I am now tempted to the
opinion that we will understand our policy better, and
make a better discharge of our responsibilities, within
acceptable canons of delegation as between principal and
agent, the more nearly we develop directives that avoid
qualitative terms and approach directives in quantitative
terms, whether free reserves, total reserves, money rates,
or money-rate ranges.
On the economic situation, I share totally the views
expressed by Mr. Sproul and Mr. Williams. I quarrel with
nobody's conjectures, but it seems to me that we have the
problem of taking up slack in the economy and of providing
for a growth sufficient to provide for a rapidly expanding
working population. I cannot see, by an examination of
prices or employment levels, any real inflationary problem
at this time. Therefore, I am extremely concerned, as I
was in December, when I reluctantly voted to take the word
"active" out of the policy directive as describing our
policy of monetary ease, that any actual change in policy
whatever words we may use in the directive-be very tenta
tive, very hesitant, very experimental, lest we send a pall
over the economy.
In response to Chairman Martin's question as to the limitation to
be included in the directive to be issued to the executive committee, Mr.
Rouse stated that he felt the existing limitation of $2 billion in each
paragraph was satisfactory.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the following directive to the
executive committee was approved, Mr. Bryan
not voting for the reasons indicated above:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for such transactions for the System open market account,
either in the open market or directly with the Treasury (in
cluding purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing
securities, and letting maturities run off without replace
ment), as may be necessary, in the light of current and

1/11/55
-27-
prospective economic conditions and the general credit
situation of the country, with a view (a) to relating
the supply of funds in the market to the needs of commerce
and business, (b) to fostering growth and stability in
the economy by maintaining conditions in the money market
that would encourage recovery and avoid the development
of unsustainable expansion, (c) to correcting a disorderly
situation in the Government securities market, and (d) to
the practical administration of the account; provided that
the aggregate amount of securities held in the System ac
count (including commitments for the purchase or sale of
securities for the account) at the close of this date,
other than special short-term certificates of indebtedness
purchased from time to time for the temporary accommodation
of the Treasury, shall not be increased or decreased by
more than $2,000,0000000.
The executive committee is further directed, until
otherwise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to
arrange for the purchase direct from the Treasury for the
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (which Bank
shall have discretion, in cases where it seems desirable,
to issue participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks)
of such amounts of special short-term certificates of in
debtedness as may be necessary from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury, provided that the
total amount of such certificates held at any one time by
the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate
$2,000,000,000.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held
during the week beginning February 28, 1955.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary