A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board, of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Tuesday, August 23, 1955, at 10:45 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Earhart
Mr. Irons
Mr. Mills
Mr. Leach
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Sproul
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. C. S. Young, Alternate for Mr. Fulton
Messrs. Erickson, Johns, and Powell, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Mr. Bryan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Messrs. Daane, Hostetler, Rice, Roelse, Wheeler,
and Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Mitchell, Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago
Mr. Koch, Assistant Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Securities Department, Federal Re
serve Bank of New York
Approval of the minutes of the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee on August 2, 1955, was deferred until the next meeting to afford

8/23/55 .2.
absent members of the Committee who were present at that meeting time to
review the minutes.
Before this meeting there had been sent to the members of the
Committee a report of open market operations prepared at the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York covering the period from August 2 to August 17,
1955, inclusive, and there were distributed at the beginning of this meet
ing copies of a supplementary report prepared at the Bank covering opera
tions during the period August 18 through August 22, 1955. Copies of
these reports have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period August 2
to 22, 1955, inclusive, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Chairman Martin then called on Mr. Ralph Young for a statement on
the current economic situation. Mr. Young made substantially the follow
ing comments which were a digest of a staff memorandum sent to the mem
bers of the Federal Open Market Committee under date of August 19, 1955:
The economic situation continues to be one of demand
pressure in the industrial sector and supply pressure in
the agriculture sector. Over-all price stability in this
country and abroad appears very much to be the product of
a compensation of demand and supply forces as between these
two major sectors of activity. In this country and in other
important industrial nations, the high levels now attained
by industrial output have generated such strong credit demands,
with accompanying upward pressures on interest rates, that
steps of restraint on undue monetary expansion have become
more general and overt.

8/23/55 -3
This economy's gross product for the second quarter has
been notched up one more time and is now put at 385 billions.
With the additional gains registered since then, a preliminary
guess for the third quarter figure is 390 billions.
The Board's index of industrial production for July re
mains uncertain, i.e., whether the final figure will be 140
or 141. Preliminary data for August suggest another index
point rise, but this guess does not allow for the effects
of recent storm and flood damage along the central and north
eastern Atlantic seaboard, or for shutdowns in copper fabrica
tion due to copper shortage.
A feature of industrial output that merits special com
ment is that, after the general rise in activity which has
already taken place, more industrial groups seem to be produc
ing close to apparent capacity. This situation affords some
basis for expecting a slowdown of advance in the months ahead.
One needs to weigh such an expectation in the light of the
rising momentum of business plant and equipment expenditures,
the relative balance in this business upswing between expan
sion in finished goods output and materials output, and the
comparatively moderate growth thus far of business inventory
holdings. On the latter point, despite the rise of inventories
which has now occurred, average stock-sales ratios have been
relatively stable in recent months.
Retail sales, after seasonal adjustment, were 2 per cent
above June and 9 per cent over a year ago. Sales of furniture
and appliances rose very sharply, a development finding sym
pathetic response in very recent output data for these areas.
Other large gains were made in apparel and general merchandise.
Department store figures for August suggest a fall-back in re
tail sales to May-June levels, but unfavorable shopping weather
may account for this result.
Newspaper comment suggestive of some weakening in the auto
mobile sales picture calls for special examination of facts in
this area. Early August industry reports show sales of new
cars 40 per cent ahead of last year, and, while stocks are up
28 per cent and at a new high, stock-sales ratios are under
a year ago. Used car sales are still running 20 per cent over
last summer, although stocks are up 17 per cent. These figures
are roughly as of the industry's production cutbacks for model
changeover, with new model introductions from 30 to 60 days off.
Free market prices of used cars, i.e., prices at dealers'
auctions, have continued to show little change after allowance
for depreciation rates typical of this time of year.

8/23/55
With automobile sales relatively active and sales of
other hard goods up, consumer instalment credit in July is
estimated to have advanced by another half billion. The most
recent information reaching us about terms shows 36 months
maturities on new cars to be quite common in most sections of
the country, and the predominant maturity in industrial areas
along the eastern seaboard. Customer equities on new cars,
from a historical standpoint, are generally running on the
thin side.
While over-all spending for new construction remains at
a high level, residential construction has been easing off.
With real estate markets continuing active, with few unsold
houses in builders' hands, and with vacancies reportedly low,
this development appears primarily related to a tightening of
mortgage credit, especially with regard to new lender commit
ments. However, shortages of building materials in some areas
and advancing construction costs have no doubt also affected
the slowdown in residential starts.
With demand for industrial products strong and costs
rising, prices of materials and finished products have both
been rising with price increases for finished goods much more
frequent than earlier. Average prices of farm products since
mid-June have fallen 4 per cent and currently are 8 per cent
below a year ago. The price for farm products declines have
been mainly in hogs and grains on the domestic side and in
cocoa and coffee on the foreign side. Cattle prices have
changed little over the past two months.
Strength continues to feature the labor market, with un
employment down to less than 4 per cent of the labor force.
Seasonally adjusted nonfarm employment is expected by labor
market specialists to show a further rise in August. Agree
ments negotiated in major industries are showing larger wage
rate increases than in other recent years. The impact on pay
envelopes of some of the more recent and more important of
these settlements is only beginning to be felt.
The materially improved business conditions of recent
months point to higher tax collections for the Government. Al
though expenditures may run above earlier estimates, a surplus
of 2 billion or better is now indicated for the current fiscal
year.
The capital markets remain active with corporate volume up
but with State and local government issues off, partly on account
of the rejection of bids on several offerings.

8/23/55
Common stock prices have leveled off, on reduced trad
ing volume about 4 per cent below July peaks. Increases in
stock market credit for two months have been quite moderate,
and the number of margin accounts showing debit balances
changed little in July, after many months of apparent in
creases.
Bank credit, as shown by the statements of weekly report
ing city banks, has increased considerably over the past month.
With security portfolios showing little change in balance,
the increase has reflected expansion in most types of loans.
Security and agricultural loans, however, have declined some
recently for special reasons. The all important points about
recent banking developments are that private credit expansion
has been strong in the period of usual seasonal slack and like
wise there are indications that money supply growth has picked
up again. Turnover of demand deposits has continued at the
high levels reached in mid-spring.
Market interest rates, after an interruption of upward
movement early in August, recently have again shown an upward
tilt. The movement, however, has been somewhat uneven as
between different types of paper. Uncertainty with respect
to future levels of longer-term yields has tended to raise
liquidity preference of institutional investors and this has
evidently been a special factor in holding down yields on Treas
ury bills recently.
In connection with Mr. Young's statement, Mr. Leach said that,
from conversations with businessmen in his district, it appeared that in
creases in minimum wages in conformity with legislation recently approved
by the Congress to become effective next March were already beginning to
have some effect in industries in the Fifth District where increases made
in the furniture industry were creating pressure for increases at other
plants. He added that since a very large proportion of the workers in the
furniture, textile, and other industries in the Fifth District have earned
less than $1 per hour in the past there will be cost pressures in these

8/23/55 -6
industries as well as in the steel industry where prices have been in
creased as a result of recent wage agreements.
At Chairman Martin's request Mr. Koch made a statement with re
spect to the prospective member bank reserve situation as follows:
The reserve position of member banks has changed markedly
since the Treasury refinancing around the turn of the month.
During the last two full weeks in July the outstanding level
of free reserves averaged about a positive $250 million.
During the first three weeks of August, on the other hand, the
level averaged about a negative $175 million. The change oc
curred largely by allowing market forces, particularly an in
crease in currency in circulation and a decrease in float early
in the month, to have an effect in reducing reserves. In addi
tion, however, the System reduced its holdings of Treasury bills
by allowing some to run off at maturity and selling others.
Currency in circulation increased in June, July, and early
August at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of about 5 per cent,
after having shown little net change on balance for many months.
In the current week ending August 24 the average outstand
ing level of free reserves is likely to show a decline of ap
proximately $100 million due mainly to System operations, in
cluding another run-off of Treasury bills and the carry-over
effect on a daily average basis of last week's reduction in Sys
tem bill holdings. In the next week ending August 31 market
forces, particularly the usual end-of-month decrease in float
and the pre-Labor Day outflow of currency into circulation, are
expected to lead to a further reduction in bank reserves by
perhaps an additional $100 to $150 million. In the week ending
September 7 a continuing pre-Labor Day outflow of currency into
circulation may drain a further 200 million from bank reserve
positions. In the week ending September 14 market forces are
likely to have little effect on balance on reserves. Thus,
assuming no further Federal Reserve open market operations,
market forces would likely produce a decline in outstanding
free reserves to an average level of approximately minus $600
million during the early part of September.
In the week ending September 21 the usual mid-month in
crease in float should produce a sharp temporary rise in bank

8/23/55 -7
reserves. This review of prospective bank reserve develop
ments carries us past the next scheduled meeting of the
Committee.
In opening the discussion of system credit policy, Chairman Martin
stated that at times like the present the formulation of policy may be
largely a question of techniques and procedures and he doubted that it
was possible completely to separate over-all policy from techniques and
procedures. He said he had reviewed the minutes of the last meeting of
the Committee, which he felt was a very useful and constructive meeting,
and was impressed that the differences of opinion were in the area of the
degree of restraint to be applied rather than in the over-all policy that
restraint was necessary.
He inquired whether any member of the Committee would wish to
change the current policy as stated in the directive issued to the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York at the last meeting which provided among other
things, that open market transactions would be for the purpose of restrain
ing inflationary developments in the interest of sustainable economic
growth. Upon an indication from all of the other members of the Committee
that no change was called for in the policy stated in the directive, he
turned to the problem of actions to be taken to carry out that policy and
in that connection made substantially the following statement:
The important questions have to do with techniques and
procedures. I have reviewed my statement at the last meet
ing of the Committee and would like to comment on my remarks

8/23/55 -8
at that time. What I say will not change the general basis
of what I said then. I think the wage cost push is still
with us and the psychology that that creates is still with
us. I would emphasize a point that I think we exaggerated at
the time of the last meeting. We used the terms "theatrical"
and "dramatic" in connection with the amount of the discount
rate increase. I question whether an increase of either 1/4
of 1/2 per cent could be characterized in that way. What I
was trying to say at the last meeting was that the action
should be decisive and clear. We might have differing views
as to whether an increase of 1/2 per cent is dramatic or
theatrical. I would not want to imply that the action was
either dramatic or theatrical but rather that it would be
clear and decisive.
One of the points I made in my statement at the last meet
ing was on inventories. I think inventories are rising much
more rapidly than we realize. Our inventory data is the
poorest we have and the lack of adequate information will be
come apparent at a time when it will cause us the most trouble.
I realize that that comment is in the area of projection but
I think it is true.
I want to comment on the philosophy of restraint. Behind
the wage cost push is a sort of general conviction, one that
has been growing for a number of years, that inflation, if not
desirable, is something that it is not politically feasible to
hold down. There are those in Wall Street who assume it will
not be politically feasible to restrain inflation, that the
economy has an inflationary bias, and that they might as well
resign themselves and relax and enjoy it. I want to present
my own thinking on that point. I have been in the Government
now for 10 years and I am fully aware of Government pressures.
There are margins of error in all these things, but it is
perfectly clear to me that it is politically feasible and
practicable, if judgment is sufficiently wise, to restrain a
situation before it develops. It is much more difficult in my
judgment to restrain a condition after it has developed. I
believe we should approach the problem of credit policy with
that philosophy. In other words, it is possible to restrain
a person before he does something, and while he may not like
to be restrained he will forgive you for it later, but if he
goes ahead and does something and then you act to pull him
back your action becomes a form of punishment for what he has
done that is not feasible in a democracy.

8/23/55 -9
We can never recapture the purchasing power of the dollar
that was lost because of the war. That is not politically
feasible or economically desirable. Such a loss usually occurs
in a relatively short time. In the present circumstances, when
we are faced with another period of increasesin prices, I be
lieve that any margin of error should be resolved in the direc
tion of tightness until we are certain that the policy should
be changed. No one can project the future. We don't know
whether we are going to have the high level of fall and Christ
mas trade that we think we are but the production picture is
moving upward and confidence is projected all along the line.
If we let it get out of hand we may be in a position of "too
little too late" for a long time to come and may be faced with
the inevitable "bust" that some people think will come in any
event because of the inflationary bias in the economy. We
have reached a point in the present phase of the economy where
there are going to be a good many bearish statements. These
are the "dog days", i.e. this is the end of August. This is
the season when there is usually a certain amount of bearish
ness.
The contribution that the members of the Committee are
making in their statements in these meetings is very helpful
and useful. It is important to get the various points of view
on the table and analyze them. There will be differences of
opinion because no one has perfect wisdom or judgment particu
larly in this field. Therefore, it is a question of exercising
the best judgment we can bring to bear.
There are differences of opinion on the discount mechanism
and how it should be used, whether the System should lead and
make the market or otherwise. That question should be discussed
this morning. I am going to ask Mr. Riefler and Mr. Ralph Young
to present their thinking on this subject. I happen to agree
with their views. Mr. Young's statement may appear to some pre
sumptuous because of his direct advocacy of a point of view but
the presumption is mine. I did not have time to write a state
ment but I agree with what he will say. It is important that
we get on the table the question of the relationship of the dis
count rate to market rates and whether we should proceed to make
the discount rate effective by negative free reserves of say
,400 or 500 million or whether it would be wiser to pursue the
course of increasing the discount rate as a lead factor. That
involves problems that are inherent in the history of monetary
policy. To cite one such problem, one of the points in the

8/23/55 -10
Treasury-Federal Reserve accord was that it was agreed that
there would be no change in the discount rate for the balance
of the year 1951 unless conditions radically changed and that
the discount rate would be used as a pivot for Treasury re
financing. That is typical of the framework in which some of
our views get shaped from time to time when we make compromises.
Sometimes they are wise and sometimes unwise. We never should
be carried away by pure logic. We should always taink in terms
of the statement in the foyer of this building that we do not
have, and we will never have, a clean sheet of paper to write
upon.
I will now call on Mr. Riefler and then Mr. Young, after
which the meeting will be open for any comments that any of
the members may wish to make.
Mr. Riefler's statement, during which he referred to a flannel
board chart which he had prepared for use in another connection, was sub
stantially as follows:
If you are going to exert further restraint on the market,
the question is how to apply the restraint. In the past, the
procedure has been to initiate restraint through open market
operations by reducing available free reserves. When the mar
ket rate finally went above the discount rate as a result of
this action, it constituted an almost automatic signal for an
increase in the discount rate. If pressure is kept on free
reservesunder these conditions, the market rate will climb up
again, probably above the discount rate. In this approach,
there is always a problem of circular reasoning as to the rea
son for raising the discount rate.
Almost each time in the past when the System has followed
this procedure of restraint, namely, of leading with open mar
ket operations, thus producing negative free reserves and a
firming market, we have gotten into a position where the dis
count rate was not a penalty rate, i.e., it was below yields on
short-term open market obligations. This creates an incentive
for member banks to adjust reserve deficiencies through dis
counting rather than through disposal of securities in the mar
ket. It also makes it technically possible for banks to borrow
from the Federal Reserve and use the funds to buy highly liquid
market paper at a profit. While most banks do not do this, the
absence of a penalty rate has created a problem for us of

8/23/55 -11
administering the discount facility in such a way as to pre
vent member bank abuse of the discount privilege by over
borrowing. Historically the record is quite uniform with
respect to that problem. If you go through the Board's rec
ords covering the five times when the System has acted to
firm the market--1920, 1923, 1926, 1928-9, and 1952-3-
there are long discussions about over-borrowing. It was
particularly acute in 1920-21. I do not recall the problem
arising in 1923, but it became active again in 1926 and led
to the discussion in the 1926 Annual Report which more or
less promulgated the philosophy embodied in the recent revi
sion of Regulation A, "Advances and Discounts by Federal Re
serve Banks", as to when it is appropriate for member banks
to borrow.
In 1929 there was the "knock down drag out fight" within
the System about direct action and forbidding borrowing member
banks to carry brokers' loans. In 1953 we had the problem
again in the form of borrowing for the purpose of avoiding
taxes. The point I want to make is that serious problems in
administering the discount mechanism have arisen recurrently
during periods of restraint when the discount rate was not
a penalty rate.
There is another approach to restraint that the System
has never taken. Under this approach the System could avoid
exerting so much pressure through open market operations as
to raise market rates actually above the discount rate. Rather,
open market operations would be used to maintain a volume of
negative free reserves sufficient to make market rates of in
terest highly responsive to the discount rate, but not in such
large volume as to raise, say, the bill rate above the discount
rate. That procedure would always keep the discount rate in
the position of being a penalty rate, something like it is at
the present time. Under this approach, the discount rate would
be used to lead in applying a policy of restraint. Market
rates would still move up but after the discount rate was in
creased. I think bill rates would move up proportionately with
the discount rate but not above it if the negative free reserve
position were maintained between $200 and $300 million. Bill
rates would move up with the discount rate because it would be
less costly for banks to adjust to temporary shortages by sell
ing bills than by discounting. To summarize, under this approach
we would lead with changes in the discount rate and market rates
would firm following the change, instead of the traditional ap
proach of bringing pressure through open market operations until
market rates rose and then raising the discount rate.

8/23/55 -12
(Indicating on the chart.) Since the Treasury-Federal
Reserve accord in 1951, we have had positive free reserves
in every year except one. June 1952 to June 1953 was a
year of negative free reserves. This chart shows that it
takes a very large volume of negative free reserves to put
the market bill rate above the discount rate. During that
one year we had very large negative free reserves and we had
bill rates moderately above the discount rate. We changed the
discount rate once in that period, and as a result the bill
rate moved up also. That year, however, is an exception. The
normal position has been for the bill rate to be below the
discount rate and to remain there in the absence of a very
heavy negative free reserve situation. What I am suggesting
is that the Committee might consider the possibility of keep
ing the discount rate a penalty rate during a period of
restraint. With a discount rate of 2 per cent and a somewhat
firmer market than we have now the bill rate would average
1.80 - 1.90. With a 2-1/4 per cent rate and the same general
level of negative free reserves, the bill rate could be ex
pected to go to 2.10 - 2.15. Other market rates would adjust
to that level of bill rates. As a result, we would be exert
ing as strong restraint on the credit situation as we would
if we operated first through the open market to raise bill
rates above the discount rate, but we would not lose the posture
of a penalty discount rate and would have less difficulty in
administering the discount function.
Mr. Ralph Young read the following statement:
Aside from questions of timing of action and of market risks
incident to a stronger vs. more moderate action, one of the
points of emphasis in the last meeting's discussion was the
danger of getting "the discount rate and open market operations
out of tandem." Mr. Sproul made this point, but it was also ex
pressed, if I am not misinterpreting his remarks, by Mr. Bryan.
Underlying the point, I would gather, is the view that a proper
or normal level for the discount rate in this sort of economic
situation is one more or less continuously in touch with short
term market rates, and that no discount rate should be estab
lished at a level higher than the one to which we are prepared
to see short-term rates rise or moderately exceed. Any other
rate level would be anomalous, inconsistent with the discount
rate practices and traditions of the System, and misleading to
the market. In other words, we would not be "meaning what we

8/23/55 -13
say," as Mr. Bryan put it, if we had had a discount rate level
of 2-1/4 per cent and a market rate level for Treasury bills,
say of around 2 per cent.
I want to say here that I recognize that this viewpoint
has a case in its favor and agree fully that it finds some au
thority in historical patterns. But the System is feeling its
way in a new and different situation and it must be experimental.
I personally feel that the Committee ought to reexamine this
traditional view and, if considerations of merit warrant, de
part from it. I would suggest that there are some considera
tions of merit which ought to be weighed.
The basic tradition of central banking is that the dis
count rate in boom times ought to be a penalty rate. In the
System's formative period, as I recall the record, a central
question of System credit policy was how to make the discount
rate a penalty rate. In this connection, it is rewarding in
vestment of time to reread the discussion of discount rate
policy in the Board's annual reports of the Twenties.
The broad conclusions of System experience in the Twenties,
the record shows, was that in this country it was not feasible
to attempt to make the discount rate function as a penalty rate.
Our banking conditions were too unique. It was more practical
to rely on the bankers' tradition against borrowing and reluc
tance to remain continuously in debt, and to set the discount
rate level in close relationship to the rates on the most
liquid paper in the market--generally just under 90-day col
lateral and 4-6 months commercial paper rates and slightly
over bankers acceptance and short-term U. S. security rates.
Because of the tradition against member bank borrowing and re
luctance to stay in Reserve Bank debt, the discount rate was
made effective by open market sales which occasioned increased
discounting. Conversely, the effectiveness of the discount
rate was relieved by open market purchases which decreased dis
counting. Discount rate policy was a matter of adjusting rate
levels to changes in market rate levels in response to pres
sures on, or relaxation of pressures on, member bank reserve
positions. Reserve Bank discount rate levels, therefore, fol
lowed but did not lead the market. They were never, or practi
cally never, penalty rate levels.
I appreciate that this generalized description of Federal
Reserve discount rate principles as they took form over the
Twenties is an over-simplification, and there are facets of the
matter, such as Federal Reserve influence over the bankers ac
ceptance rate, and perhaps other interrelations between open
market policy and discount rate policy which I am leaving out
of account.

8/23/55 -14
It suffices for the moment to emphasize two things:
first, this pattern of discount rate operation crystalized
by trial and error experiment. Second, there is a vast dif
ference between banking conditions now and what they were
then. The System needs some trial and error experiment in
the light of present banking conditions. It needs in this
period to reevolve a pattern of discount rate policy.
Today, the money market does not present to financial
institutions and corporate investors a cluster of alternative,
liquidity forms of varying rate attractiveness. Instead, we
have a market in which a single kind of paper, the Treasury
bill, is serving as the dominant or pivotal liquidity instru
ment. The Treasury bill serves not only as the main liquidity
instrument for the operating adjustments of banks, but also
as a common instrument of adjustment for other financial in
stitutions and for business corporations. Moreover, today
the large corpus of intermediate and long-term Federal debt
in the market makes for a sensitive, sympathetic value re
lationship between Treasury bills and other Federal debt.
This in turn makes for a whole market more closely integrated
value-wise than during the Twenties. Consequently, instead
of a systematic array of short-term market rates for refer
ence in discount rate policy as in the Twenties--none of which
could be accurately described as dominant, we have today a
single short-term rate that is a pivot in a very realistic
sense. Other short-term rates, as I observe the market, most
often take their cue in movement from the Treasury bill rate.
The System needs to give some thought to another impor
tant difference in financial environment between the Twenties
and the present. In the Twenties discount rate policy had to
find a compromise solution in part because of continuing large
volume of member bank discounts--in a sense a legacy from war
and postwar finance of World War I. The present banking situa
tion follows a long period of little or no reliance on discount
ing, and discount experience since the accord has shown a high
degree of credit sensitivity to a relatively small volume of
member bank borrowing. And thanks to the System's careful
review of its discount window experience and its reformulation
of discount principles based on that experience, this sensi
tivity seems likely to be extended.
This all leads up to the suggestion that the System is
now in a situation where it can deliberately experiment with
a penalty discount rate. By that I mean a discount rate that
is kept a margin above the Treasury bill rate in the market.

8/23/55 -15
As a student of Federal Reserve history, I would not regard
this as getting "discount rate policy and open market opera
tions out of tandem" or as "not meaning what our discount
rate says." Rather, I would regard it as taking advantage
of the current financial environment for the System to get
into the tactical position with respect to the pivotal short
term market rate that central banking percepts, developed
out of long experience indicate that the System ought to es
tablish and to maintain in boom periods, if at all practicable.
The System discount rate policy in relationship to Treas
ury bill rates in the 1952-53 episode was most certainly ex
perimental. It was definitely an experiment, I should say, in
the pattern of System discount rate tradition. In retrospect,
the System treated the Treasury bill rate for reference pur
poses as one of a number of related liquidity rates, though
not clearly as the dominant liquidity rate. The System followed
the market rather than leading it and penalizing the use of Re
serve Bank credit by means of the discount rate. It relied on
the tradition against borrowing and the reluctance to stay in
debt to restrain undue credit expansion. And the System was
surprised that borrowing for profit went on and that monetary
expansion during the period of build-up in member bank debt
was so rapid. Future historians of System policy will cer
tainly find reason to question whether the discount rate policy
pursued two years ago was the wisest one that could have been
followed.
In the present situation, it seems to me, the System's
discount rate policy can well be different. The System should
experiment with another approach. It should establish a dis
count rate level and maintain a level that will make the rate
a penalty rate in relation to the Treasury bill rate, the
dominant short-term rate in the market. It can then broadly
govern the volume of reserves needed for growth through open
market operations while at the same time restraining an undue
credit expansion financed primarily on borrowed reserves. An
undue bank credit expansion that is a fait accompli cannot
later be contracted by counter measures, at least, not with
out serious deflationary dangers of chain-reaction potential.
The argument is, then, that the System should act now, while
there is an opportunity to act, to assume and maintain a posi
tion of credit market leadership. It should not let the bubble
on top of the boom develop in so far as its tactics can help
to prevent it.
Psychologically in the market, it can be questioned whether
this approach would give rise to undue confusion. The market

8/23/55 -16
would quickly come to understand the meaning and common
sense of firm leadership. The market is not now completely
free of confusion as to rate policy. Moreover, there will
always be some difference of views in the market as to cur
rent trends in credit policy, for differences in market
judgment are an attribute of a well functioning and healthy
market. But to important segments of the market at the
present time, a penalty discount rate in the sense in which
I am using it here, would make System leadership in a volatile
economic situation crystal clear.
Chairman Martin requested that, if there were no objection, the
two statements be incorporated in the record of this meeting. He re
peated that he was in sympathy with the point of view that they expressed
and believed that the suggestion should be considered throughout the Sys
tem.
Mr. Earhart asked whether there was any reason why copies of the
two statements could not be given to the directors of the Federal Reserve
Banks for their use in considering the action to be taken with respect to
the discount rate. It was his view, in which Mr. C. S. Young concurred,
that the two statements were the kind of material that could well be given
to the directors.
Mr. Mills made substantially the following comment on the proposal
presented by Messrs. Riefler and Young:
It is appropriate that, in reviewing their operations,
the Federal Reserve Banks should consider the suggestion
that Messrs. Riefler and Young have made. However, in making
those reviews the Banks should look at the question whether
the concept of a penalty rate to discourage member banks

8/23/55 -17-
from borrowing in order to take advantage of a rate differ
ential is applicable at this particular time. The question
of timing is what we should give our thought to and not to
the theory of the desirability of a penalty rate. We should
look at the penalty rate against the structure of yields in
the market and also against the position of member banks
which would be affected by the institution of a penalty rate.
We are very conscious of the fact that commercial banks,
taken as a group, are in a very less liquid position than
they have been accustomed to in recent years. In the past,
when the market rate rose above the discount rate, very few
member banks took advantage of the rate differential to ex
pand their holdings of bills. Of course, there were some
shining exceptions but under present conditions a bank will
look hard and twice before borrowing from a Federal Reserve
Bank to expand a bill portfolio. If that was done, when the
bank's statement was published, it would be revealed to
analysts and others that its liquidity had dropped and that
Federal Reserve funds were being used to sustain operations.
You will find that, by and large, banks are not inclined to
do that.
You have another situation to consider in this connec
tion and that is that the structure of rates in the short
term area of the Government securities market is leveling
out at a yield substantially above the discount rate. With
that condition as it now exists, if the bill rate should rise
above the discount rate, although it is unlikely that banks
would discount to buy bills, they could be tempted to discount
to maintain their asset position in other issues on which the
yields have risen over the last few months, or to avoid the
liquidation of those securities at a loss where faced with
depreciation. It seems obvious that under these circumstances
a penalty discount rate would have to be set at such a high
level in relation to the rates on 1956 to 1958 maturities that
in the process the market for U. S. Government securities would
be damaged.
So, my thesis is that although a penalty rate is eminently
desirable theoretically, before such a decision is made it is
essential to look at all of these other factors that inject
themselves into the problem. Again, for example, if the dis
count rate was raised abruptly at the present time before being
confirmed by a higher interest rate trend having been estab
lished in the market, the market might be seriously unsettled.

8/23/55 -18
And if it should then become necessary to correct a dis
orderly situation, you would undo the benefits sought from
moving precipitously to a penalty rate. In other words,
timing of a change in the discount rate would seem to be
the essence of the problem, and in considering timing it
is necessary to bear in mind the fact that System policy
is getting an increasing and accumulating assist from
public comments of what the System's intentions are, which of
itself is a restraining factor coming to our help in implement
ing the policies which we wish to make effective by reducing
any necessity for hurrying to make another change in the dis
count rate.
Referring to the question which had been raised with respect to
the statements of Messrs. Riefler and Ralph Young, Mr. Earhart said that,
on the basis of the discussions that had taken place, his directors would
be reluctant to move to increase the discount rate immediately because we
have not yet seen the effects of actions already taken.
Mr. Johns commented that the Young statement made reference to
the statements made by Messrs. Sproul and Bryan at the last meeting of
the Federal Open Market Committee and expressed the view that the two
statements would not be as informative to the directors as they should be
unless they were accompanied by the Sproul and Bryan statements. There
fore, he asked if there would be any objection to the latter statements
being excerpted from the minutes of the Committee and furnished to the
directors of the Federal Reserve Banks.
This point was discussed in the light of the confidential character
of the proceedings of the Federal Open Market Committee and the difficul
ties which that created in relation to the information that should be made

8/23/55 -19
available to the directors of the Federal Reserve Banks in their considera
tion of discount rate action. It was also considered in the light of the
fact that the Riefler and Young statements related wholly to the ques
tion of Federal Reserve discount policy which is in the field of the di
rect responsibilities of Federal Reserve Bank directors. The suggestion
was made that the Riefler and Young statements could be distributed as
proposals which they had made, that the reference in Mr. Young's state
ment to the statements of Messrs. Sproul and Bryan could be dropped, and,
if necessary, the points with respect to the discount rate raised in the
statements by Messrs. Sproul and Bryan could be presented to the directors
without reference to the statements themselves or to the minutes of the
Committee thus avoiding the precedent of taking excerpts from the minutes.
If that suggestion were followed, the statements of Messrs. Riefler and
Young would be handled in the same manner as other statements or memoranda
with respect to the discount rate had been handled in the past.
Chairman Martin stated that, in the light of the discussion, it
might be wiser not to circulate the Riefler and Young statements, that
the Presidents had the ideas presented therein and if they desired to use
them in discussing the question of the discount rate with their directors
they would be at liberty to do so. He asked that the two statements go
into the record of this meeting since he felt it was important that the
proposal be considered by those present as well as by the directors of
the Federal Reserve Banks.

8/23/55 -20
Mr. C. S. Young asked if there would be any objection to the
Presidents making a report to the directors based on the comments in the
four statements with respect to discount policy without reference to the
statements themselves and it was indicated that there would be no objec
tion to that procedure. Chairman Martin also said that perhaps, by the
time of the next meeting of the Committee, a document could be prepared
in a different form that might be useful.
Mr. Erickson expressed the view that member banks no longer had
the same reluctance to borrow that they had in the 1920s and 1930s and
that therefore a penalty rate would mean more today than in earlier
periods. He inquired whether the other Presidents shared in that view.
Several questioned its correctness, Messrs. Earhart and C. S. Young stat
ing that they saw no material change in the attitude of banks on this
point. Mr. Earhart also said that his Bank's experience with a penalty
rate years ago was not at all good, that member banks were penalized
when the banks had to borrow, and that the penalty rate eventually had
to be waived. Mr. Leach said in his experience only a small number of
banks would borrow at a given time, that some were very willing to borrow,
that some borrowed reluctantly, that others would not borrow at all, and
that the number in the last category was still large.
Chairman Martin then called for the views of the members of the
Committee on the open market policies to be followed pending another meet
ing of the Committee.

8/23/55 -21
Before discussing that subject, Mr. Treiber commented on the ques
tion of the use of the discount rate. He observed that the differences
expressed at this meeting were differences in degree; the question is not
one of extremes. He questioned whether the market rate on Treasury bills
should be looked upon as the focal point in the short-term market and
said that there were a number of other factors that should, be considered,
such as the degree of liquidity of the banks, the demand of corporations
and other nonbank investors for bills, the supply of bills in the market,
and the whole structure of rates. The fluidity of the money market is
such that if there were a discount rate substantially above market rates
there would be very little use of the discount facility. If banks were
not as reluctant to borrow as they were in earlier periods, as Mr. Erick
son has indicated, the banks were reluctant to stay in debt, and the ad
ministration of Regulation A has tended to encourage that reluctance. If
the relationship of short-term rates and discount rates were such that the
banks were to borrow to obtain needed reserves, the borrowing would become
a restraining effect which would be lost if the discount rate were moved
substantially higher than short-term market rates. He made the further
observation that in making intelligent decisions on the discount rate it
was necessary for the directors of the Federal Reserve Banks to know what
current open market policies are in order to bring about the necessary
degree of correlation between discount policy and open market policy.

8/23/55 -22
On the question of an appropriate discount rate at this time, he said
that the situation was not the same as in 1953 when bill rates and other
short-term rates were above the discount rate. We might now approach
the problem by saying that the discount rate should lead in signaling
Federal Reserve policy as it had done a few weeks ago, and be followed
by open market action tightening the market so that short-term rates
would rise and fluctuate around the discount rate. If further pressure
is needed, a further increase in the discount rate might lead again. He
said that in a period of restraint he would want to avoid having the dis
count rate "stick" much above short-term rates and unsupported by the
pressure of open market action.
With respect to the general question of current Federal Reserve
credit policy, Mr. Treiber made a statement substantially as follows:
Since the last meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee the economy has shown continued strength. Nevertheless,
recent statistics indicate a less rapid rise in the rate of
expansion in the third quarter of 1955 than in the first two
quarters. We will probably see more expansion in the fourth
quarter.
The present lessening of the rate of expansion should re
duce the pressure in the economic system and foster orderly
expansion later in the year. However, the possibility of a
price-cost spiral accompanied by speculative inventory accu
mulation and heavy credit usage are important threats.
There are encouraging developments in certain of the
special areas with which we have been concerned. The stock
market has lost its head of steam, at least for the present.
As for residential real estate credit, declining applications
for home mortgages and a reduced willingness on the part of

8/23/55 -23-
lenders to make mortgages may be expected gradually to reduce
net mortgage extensions. While there is no doubt that con
sumer credit has been expanding rapidly this year, with auto
mobiles playing the major part, the anticipated reduction in
automobile production should slow down consumer credit expan
sion.
The principal need for commercial bank credit will be
from business and industry for normal seasonal credit needs
and for increased inventory called for by the increased busi
ness tempo.
The higher discount rate at Cleveland has been inter
preted as an indication that the System would not hesitate
to increase the rates at the other Reserve Banks further if
such action seems called for. This has created uncertainty
which, in turn, has constituted an additional factor of re
straint.
Bank liquidity has been reduced; this will be a restrain
ing factor.
The Federal Reserve System should continue to exert a
steady pressure on credit expansion. Continuing steady pres
sure over a period of time actually brings increasing pressure.
Rates do not necessarily adjust immediately and fully. As
time passes, different groups take action or refrain from tak
ing action, and this in turn affects other groups.
We have not yet seen the full effect of the two increases
in the discount rate this year and the accompanying open market
policy. Our action has not yet been fully reflected in market
rates--both short-term and long-term.
Some of the additional reserves needed this summer and fall
should come through increased member bank borrowing. We have
already experienced increased borrowing--the highest sustained
borrowing since May 1953. In the last three weeks member bank
borrowing has averaged between $750 and 850 million, with ex
cess reserves of about $600 million confined largely to the
country banks. In the same period, free reserves have averaged
between minus $100 and minus $200 million. As we experience in
creased member bank borrowing--with borrowing by a greater number
of banks although not always the same banks--and the accompanying
pressure on banks to get out of debt to the Federal, there will
be increasing credit restraint.
Projections for the next three weeks made by the New York
Bank show increasing reserve losses totaling several hundred
million dollars. Borrowing should play an important part in
supplying the needed reserves. If all needed additional reserves

8/23/55
were to be acquired through increased borrowing, we would
have borrowing of between $1 and $1-1/4 billion. This
might put a severe strain on the banking system and partic
ularly on the central money markets. Some outright purchases
of Government securities by the System may be called for.
Some repurchase agreements in the first half of Septem
ber may also be in order, but the amount would probably not
be large in view of the small dealer positions.
There has been a strong demand for Treasury bills by
business corporations and other nonbank investors. Part of
the strength appears to be due to purchases by investors who
want to have their funds in short-term securities, having in
mind a possible decline in the market value of long-term se
curities. In the last few days there has also been a good
market for short-term Government obligations other than bills.
It would seem desirable in the first instance to let
the banks get needed reserves by additional borrowing or by
selling securities to nonbank investors. As this process con
tinues, short-term Government securities are likely to become
available in the market in increasing amounts and at declin
ing prices; in this setting, outright purchases for the System
Account would be in order.
If the banks have to sell Government securities (primar
ily notes and short bonds) too rapidly, we might see an un
fortunate price erosion in the capital market. Timely pur
chases by the System should avoid such a development.
Because of the special situation keeping up the price of
Treasury bills and the dearth of Treasury bills in the portfo
lios of the city banks, the purchase by the System of short
term Government securities other than Treasury bills may be
desirable.
The present economic and credit situation calls for steady
and increasing pressure on the expansion of bank credit. The
program just outlined should produce the desired pressure.
Mr. Erickson stated that he liked very much Chairman Martin's ap
proach to the philosophy of restraint, and felt that we should lead rather
than lag in System actions. He shared the Chairman's concern about inven
tory accumulations and about the wage cost factor and what might be happen
ing to prices. He was also pleased with the degree of tightness that had

8/23/55 -25
been brought about in the market during the last few weeks. He hoped that
greater use would be made of the discount facility and, in the present
circumstances, he would not hesitate to tighten the credit situation
further.
Mr. Irons concurred with the view that the System should lead in
its actions and expressed the opinion that the recent action increasing
the discount rate did lead to some degree. He was pleased at the increas
ing steady pressure on the market. He had hoped that the bill rate would
move closer to the discount rate, but he questioned whether in the peculiar
circumstances existing in the market it would be reasonable to expect
that result or whether it would be desirable to try to induce it as that
might unduly tighten the market. He believed that increasing pressure
should be applied as needed and he realized that judgment on that point
was the difficult question. There were few signs of lessening activity
in the economy and he was concerned with the steady increase in consumer
credit and in the lengthening of instalment terms. The economy was moving
into the season when there was a strong demand for consumer credit and,
in spite of the fact that the automobile industry was in a period of model
change, he questioned whether there would be any reduction in the growth
of consumer credit. The economy is going into the fall period with full
utilization of capacity, a tight labor market, a less liquid condition
in the banks, and a tighter money situation. With the existing strength
in the economy a further tightening of the credit situation in his opinion

8/23/55 -26
would not have as damaging an effect as failure to bring about a further
tightening, and it was his view that if the System has to lead one way
or another it should lead toward further restraint.
Mr. Earhart was in agreement that there should be a policy of
gradually increasing pressure and that this condition would result if
the System continued the present policy of not supplying reserves
through open market operations. He was certain that if conditions were
such that member banks had to borrow, the degree of restraint would be
increased. His judgment was that the discount rate should not lead in
the sense of stepping up the rate to where it would be a penalty rate
under all conditions, but that market rates and the discount rate should
be kept as close together as they have been during the last two weeks.
He felt that without further open market action there would be an increas
ing amount of restraint and that possibly within about two weeks the
discount rate might be moved up to 2-1/4 per cent. He added that unless
something developed at this meeting that changed his mind, his recommenda
tion to his directors at their meeting tomorrow would be that they take
no action to increase the discount rate and that they consider the matter
again at the meeting two weeks later.
Mr. C. S. Young said that the discount rate was the only item on
the agenda for the meeting of his directors on Thursday and he was satis
fied that no change would be made at that time. He felt that if an
error was to be made it should be in the direction of increased tightness

8/23/55 -27
but that we have not yet seen the full effect of the increase in the dis
count rate to 2 per cent. He questioned whether the present bill rate
was a real market rate. He had asked nonbank purchasers of bills whether
they would buy anything other than bills, and the reply was a negative
one because they wanted short-term bills which were liquid. Even if the
rates on other issues were as much as 1/2 per cent higher, he said, these
people would not buy them. There were a number of treasurers of big in
dustrial concerns that have funds to invest and they want to put these
funds where "they can get their hands on them." He questioned whether
further action should be taken on the discount rate this week.
Mr. Leach explained that the fact that the Federal Reserve Bank
of Richmond was the last to increase its discount rate to 2 per cent did
not indicate any reluctance to make the change. When he learned that
Cleveland had established a 2-1/4 per cent rate and some of the other
Banks a 2 per cent rate he felt he should not attempt to get action before
the next regular meeting of his directors at which time the matter could
be carefully reviewed. When the meeting was held, he said, the decision
was made that the increase to 2-1/4 per cent should be in two steps rather
than in one. However, he thought that, if the present expansion continued,
when the directors met in September they would favor a 2-1/4 per cent rate.
They would not favor such an increase now because it would be too soon
after the recent increase. Speaking personally, he was very much pleased
with the System's policy in August when the pressure on the market

8/23/55 -28
gradually increased with the resulting change in the volume of free re
serves. Representatives of his Bank had talked to a number of the larger
banks in the Fifth District to ascertain what effect System policy was
having and it appeared that the banks are currently more selective and
are exercising more restraint in their lending policies. On the ques
tion of the relationship between the bill rate and the discount rate, he
felt the small supply of bills in the market, the unusual nonbank demand,
and the tendency of more people to purchase bills pending the rate adjust
ment in the long-term market, were tending to impair the usefulness of
the bill rate as an indicator of the present degree of market tightness.
He would like to see a substantial part of the additional reserves needed
in coming weeks supplied through the discount window because in his opinion
that would mean increased pressure on the borrowing banks because of their
reluctance to borrow. Such a policy would also result in increased pres
sure on other banks because they would have to sell securities at a loss
to make additional loans. In his opinion the Committee would have to get
accustomed to looking at larger amounts of negative free reserves. Mr.
Vardaman referred to the comment made by Mr. Erickson about the reluctance
of banks to borrow and stated that the Federal Reserve Banks through their
educational programs should instill in their member banks that it is no
disgrace to borrow, and that borrowing is a proper use of the discount
facility and is one of the best insurance policies in the System. He
hoped that banks would be encouraged to borrow when it is proper to do so.

8/23/55 -29
On the question of timing of a further increase in the discount rate, he
expressed regret that all Federal Reserve Banks had not increased their
rates to 2-1/4 per cent following the last meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee. He felt that the pattern of fall and winter spending
was now taking form, that not only were inventories increasing in accord
ance with that pattern, but orders were being placed, and that these
orders would govern the borrowing needs of customers of banks later in
the year. Unless the System gave some warning now it would be unfair to
the economy to squeeze the banks too tight after the manufacturers had
put the orders into production and the local merchants were committed.
He had the strong hope that within the next two weeks the discount rate
would be increased to 2-1/4 per cent and, if that did not have the de
sired effect, a further increase to 2-1/2 per cent would be made.
Governor Mills expressed what he regarded as being the general
tenor of the meeting that it is difficult to look beyond the next two or
three weeks. He felt that over that period the System should move in the
same direction it had been moving or gradually increasing market pressure
and should be very alert and increase the discount rate when there is con
vincing evidence of need of such action.
Mr. Shepardson concurred in the feeling that had been expressed
that continuing pressure should be applied. While agriculture prices had
declined somewhat, crop prospects were excellent and with the decrease in

8/23/55 -30
the number of farmers that has been going on he felt that the income of
the farmers was holding at a respectable level and that there was not the
weakness in the general agricultural picture that might be indicated by
the declines in prices. Farmers were in a strong position generally and
with other factors of the economy operating at a high level he saw need
for continuing restraint.
Mr. Bryan agreed that if further tightening action is to be taken
it should be taken "sooner rather than later." He would like to be able
to see more clearly the effects that were being produced by actions that
had already been taken. It appeared to him that, because of Treasury
financing in October, the decision would have to be made to stay on a 2
per cent rate or to increase to 2-1/4 per cent without knowing the effects
of the recent discount rate increase. He did not believe that System ac
tions had been too restraining. While banks were "talking an excellent
game of restraint", he said, there were evidences in the reports of bank
loans and in other ways that banks are continuing to increase loans. On
the question of the relationship of the discount rate and open market
rates, he would want to study the proposal made by Messrs. Riefler and
Young. He did not think there was any theoretical solution that would
say at all times and under all circumstances what the relationship of the
discount and market rates should be. There might be times when a market
rate well under the discount rate would serve a very useful purpose and
other times when a market rate which had been pushed above the discount

8/23/55 -31
rate would also serve a useful purpose. He questioned the desirability
of referring to the rate as proposed by Messrs. Riefler and Young as a
penalty rate. He was disappointed by the fact that during the past two
or three weeks open market operations had not been used with vigor to
force the bill rate above the discount rate. In his opinion that would
have several advantages. If the market goes up, because of the demands
for funds or other reasons, it has a substantial arbitrage effect through
the entire market. He regretted the fact that the Federal Reserve Banks
and the Board were contemplating a further rate increase without knowing
what the effects of recent increase were going to be. The question at
this meeting, he said, regardless of whether the discount is to be 2 or
2-1/4 per cent, is at what point and in what considerations will the Sys
tem begin to supply reserves to take care of the seasonal needs of the
economy. It was his view that more vigorous action to tighten up on
the supply of reserves should be taken than has been the case. He said
that statement not as a criticism of any individual but as a statement
of desirable policy.
Mr. Johns concurred in the views expressed by Mr. Bryan that the
commercial banks are not pursuing tight loan policies. He also expressed
the desire to study the suggestion made by Messrs. Riefler and Young. One
of the things about the proposal that concerned him was that there were
still something over $2 billion of Treasury bills in the hands of banks

8/23/55 -32
and a penalty rate as outlined would be a penalty rate for banks that did
not have bills while banks holding bills could obtain additional reserves
by foregoing a yield of what happened to be the current market rate on
bills. He assumed that if the System adopted a penalty rate it would want
that rate to apply to banks that held bills as well as to banks that did
not.
Mr. Powell stated that in the Ninth District, which is predominantly
agricultural, the Federal Reserve Bank had surveyed the retail sales in a
number of small towns and had found a very real reduction in the volume of
sales indicating that the farmer has been suffering from low prices when
industrial prices have been rising. On the question of credit policy, he
felt that if no action in the open market were taken over the next three
weeks it would have a very considerably restraining effect since it would
increase substantially the amount of negative free reserves. It was his
view that the Committee could maintain the desired degree of tightness by
supplying only a part of reserves that would be needed to meet credit needs
over the remainder of the year. He referred to the various indicators of
the effects of tighter credit policy and stated that his Bank's appraisal
of the situation was that no action on the discount rate should be taken
at this time but that the System should see what the full effects of the
recent increase would be. It was his view that probably open market opera
tions could provide the necessary amount of restraint.

8/23/55 -33
Governor Szymczak said that, regardless of the various points
made at this meeting, the Committee was faced with a practical situation
in which (1) one Federal Reserve Bank has already established a 2-1/4
per cent rate, and (2) the Treasury will have to come into the market for
additional funds in October and again in December for new funds and a
refunding operation. In view of all of the factors in the picture he
favored a further increase in the discount rate to 2-1/4 per cent as soon
as possible. The present level of negative free reserves, the fact that
the recent increase in the discount rate and even an increase to 2-1/4
per cent had been largely discounted by the market as indicated by market
reaction, the fact that the amount of reserves that will have to be sup
plied to the market between now and the end of the year to take care of
credit needs of the economy and Treasury financing can not be determined
at this time,--all these factors call for an increase in the discount
rate to 2-1/4 per cent, and he favored such action as soon as possible
so as to permit the market for Government securities to adjust--so that
the Treasury can determine the nature of its financing in the latter part
of September.
Mr. Martin inquired whether there should be any change in the
directive to be issued to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Mr. Rouse stated that if there should be a further increase in
the discount rate or a bad effect from increased shortages of reserves,
a market situation could develop which would call for increased open
market operations. For that reason, he suggested that the Committee might

8/23/55 -34
wish to increase to $1 billion the amount stated in paragraph (1) of the
directive.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York until otherwise
directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (includ
ing replacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities
to run off without replacement) for the System Open Market Ac
count in the open market or, in the case of maturing securities,
by direct exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary in
the light of current and prospective economic conditions and
the general credit situation of the country, with a view (a)
to relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs of
commerce and business, (b) to restraining inflationary develop
ments in the interest of sustainable economic growth, and (c)
to the practical administration of the account; provided that
the aggregate amount of securities held in the System account
(including commitments for the purchase or sale of securities
for the account) at the close of this date, other than special
short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased from time
to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall
not be increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to
one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special
short-term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treas
ury; provided that the total amount of such certificates held
at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed
in the aggregate $500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System ac
count for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury securi
ties maturing within one year as may be necessary from time
to time for the accommodation of the Treasury; provided that
the total amount of such securities so sold shall not exceed
in the aggregate $500 million face amount, and such sales
shall be made as nearly as may be practicable at the prices
currently quoted in the open market.

8/23/55 -35
Chairman Martin said that it would not be possible to specify at
this meeting exactly the level of negative free reserves that should be
maintained over the next three weeks but that the level should be in the
direction of continuing restraint.
Mr. Rouse stated that the feeling of the New York Bank was to al
low free reserves to decline to a point where there would be quite ap
parent market effects before injecting additional reserves through open
market operations. In that connection, he said that if the Federal Reserve
Banks or the Board should sense any bad effects from open market opera
tions or that effects beyond those desired appeared to be developing in
any district the New York Bank would appreciate hearing about it. He said
that the Federal Reserve Banks and the members of the Board might have
conversations which would disclose developments which might not come to
the New York Bank in a period which might involve a delicate market situa
tion.
In response to a statement by Mr. Riefler that, as he understood
it, the New York Bank during the next three weeks would not purchase ad
ditional securities and would continue to allow maturing bills to run off
without replacement, Mr. Rouse stated that he had felt that it would be in
consistent with his understanding of the Committee's intentions to bid for
Treasury bills in the weekly refundings at a rate below 2 per cent. How
ever, if the situation should reach a point where it was necessary to go
into the market to supply reserves it might be necessary to buy bills at

8/23/55 -36
less than 2 per cent. Therefore, the question as he saw it was not as
much one of rates as it was one of the availability of reserves. It
was brought out that the projections made at the Board and at the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York as to the future member bank reserve position
did not take into account any run off of the System's holdings of maturing
bills. However, Mr. Rouse said that the amount of System holdings of the
next three weeks were not large.
Mr. Martin stated that the question of the point at which re
serves would be supplied in the existing situation was the heart of the
present problem of open market policy. He said he had not been able to
discern any meeting of minds at this meeting on that point. He was in
clined to favor an immediate increase in the discount rate to 2-1/4 per
cent and felt that failure to increase the rate was a factor of confusion
and uncertainty in the market which complicates the problem with respect
to free reserves. Under present conditions, with a shortage of bills in
the market, he would not like to rely solely on forcing the bill rate up
to the discount rate by increasing pressure through negative free reserves.
Therefore, he felt that the Committee should take something of a middle
course which was about all that could be done in the circumstances.
Mr. Rouse stated that his preference, should a shortage of bills
develop, would be to purchase what the banks have to sell, i.e., short-term
securities other than December rights, instead of buying bills at the

8/23/55 -37
current rates. Something could be accomplished, he said, through repur
chase agreements at some point if the severity of restraint increased.
He interpreted it to be the sense of the Committee that the New York Bank
should not buy bills at a rate below 2 per cent.
Chairman Martin stated that we faced a difficult problem, but that
he would have no hesitation to purchase bills below 2 per cent. Mr. Rouse
commented that if the problem was regarded as solely a question of re
serves and acquisitions were looked at from that standpoint such purchases
would be fine. Chairman Martin's response was that if the market tightens
enough bills would probably be available. While the question was not
further clarified by further discussion, Mr. Rouse stated that he thought
the New York Bank could function satisfactorily in the light of the dis
cussion at this meeting. Chairman Martin then stated that, if there was
no objection, the discussion would conclude on that uncertain, and in a
sense, rather unsatisfactory note. He said that everyone should continue
to study the problem and feel free to communicate with Mr. Rouse at any
time.
Chairman Martin then referred to the replies to letters received
from Congressman Patman which were mentioned at the last meeting of the
Committee. He said that the suggestion had been made that copies of the
letters be sent by the Board to the members of the Federal Advisory Council
and the Chairmen of the Federal Reserve Banks for their information and
that, in the absence of objection, that would be done.

8/23/55 -38.
Reference was then made to the understanding at the last meeting
that the authority to the New York Bank to enter into repurchase agreements
with dealers covering United States Government securities would be con
sidered at each meeting of the Committee. Mr. Rouse stated that the range
of rates in the existing authorization was regarded by the bank as minimum
rates, that the going rate in the market on loans to dealers was 2-1/2 per
cent, and that if the situation called for repurchase agreements during
the next three weeks, he would be inclined to make them at 2-1/4 per cent.
The ensuing discussion brought out the point that such action would be
within the terms of the existing authorization and no objection was made to
it.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, authorization to the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of New York was renewed
as follows with the understandings (a) that
the authority would be used sparingly in
entering into agreements at rates below the
discount rate, and (b) that the Federal
Open Market Committee will consider at each
meeting the extent to which repurchase agree
ments covering Government securities were
to be authorized and the rate or rates at
which such agreements are to be undertaken:
CONDITIONS FOR REPURCHASE AGREEMENTS
PRESCRIBED BY THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
As Approved August 23, 1955
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is hereby author
ized to enter into repurchase agreements with nonbank dealers

8/23/55 -39-
in United States Government securities subject to the following
conditions:
1. Such agreements
(a) In no event shall be at a rate below whichever
is the lower of (1) the discount rate of the
Federal Reserve Bank on eligible commercial
paper, or (2) the average issuing rate on the
most recent issue of three-month Treasury bills;
(b) Shall be for periods of not to exceed 15 calendar
days;
(c) Shall cover only Government securities maturing
within 15 months; and
(d) Shall be used as a means of providing the money
market with sufficient Federal Reserve funds to
avoid undue strain on a day-to-day basis.
2. Reports of such transactions shall be included in the
weekly report of open market operations which is sent to
the members of the Federal Open Market Committee.
3. In the event Government securities covered by any such
agreement are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant to
the agreement or a renewal thereof, the securities thus
acquired by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall be
sold in the market or transferred to the System Open Mar
ket Account.
Chairman Martin stated that ordinarily the next meeting of the
Committee would be held on September 13 but that Governor Balderston would
not return from Europe until the evening of that day. For that reason
he (Chairman Martin) suggested that the next meeting be held either on
September 14 or 15. Some of the members having indicated that a meeting

8/23/55 -40
on September 14 would be more convenient to them, there was unanimous
agreement that the next meeting should be held on that date.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary