A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Wednesday, November 16, 1955, at 10:45 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Earhart
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Irons
Mr. Leach
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Messrs. Erickson, C. S. Young, and Johns,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Williams, Bryan, and Leedy, Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Atlanta, and Kansas City, respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Daane, Hostetler, Rice, Roelse, Wheeler,
and R. A. Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Assistant Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Mitchell, Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago

11/16/55 -2
Secretary's note: Mr. Powell, alternate
member of the Committee, planned to attend
this meeting but was unable to be present
because his plane was grounded.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
held on October 25, 1955, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York covering open market operations during the period October 25
to November 9, 1955, inclusive, as well as a supplementary report cover
ing commitments executed November 10-15, 1955, inclusive. Copies of
both reports have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
Mr. Sproul noted that Mr. Rouse had been delayed in reaching
the meeting, and it was understood that discussion of the report would
be deferred until he arrived.
Chairman Martin called upon Mr. Ralph Young for a statement on
the economic situation concerning which a staff memorandum had been dis
tributed under date of November 10, 1955. Mr. Young reviewed the situa
tion in summary form, making a statement substantially as follows:
Currently, the economy is at a stage of bulging, even in.
flationary, industrial prosperity. Broad advance still features
industrial output, though the pace of advance is slower than
earlier as capacity output is being approached in more and more
lines. Markets for industrial commodities are very strong, with
demand pressures manifested in a quite slow rise in business in
ventories, in a climbing backlog of manufacturers' orders, and
in a spreading of industrial price increases. The labor market
shows every evidence of further tightening. Also, business,
financial, and consumer confidence and optimism are once again
on the ebullient side. While agriculture is less prosperous

11/16/55
than last year, it is still relatively well off. Furthermore,
with the peak of livestock marketings almost passed, the de
cline in farm prices would seem to have largely run its course,
Continued over-all price stability on the basis of offsetting
movements of farm and industrial prices is thus a less likely
prospect. With further substantial expansion in business capi
tal investment now indicated, demand pressures on the industrial
side are such as to point to some lifting of the average commod
ity price level.
As to the specifics of the situation:
The Board's index of industrial production is now put at
142 for September and about the same for October. At this early
point, the November index is expected to reach 143.
The further rise in industrial output reflects additional
advance in production of metals and fabricated durable goods
and a new high for the output of nondurables.
With automobile model changeovers now complete, automobile
production is proceeding at earlier advanced rates. New model
reception is reported as favorable and, although dealers are
shaving prices to buyers, dealer margins are stated by trade
sources to be profitable on reasonable volume basis. In October,
new car stocks showed little change, as output approximated sales.
With used car sales holding one-fourth above a year ago, dealer
stocks of used cars showed an appreciable decline. Downward
used car price adjustments recently, except for older cars, seem
to be about consistent with new model introductions.
Output and retail sales of household durables have generally
been maintained at advanced levels.
Instalment credit expansion proceeds apace, with credit
terms--at least on the downpayment side--showing some tendency
to stabilize.
Retail sales, over-all, were off slightly in October, re
flecting mainly lower sales by auto dealers. However, they were
still about an eighth above a year ago. Department store sales
have held at high September levels until recently, when adverse
weather conditions have reduced sales in some areas.
Manufacturer sales in September, while a little under the
August level, ran a fifth larger than a year ago with increases
for the year quite general. New orders ran ahead of sales again,
bringing the backlog of orders to $53 billion, or 10 per cent
over last year at this time.
Business inventory growth has been exceptionally moderate,
considering the momentum of the upswing, and recently price in
creases have played a greater part in the inventory value rise.
The month-end value of stocks for September was only 4 per cent
over a year ago.

11/16/55 -4-
Value of new construction in October at just under $42
billion was off slightly from record spring and summer levels.
Construction for business purposes continued to rise. New
housing starts continued at a 1.2 million unit rate. But value
of contract awards were off from the high September volume, re
flecting mainly reductions in public works and utility awards.
The McGraw-Hill compilation of plans for next year' s busi
ness plant and equipment expenditures clearly reflect the per
vasive optimism of businessmen, even though some window dressing
element may be present in the figures. The plans would indicate
a 10 per cent increase from the fourth quarter of this year to
the fourth quarter of next year, assuming an even time spread
of the expenditure pick-up. This percentage increase is no
greater than for this past year, but the economic situation
which is called upon to absorb the increase is altogether dif
ferent than a year ago.
Labor market figures show a further rise in total employ
ment, manufacturing employment, hours of work, and earnings,
all spelling still greater tightness of supply in relation to
demand.
In agriculture, livestock prices have declined further,
declines affecting both hogs and steers. Grain prices have
adjusted to support prices, but recently cotton has firmed
some to above the support level.
Cash returns from farm marketing are continuing about 4
per cent under last year, and, with farm expenses not changing
much, farm net income is down even more. Farm debt in these
conditions is showing a fairly substantial rise--up 10 per cent
over last year.
Despite the indicated price, income, and debt developments
for agriculture, confidential reports confirm a continuing,
though gradual, general rise in farm land values.
Industrial prices have been rising about 1 per cent a month
since mid-year and already indicated and prospective increases
appear likely to sustain this rate of advance in months immedi
ately ahead. Crude rubber prices have advanced again; also
copper scrap, and London futures for copper. At some producers,
carpet prices and some cotton textile prices have been marked
up recently. Other recent price advances of note include crude
oil, newsprint, cement, tin cans, new model autos, tires and
tubes, and a variety of other items. Expectations of a further
steel price rise are widespread.
Consumer prices have been showing little change, although
prices of commodities other than foods and of services have been
edging up, Sears, Roebuck & Co. have stated that the average of
prices in the company's forthcoming catalogue will be up 2 per
cent from the mid-year edition.

11/16/55 -5
Abroad, trade and industrial development seem best charac
terized as showing some further advance but with greater uneven
ness of trend. In some cases, as in Britain, capacity operations
offer obstacles to further advance. Wholesale prices in a number
of countries have been registering some advance. Among the more
important items of foreign news are the indications of a gradual
lifting of adverse financial clouds over Britain.
Mr. Thomas stated that the situation presented in the economic
review was reflected in financial developments and in the money market.
It was becoming clearer that the economy was operating very close to
capacity and that the possibility of further growth was much more limited
than a year ago. Hence, some slowing of credit growth would be needed
if consumption and production demands were to be kept in line with pro
ductive capacity. The pressures of demand on limited supplies were
beginning to appear in rising prices of industrial materials and prod
ucts, Mr. Thomas said, and the ebullient economy was showing signs of
inflation.
Mr. Thomas noted that since the meeting on October 25 there had
appeared some ease in the money market. To some extent this had been
attributed to rumors of a shift to an easier credit policy. However,
his view was that the appearance of ease could be partly explained by
a more active use of the available money supply to purchase securities.
Such increased use of available money is a result to be expected in a
period of high interest rates, Mr. Thomas said. Within the past few
days there had been some tightening in the money market more in accord
ance with the restricted bank reserve position.
Credit demands continue heavy, Mr. Thomas pointed out; consumer
credit has expanded at an unprecedented rate; mortgage demand continues

11/16/55 -6
very large, and there are complaints of difficulties in obtaining funds.
New capital issues were exceptionally large in October and quite sub
stantial in November, and the calendar for the period ahead is also
heavy. Business loans at banks continue to increase, compared with
declines in the same period last year.
Mr. Thomas reviewed changes in bank condition figures, noting
that within the past year commercial banks had increased loans by nearly
$12 billion but reduced holdings of Government securities by over $7
billion. Thus, there had been a decline in the liquidity of the bank
ing system, but on the other hand there had been an increase in the
liquidity of the economy which had expanded holdings of both cash and
Government securities. Individuals, businesses, and institutional in
vestors had used funds to purchase Government and other securities
which they considered to represent liquid assets. Apparently, about
$$ billion of Government securities had been absorbed by public and
private pension and trust funds, and corporations and individuals had
each added about $1 billion to their holdings. In addition, nonbank
investors had acquired substantial amounts of other securities and
mortgages.
Mr. Thomas also noted that the money supply had increased dur
ing the past year, although at a slower rate than during the three pre
ceding years. Since January, the growth had been at a seasonally ad
justed annual rate of barely 1-1/2 per cent, but the rate of turnover
of deposits had increased. There had been greater activity in security
markets and common stock prices had risen to the previous high level.

11/16/55 -7
Net borrowed reserves recently have been running around $600
million to $700 million and, while there would be some reduction in
borrowed reserves during the next few days, the level was expected to
average above $500 million for the current reserve week. In the ab
sence of open market operations it was anticipated that net borrowed
reserves would be somewhat lower in the next statement week and then
would increase to around the billion dollar level in December. Pur
chases or repurchases of Government securities by the System of around
1/2 billion dollars would maintain something like the present pressure
on the market. Pressure could be increased by forcing banks to borrow
more of their needs.
Mr. Rouse entered the room while Mr. Thomas was presenting his
statement.
In response to Chairman Martin's question, Mr. Rouse said that
he had no comments to make on the reports of open market operations
prepared at the New York Bank and distributed prior to this meeting,
and none of the members of the Committee raised any questions in con
nection with the reports.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the open market transactions during
the period October 25-November 15, 1955,
inclusive, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Chairman Martin stated that before proceeding with discussion
of open market operations, he wished to comment on a telegram he had
sent to the President of each Federal Reserve Bank under date of

11/16/55
November 9, 1955 suggesting that, without implying that action should
be taken on the matter, there be a full review of the discount rate by
the directors of the Reserve Bank at their next meeting. That wire,
Chairman Martin said, was sent out in accordance with the general
thought that the Federal Open Market Committee should be the focal
point of discussions of all aspects of System credit policy. The wire
should not be construed as indicating that any position had been taken
by the Board regarding a possible change in the discount rate; it was
sent with the thought that it would be desirable if all of the Presidents
could be adequately prepared to discuss the problem of the discount rate
at today's meeting. Chairman Martin then called upon Mr. Sproul who
made a statement in which he brought out the following points:
1. There seems to be little question about it--businessmen
and consumers have thrown off, for the present, doubts about
the economic situation which may have been created by the
President's illness.
2. Consumer spending and borrowing continues in high gear,
the savings ratio is down to the lowest level of recent years,
demand for business loans is still high, and plans for busi
ness spending for plant and equipment during 1956 are sub
stantially, even dramatically, higher than in 1955.
3. At the same time we are obviously nearer to current ceil
ings on production and employment than we have been for some
time past.
4. Combined with a generally optimistic attitude about the
outlook, as reflected, for example, in the stock market which
has recovered most if not all of its September-October losses,
and with the fact that increased costs are still working their
way through the economy, this is a situation which might well
be headed for higher prices and the possibility of speculative
excesses.
5. To be sure, the statistics of the recent past don't make
an ironclad case for further anti-inflationary measures. The
pace of physical expansion is slower than it was. Clear evi
dence of either an upward wage-price spiral or of widespread

11/16/55
material or employment bottlenecks is still lacking, although
there are some evidence of both. While inventories are in
creasing, they are increasing less than sales (this may be
involuntary) and at a slower rate than earlier in the year
($2.5 billion annual rate in the third quarter, compared with
$4.5 billion in the second quarter). It might indeed still
be argued that, except for the agricultural situation, we are
enjoying an almost ideal state of production, employment, in
come, and prices. But part of our job is to try to help keep
it that way, and recent pressures suggest the possibility of
an outbreak on the upside, which we could help to prevent be
coming a movement of prices rather than of production.
6. We have, of course, been allowing the seasonal demand for
bank credit to press against available reserves during recent
weeks, and member bank borrowings are higher, net borrowed re
serves are higher, the money market has been tighter, and the
tendency of most short-term rates of interest has been upward.
In other words, a policy of credit restraint has been maintained
and even increased, but it has not worked through as effectively
as might be desired, either in terms of the supply of bank credit
or in the capital markets. Particularly in the municipal and
corporate bond market, during most of the past several weeks,
there has been more buoyancy than two or three months ago, with
some issues which were then withdrawn because of unsatisfactory
bids coming to the market at equally favorable or more favorable
rates.
7. One thing that has worked against the effectiveness of exist
ing credit policy has been the widespread opinion, following the
President's illness, that credit restraint had reached its peak
and that relaxation was in the offing as 1956 approaches. The
published figures of open market operations have begun to dispel
this belief, I think, but until the last few days they seemed
slow in taking hold. Another increase in the discount rate might
confirm the continuance of restraint and help ward off possible
speculative excesses which now appear more likely than they did
a few weeks ago. We can't allow rumors to make policy but, at
times, they do become part of the climate in which policy is made.
8. Treasury operations are again about to become a complicating
factor. The Treasury will be in the market to refund a $12 bil
lion December 15 maturity at the end of this month or early in
December, and it will probably have to follow that up with up
to a $1 billion cash borrowing before the middle of December.
Avoidance of an unsettled market during the period of Treasury
financing means we shall have to stand aside, pretty much from
mid-November to mid-December. If it were not for this factor, I
would favor postponing further restrictive action until we have
had a little more time to observe the results of what we have
already done, which appears to have begun to take hold during
the past week.

11/16/55 -10
9. In all the circumstances, however, it seems to me to be
the part of prudence and wisdom to increase the discount rate
to 2 1/2 per cent now, putting a little more cutting edge on
the relatively high level of borrowing which I assume we shall
expect to maintain, for the present, through open market opera
tions. If such an increase in the discount rate has too great
an adverse effect, particularly in the capital markets, of course,
we may have to give temporary relief through open market opera
tions. The way for an increase in the discount rate has been
somewhat prepared, however, by the increase in our repurchase
rate from 2 1/4 to 2 3/8 per cent on November 10, and the "shock"
of an increase in the discount rate should not be so great, given
the prevailing broad optimism about the economic future.
10. Gradual consistent pressure, when further expansion of bank
credit may go into increased prices rather than into increased
production (as it has already been doing, for example, in the
building industry) seems to me to be the way to try to have a
boom that doesn't "bust".
Mr. Szymczak inquired whether Mr. Sproul's statement to the
effect that an increase in discount rate should not be made between
mid-November and mid-December because of the forthcoming Treasury
financing indicated that he did not favor an increase in the rate at
this time, or whether it should be taken to indicate that the rate
should be increased immediately.
Mr. Sproul responded that he felt the rate should be increased
at once since, unless the increase were made this week, it probably
would have to wait until after the Treasury financing.
Mr. Szymczak said that he favored an increase in the discount
rate at this time. He would then observe the situation closely until
the first part of 1956 to see what happened as a result of seasonal
changes and political developments that might affect the economy. Also,
he would pursue an even tighter policy in the open market than had been

11/16/55 -11
followed recently, although he felt the open market account should be
in a position to furnish additional reserves to the money market for
a temporary period if an increase in the discount rate resulted in too
much tightness.
Mr. Erickson commented on conditions in the Boston district,
stating that activity there did not seem to be "boiling" as much as in
other districts. In speaking of consumer instalment debt, Mr. Erickson
noted that the percentage of the United States total of such debt held
in New England was larger than the percentage of the country's consumer
income in that region. Consumer debt at member banks in New England
had increased by 19.2 per cent since December 1954, compared with an
increase of 15.1 per cent for the United States as a whole. Mr. Erickson
cited an instance of a mutual savings bank which had asked a Boston cor
respondent for a written confirmed line of credit for a period of one
year for which it was willing to pay a commitment fee, in order to be
sure that it would have funds available to meet its needs for mortgage
advances during that period. He went on to say that, considering the
economic situation and the psychology of businessmen and the general
public, he proposed to recommend to the Board of Directors of the Boston
Bank at its meeting to be held next Monday that it increase the discount
rate. Mr. Erickson said that he also believed that the Open Market Com
mittee might well follow a somewhat tighter policy than it has been fol
lowing.

11/16/55 -12
Mr. Earhart said that he favored an increase in the discount
rate to 2-1/2 per cent and would so recommend to his directors. He
also said that the members of the research staff at the San Francisco
Bank were opposed to an increase of the discount rate at the present
time. His reasons for favoring the increase had been well stated by
others this morning, Mr. Earhart said, and in addition, banks in the
Twelfth District seemed to be going ahead fairly freely in meeting
credit demands and some of their use of the discount facilities had
reached the stage where the borrowing was for more than temporary con
tingencies. This raised the question whether the Reserve Bank should
"close the discount window" just a little by cautioning banks with re
spect to the programs they were following. Mr. Earhart recalled the
difficulties which arose as a result of admonishments against extended
use of the discount facilities in the spring of 1953 and stated that in
his opinion if the impression were created that the Reserve Banks were
closing the discount window a little, that might create a tighter situa
tion than would be caused by an increase in the discount rate. His
preference was to have an increase in the rate rather than to resist
too strongly the borrowing of banks at the Reserve Bank. While he would
prefer to be able to wait a week or two to see whether the actions al
ready taken by the System were having enough effect in the short-term
money market and in the capital market, he felt that in view of the
timing of the Treasury's financing, action in raising the discount rate
was called for at this time.

11/16/55 .13
Mr. Irons said that conditions in the Dallas District were
booming. There had been a resurgence of confidence among businessmen
during the past few weeks. A survey that the Dallas Bank had made in
82 counties and parishes of the District during the past two weeks showed
almost without exception that the picture was one of very strong con
fidence. Bankers, businessmen, and farmers anticipated stronger business
this year-end than a year ago and were highly confident about the first
six months of 1956. Agriculture was in fairly good condition, although
many farmers in the Dallas District were discontented and disgruntled.
This feeling seems to be associated with the belief that the farmer is
not sharing in the boom to the same extent as industry; in addition,
the farmer is unhappy about the price developments for farm products.
From the standpoint of income, many farmers are better off than last
year and banks were expecting farmers to pay off loans which had been
carried from earlier years. Demand for credit in the Dallas District
currently is stronger than at any earlier time although banks, which
are under considerable pressure, are resisting these demands and are
culling their loans. Mr. Irons described the discussion of the discount
rate at the meeting of the Dallas directors last Thursday in the light
of the telegram received from Chairman Martin. While he recommended re
establishment of the rate but without any attempt to press the matter,
he said, he thought most of the directors would have voted against an
increase in the rate at that time unless he had developed an unusually
strong case in support of an increase. Mr. Irons stated that he felt

11/16/55 -14.
an increase in discount rate at this time would have its greatest impact
initially in the capital markets and that it would seem more appropriate
under these circumstances if such an increase originated in New York.
Some of the Dallas directors had indicated that if the New York Bank in
creased its discount rate, they would be willing to follow promptly with
an increase at the Dallas Bank. Mr. Irons stated that he would be pre
pared to call a special meeting of his Board and recommend an increase
in the discount rate, assuming that action were taken promptly by other
Banks, including New York.
Mr. Leedy said that Mr. Sproul had "covered the water front"
and that he agreed one hundred per cent with his analysis of the situa
tion and his suggestion for moving further in applying restraints. The
only variation from what he understood to be Mr. Sproul's position was
that, quite aside from consideration of the Treasury's financing needs,
he (Mr. Leedy) felt that an increase in the discount rate was called for
at this time.
Mr. Young said that in the Chicago area his contacts with leading
businessmen during the past few days caused him to be prepared to recom
mend to his directors at their meeting tomorrow morning that the discount
rate be increased. While he did not anticipate a unanimous vote, he felt
the increase would be approved.
Mr. Leach recalled that at the meeting on October 25, he was
quite satisfied with the results of the Committee's general policy except
for the increase in prices of long-term Government securities. He thought

11/16/55 -15
that increase would be temporary. The Richmond Bank's directors met
last week and at that time considered the discount rate, after receiving
Chairman Martin's telegram. They voted unanimously to renew the exist
ing rate of 2-1/4 per cent. After describing the consideration which
led to this decision, which was in accordance with the recommendation
he had made at that time, Mr. Leach said that he was impressed with the
change that has taken place very recently in the psychology of the public
and businessmen at a time when we were approaching capacity. There had
been a notable change in psychology during the past week or two. In view
of the fact that this was probably the last chance for the System to in
crease the discount rate before the end of the year, Mr. Leach said that
he now expected to recommend to the directors an increase of 1/4 per cent
in the rate. As to open market operations, Mr. Leach said that several
hundred million dollars of reserves would be needed before the end of the
year and he thought these should be largely supplied through the discount
window and through repurchase agreements. Outright purchases should be
used only if the situation became quite tight. He referred to Mr.
Earhart' s comments regarding "tightening up" at the discount window,
stating that his bank had given a great deal of consideration to this
possibility over the past few weeks. However, he was hesitant to give
the impression among banks at this time that the discount window was
being "closed" somewhat, feeling that such a development might have more
effect than anything else the System could do to bring on a sudden tight
ening. For these reasons, he expected to wait until the end of the season

11/16/55 -16
when some of the banks which had been borrowing continuously were paying
off their loans, at which time the situation would be discussed with
them.
Mr. Vardaman said that he would not comment on whether the dis
count rate should be increased until all of the Reserve Bank presidents
had expressed their views. He wished to emphasize what Messrs. Earhart
and Leach had said about the discount window: if there were to be fur
ther tightening, it should be done by direct means, such as an increase
in the discount rate and in open market operations, and not by partly
closing down the discount window.
Mr. Mills said that he concurred in the desirability of moving
promptly to a 2-1/2 per cent discount rate and maintaining, and if possible
increasing, the pressure on bank reserves. This must be done with a very
open-minded attitude and with careful consideration of the liquidity posi
tion of commercial banks and of their reaction to such changes. As in
dicated by the discussion this morning, the acquisition of Treasury bills
by corporations and institutional investors has been at the expense of
bank deposits, and central reserve cities have felt the brunt of that
situation most severely. There may possibly be a "psychology of uncer
tainty" that might change to fear if the System were to act too aggres
sively, regardless of the desirability of the objectives of such action.
Further, on the assumption that the New York and Chicago Reserve Banks
will move to a 2-1/2 per cent discount rate tomorrow, the Committee must
be conscious of the fact that yesterday's moderate sales of $37 million

11/16/55 -17
of Treasury bills gave evidence of this sensitivity of the market
through an immediate downward price pressure on the market. Mr. Mills
suggested that in this situation perhaps the Manager of the Open Market
Account could comment on the way in which open market operations during
the reserve week starting tomorrow should be correlated with an increase
in the discount rate. As natural forces in the reserve picture are
going to ease the market tomorrow and during the rest of the current
week, if the discount rate were increased Thursday, this might be a very
happy circumstance. It might be desirable to suspend any Treasury bill
sales for Thursday and Friday with the thought that natural forces could
be allowed to reassert themselves next Monday in order to obtain the de
gree of tightness that might be desired. This would allow two days of
fleeting ease for the market to adjust to the change in discount rate
and would avoid implying that the change in discount rate was being ac
companied by very agressive open market sales of Treasury bills.
Mr. Rouse commented on the prospective easing in the reserve
situation during the rest of this week, noting that the picture was ex
pected to shift back next Monday to net borrowed reserves of around $600
million to $650 million. Mr. Rouse said that his thought would be per
haps to continue some sales of bills today for delivery tomorrow, and
if the rumors of a discount rate change were persisting today, this
probably would be sufficient having in mind the extremes contemplated
in net borrowed reserves. He estimated net borrowed reserves would
average around $300 million for the week ending November 23 and $700

million for the week ending November 30. Mr. Rouse thought the slightly
easier situation suggested by Mr. Mills between now and the end of this
week would not be undesirable, if a change in the discount rate were
announced tomorrow. He would be inclined to do nothing beyond what is
done in the market today.
Mr. Robertson stated that he agreed with the views expressed at
this meeting and he presented a memorandum expressing his views, read
ing as follows:
At the last meeting, I advocated a policy more restric
tive than the one theretofore followed. At that time it was
my judgment that the key financial and economic facts called
for an increase in the discount rate rather than a higher
level of negative free reserves. The events since then have
tended to confirm my judgment that an inflationary situation
was threatening and that anything short of a rise in the dis
count rate would be an inadequate gesture to curb such a threat.
In the two weeks ending November 9, free reserves dropped
from a negative level of $303 million to $446 million and then
to $577 million. On Wednesday, November 9, negative free re
serves were over $900 million, and on November 10, repurchase
agreements were entered into at 2-3/8%, 1/8% above the discount
rate. Despite these restrictive Open Market developments, credit
and capital market conditions had not until this week tightened
materially. The Treasury bill rates at first did not rise, but
actually declined further to almost 2%. Only this week have
they regained a level around the discount rate, and then only
by virtue of a volume of negative free reserves in excess of
what was contemplated by the Committee at the time of the last
meeting.
Intermediate and long-term Government bond yields have
risen only moderately, and corporate and municipal yields have
remained relatively unchanged. The feeling continues wide
spread in financial markets and in the business community in
general that credit restraints will not be tightened any further.
This feeling has not only affected money rates and bond
yields, but has also affected investment and spending as well.
October saw the largest monthly volume of municipal and corpo
rate financing for many months, and all major types of bank

11/16/55
loans also continued to increase rapidly. New financing in
November is continuing very high. Such new financing at at
tractive rates has meant additional funds available for spend
ing by business, consumers, and state and local governments.
It is at least questionable whether the recent rates of
increase in consumer credit, real estate credit, and business
loans can be maintained. If they cannot, the impact on future
levels of business activity will be serious.
Although there has been some rise in Treasury bill rates
this week as a result, in part, of the higher volume of nega
tive free reserves, it is questionable whether even the present
degree of restrictiveness can be maintained by continuation of
this level of negative free reserves. The market becomes ac
customed to any given level of reserves and the pressure result
ing therefrom tends to diminish with time. This is particularly
true at this season of the year.
I am aware that discount rates, as such, are not within the
province of the Open Market Committee, but the Open Market policy
of this Committee must be geared to action on the discount rate.
I still feel that the System's policy of restraint should be
greater rather than lesser, and that the best means of achieving
this end is through an increase in the discount rate.
It seems to me that a rise in the discount rate is necessary
to convince the public that the Federal Reserve is going to exer
cise restraint when such restraint is called for by the over-all
economic situation.
Failure to raise the discount rate could, in the existing
situation, contribute to an inflation that is very likely al
ready in process--except for the agricultural area, price rises
are already widespread and are becoming more so. Such a failure
will not prevent the adjustment in money rates and bond returns
that is bound to come if business is as strong as our economists
portray, but it may postpone it, probably to a time when the mal
adjustments would be even more acute than now and when an adjust
ment would be even more disrupting than now.
On the other hand, a moderate increase in the discount rate
(e.g., a quarter of one per cent) would tend to restore flexi
bility in the use of this instrument. It would now have a
psychological significance, which should be an attribute of
movements in the discount rate, but which will be largely lost
if we wait until after a rise in the rate is past due and partly
or wholly discounted. There are times, and I think this is one
of them, when it is better to lead with the discount rate than
to follow.

11/16/55 -20-
There is very little time remaining in this year within
which action on the discount rate can be taken without seriously
interfering with Treasury financing activities. It would seem
to me that failure to act in the next few days will mean that
there can be no action at least until after the end of the year.
If the discount rate is raised, it is possible that a sharp
rise in money rates and bond yields would ensue, but this is
less likely now in view of the increase in the level of the
bill rate during the past three days and the present level of
member bank borrowing from Federal Reserve Banks. Furthermore,
if the general business situation is as strong as our economists
picture it, the chance that such a rise would lead to undue
financial stress is very slim. Even in the remote chance that
it would, we have the means to combat such a development. If
general business is, in fact, on the brink of a downturn, an
increase in the discount rate at this time might precipitate
the turn. But no facts before us today warrant any such eco
nomic prognosis. If the recent McGraw-Hill survey, which fore
casts business plant and equipment expenditures for 1956 at
13% above those a year ago, is anywhere near the mark, some
thing will have to give, in an economy already operating at
capacity.
Consequently, I feel that there are inflationary pressures
present which should be checked now by a firmer monetary policy-
one firm enough to curtail spending and thus dampen price pres
sures. The best instrument to use at the moment is the discount
rate policy. The rate should be raised. The risks involved in
raising the rate are less than those involved in failing to act.
If the discount rate is not raised, then it seems to me
that Open Market policy should be geared to achieve somewhat
greater restraint over the next few weeks than that prevailing
even in the past few days, notwithstanding the fact that, in
view of the projection for free reserves during the next two
weeks, this is likely to be difficult to achieve.
Mr. Shepardson said that he was thoroughly in accord with the
views expressed, particularly with those given by Mr. Leedy. He had
thought an increase in the discount rate was desirable, regardless of
the pending Treasury financing. Mr. Shepardson went on to say that
agricultural prices had stabilized somewhat recently but as far as he
could see there was no prospect of improvement in general agricultural

11/16/55 -21
prices as long as heavy, burdensome surpluses were overhanging the
market. The best help the System could give agriculture, he felt, was
to try to prevent further increases in the prices of things the farmer
has to buy.
Mr. Fulton said that the Cleveland Bank directors discussed the
discount rate at their meeting last week reaching a consensus that it
should be raised but did not act to increase it feeling that they did
not wish totake the lead in such action at this time. The Cleveland
District is on an "overtime" basis, Mr. Fulton said, even in the formerly
depressed coal mining industry, and large plant expansion programs are
under way.
Mr. Williams said that a recent survey of conditions in the
Philadelphia District confirmed the need for an increase in the discount
rate at this time.
Mr. Bryan described the discussion of the discount rate at the
meeting of the Atlanta Bank's directors last week, following receipt of
Chairman Martin's telegram. The directors were inclined toward an in
crease in the rate, he said, and much of their discussion was whether
the increase should be 1/4 of 1 per cent or more. One of the questions
asked but never answered was, if the Federal Reserve System does not act
for further restraint under the conditions that now exist, under what
conditions would it act? It was clear that the directors felt that action
should be taken, Mr. Bryan said, and they were prepared to act promptly

11/16/55 -22
to increase the discount rate, provided other Reserve Banks took
similar action.
Mr. Bryan also suggested that, in terms of the longer run
picture, the System might consider whether we have not now passed an
all-time low in the monetary returns on savings. He suggested that
this subject might be profitably discussed in terms of the shift of
income distribution in the United States, the tendency of population
figures to increase, and the volume of savings that would be necessary
in order to produce a capital endowment for the next generation that
would be equivalent to that available for this generation.
Mr. Johns commented on a discussion of the discount rate at a
meeting of the directors of the St. Louis Bank last Thursday, at which
time Chairman Martin's telegram of November 9 was brought to their at
tention. The directors re-established the existing rate at that time.
Mr. Johns said that at the time of the directors' meeting, he had just
returned from a vacation and he made no recommendation for a change in
the rate, partly because he wished to have the benefit of a discussion
at this meeting and partly because he wished to review and analyze the
data that had become available to him on the situation upon his return.
He had now reached substantially the position indicated by the views
expressed at this meeting, and he planned to recommend to his directors
that the discount rate of the St. Louis Bank be increased to 2-1/2 per
cent.

11/16/55 -23
Mr. Balderston concurred in the general views expressed during
the meeting.
Chairman Martin said that he concurred in the view that the dis
count rate should be increased. However, he stated that it would be
most unfortunate to have anything in the way of a panic develop among
banks during this period and, while it was desirable to increase the
discount rate, that did not mean that the supply of money also should
be decreased during this period. He felt that an increase in the cost
of money and a decrease in the supply of reserves did not have to take
place at the same time. This was a problem to be considered by the
Manager of the Open Market Account, Chairman Martin said, and he re
iterated the view there should be nothing in the way of a panic, and
nothing should be done that would risk developing a feeling of panic
on the part of banks regarding their ability to use the discount window.
This did not mean that the System was giving up any principles regarding
the discount window. The System should do what it could to restrain
excesses at this time, but it should not put undue pressure on the sup
ply of reserves during the period in which the money market and banks
were adjusting to an increase in the discount rate just preceding the
Treasury financing that would be announced at the end of November or
early in December. Chairman Martin also said that if the discount rate
were not increased at this time, he seriously doubted that a change
could be made until some time after the turn of the year.

11/16/55 -24
Mr. Balderston said that he was concerned that the System go
into the Treasury financing period able to discharge its secondary
obligation to the Treasury by keeping an even keel during the period
of the Treasury's financing. However, it should go into this period
with as much tightness as the System could contrive to exert without
deceiving the market. He noted that there had been a rise of 3-1/2
per cent in the industrial component of the wholesale price index
since June of this year and that this meant that the rise has been
at an average rate of 7/10 per cent each month. While it was true
that the rise between July and September immediately after the big
wage settlements was at double the rate of October and November, the
fact was that heavy individual demand was being enlarged by consumer
credit of doubtful quality, and this was being superimposed upon heavy
corporate demand. The suspicion that businessmen might be altering
their expansion plans for plant and equipment has been answered by
McGraw-Hill and other surveys of next year's expectations. For these
reasons and because the System's secondary obligation to the Treasury
would inhibit its freedom of action shortly, Mr. Balderston said that
he believed that the System should proceed at once to increase the dis
count rate to 2-1/2 per cent.
Chairman Martin said he did not think it possible to pinpoint
precisely the reaction in the market to an increase in the discount
rate or to say what the adjustments in the market would be between such
an increase and the Treasury announcement of its financing. The point

11/16/55 -25
he wished to make was that this is clearly a situation where the System
does not want to have both an increase in the discount rate and simul
taneous appearance of a strong reduction in the supply of money. He
did not object to considerably increased restriction, but it seemed to
him that if both the increase in the rate and a reduction in the supply
of money took place at this particular time it could compound the situa
tion in a way that the Committee did not wish. We have a limited period
before the Treasury financing. Whereas he would normally be in favor of
open market operations to reinforce another credit action, in the present
situation he would favor giving the desk some latitude in deciding how
far to go in this period of adjustment.
Mr. Sproul said that he would like to emphasize two points that
had come up in the discussion. First, it would be quite undesirable
and a great mistake in his opinion to have any indication of a "shut
down" at the discount window at this time. Secondly, Mr. Sproul thought
the Committee would have to continue its open market operations in the
light of what the reaction to an increase in the discount rate might be
without any preconceived idea as to what net borrowed reserves should be.
He said that he had been a little disturbed by the implication some of
the members of the Committee had given this morning of aiming for even
greater tightness in open market operations. He did not think the Com
mittee should now commit itself to an even tighter policy until it had
had an opportunity to observe the reaction of the market to a change in
the discount rate. His concept, Mr. Sproul said in response to a question

11/16/55 -26
from Mr. Robertson, was that the Committee should maintain about the
situation that has developed during the past three weeks, but it should
not say that there should be a particular figure of net borrowed reserves
at the time of a change in the discount rate, particularly since the capi
tal markets within the past few days have begun to react to what the Com
mittee already has done through its open market operations.
Mr. Robertson said that he would agree that it was not desirable
to set a level or even a range of net borrowed reserves, because it was
not possible to see what the pressure would be at any given level. He
thought, however, that the Committee should maintain at least the degree
of tightness that had existed during the past few days. In other words,
it should maintain an even keel in relation to the last few days.
Mr. Sproul said that he agreed with Mr. Mills' suggestion that
it might be appropriate, in terms of carrying out monetary policy, to
have a little less tightness during the rest of this week as a means of
helping to iron out the adjustments after announcement of the increase
in the discount rate.
Mr. Robertson said that he agreed completely with this view also,
but that for the next three weeks as a whole, the desire to maintain an
"even keel" did not mean that the measure should be what had happened
over the last three weeks, but rather the last three days.
Chairman Martin said that the only place where he would differ
with Mr. Robertson--and the difference might be only one of emphasis
would be his emphasis on giving the Management of the Open Market Account

11/16/55 -27
latitude in carrying on operations during this period of adjusting to
the rate increase. He would not be concerned if the operation did not
achieve the recent degree of tightness in the period between the increase
and the Treasury financing. What he was suggesting, he said, was trying
to move in the direction of maintaining tightness, but avoiding having
the two forces of an increase in cost of money and a decrease in supply
of reserves present at the same time the Treasury was getting ready to
announce its financing. This was a very difficult situation, he said,
and the Committee should not minimize the difficulties that would be
presented to the Management of the Account in this period.
Mr. Robertson said he did not disagree--that he was in full ac
cord with giving the Management of the Account latitude along the lines
suggested by the Chairman.
Mr. Shepardson referred to the understanding at the meeting on
October 4, that "the Committee desired to maintain the degree of restraint
that it had been trying to maintain . . . and that . . . doubts should be
resolved on the side of tightness rather than of ease." He suggested
that the current understanding might be the same, except for omission
of the provision that "doubts should be resolved on the side of tightness
rather than of ease."
Chairman Martin said that this suggestion could be put in the
minutes, but that he did not think it needed to be adopted, and there
was no disagreement with this comment. He then inquired whether the

11/16/55 -28-
directive to be issued to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York needed
any change.
Mr. Rouse stated that the wording of the directive seemed appro
priate to the objectives of the Committee as discussed at this meeting
and that he had no suggestion for change in any of the existing limita
tions in the directive.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted unani
mously to direct the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York until otherwise directed by
the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (including
replacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities to
run off without replacement) for the System open market account
in the open market or, in the case of maturing securities, by
direct exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary in the
light of current and prospective economic conditions and the
general credit situation of the country, with a view (a) to
relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs of
commerce and business, (b) to restraining inflationary devel
opments in the interest of sustainable economic growth, and
(c) to the practical administration of the account; provided
that the aggregate amount of securities held in the System
account (including commitments for the purchase or sale of
securities for the account) at the close of this date, other
than special short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the
Treasury, shall not be increased or decreased by more than
$1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the ac
count of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion,
in cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to
one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special
short-term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the
Treasury; provided that the total amount of such certificates
held at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not
exceed in the aggregate $500 million;

11/16/55 -29-
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System
account for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury
securities maturing within one year as may be necessary
from time to time for the accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such securities so sold
shall not exceed in the aggregate $500 million face amount,
and such sales shall be made as nearly as may be practicable
at the prices currently quoted in the open market.
Chairman Martin next inquired whether there was a suggestion
for a change in the instruction to be issued in connection with repur
chase agreements, particularly whether any change was needed in the
provision that the rates on such agreements should be not less than
(a) the discount rate of the Federal Reserve Bank on eligible commercial
paper, or (b) the average issuing rate on the most recent issue of three
month bills.
Mr. Rouse felt that the existing provisions with respect to the
rate were satisfactory for repurchase agreements that might be used be
tween now and the next meeting of the Committee.
Thereupon, the following authoriza
tion was approved by unanimous vote:
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is hereby authorized
to enter into repurchase agreements with nonbank dealers in
United States Government securities subject to the following
conditions:
1. Such agreements
(a) In no event shall be at a rate below whichever
is the lower of (1) the discount rate of the
Federal Reserve Bank on eligible commercial
paper, or (2) the average issuing rate on the
most recent issue of three-month Treasury bills;
(b) Shall be for periods of not to exceed 15 calen
dar days;
(c) Shall cover only Government securities maturing
within 15 months; and
(d) Shall be used as a means of providing the money
market with sufficient Federal Reserve funds to
avoid undue strain on a day-to-day basis.

11/16/55 -30
2. Reports of such transactions shall be included in
the weekly report of open market operations which
is sent to the members of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
3. In the event Government securities covered by any
such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer
pursuant to the agreement or a renewal thereof,
the securities thus acquired by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York shall be sold in the market or
transferred to the System open market account.
Chairman Martin suggested that it might be desirable to set the
date for the next meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on Tuesday,
December 13, 1955, with a view to having a full scale review of the eco
nomic and credit situation at that time and with the further thought that
the following meeting of the Committee might be held after the turn of
the year. There was unanimous agreement with this suggestion.
Chairman Martin said that, without implying criticism of anyone,
there was one other matter which he would like to mention at this time.
An article on the Committee's policy had appeared in the magazine
"Business Week" shortly after the meeting held on October 25, 1955, and
the article contained comments reflecting so closely the substance of
the meeting that he did not see how it could have been written without
some person who was familiar with what went on at that meeting having
discussed the matter. He reiterated that he was not implying that any
one had discussed the meeting and he said that he had complete confidence
in all of the members of the Committee and the others who participated
in the meetings. However, the article had impressed him and he felt it
necessary that all those who participated in the meetings be extremely
careful about their discussions about what went on in any such meetings.

11/16/55
-31
Chairman Martin then called attention to a copy of a letter
from Congressman Brent Spence, Chairman of the House Banking and Currency
Committee, dated October 25, 1955, requesting comments by the Board of
Governors on a bill, H. R. 569, introduced in the House of Representatives
on January 5, 1955, by Mr. Patman, which proposed to increase to 12 the
number of members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
and to provide that their terms of office shall be six years, and to
abolish the Federal Open Market Committee and transfer its functions
to such Board. Chairman Martin said that copies of Congressman Spence's
letter and the bill had been distributed at this meeting and that he
would appreciate suggestions or comments which might be of assistance
to the Board in preparing a response which, he hoped, could be submitted
to Mr. Spence not later than the first part of January. He also noted
that Mr. Balderston had suggested that comments be sent in in time to
be considered at the meeting of the Committee on December 13, 1955.
Mr. Sproul referred to the request made by Senator Douglas,
first discussed at the meeting of the Committee on September 14, 1955,
regarding a visit which the Senator proposed to make to the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, probably between October 20 and November 1,
for the purpose of observing the handling of open market operations.
He stated that Senator Douglas, accompanied by Dr. Achinstein, had
visited the Bank on October 26, 27, and 28, in response to the invita
tion of the Federal Open Market Committee, which he as Vice Chairman of
the Committee had sent to the Senator by letter dated October 6, 1955.

11/16/55 -32-
Mr. Sproul then described the visit in substantially the following
terms:
Each morning Senator Douglas and Dr. Achinstein came to
the bank at about 9:30 and had a preliminary talk with Mr.
Rouse and me. At the first such meeting, I spoke to them of
the possible adverse effects of publicity concerning their
visit, which might be played up as a Senate investigation of
open market operations with possible unfortunate repercussions
in the Government securities market. I pointed out that if
they attended the dealer conferences, or listened in on market
telephone conversations which would necessitate disclosure of
their being "on the line," there might be a flood of rumors.
Senator Douglas said he wished to avoid anything of the sort
and, so far as I know, no publicity attended the visit.
At 10 o'clock or shortly thereafter each day, they went
to the trading room and stayed there the rest of the morning.
After lunch at the bank, we usually went over any questions
that had come up, and they would leave in the early afternoon.
The Senator' s chief interest appeared to be how policy
directives are translated into action, how operations are
actually carried out in the market, and how the System is
kept advised of open market operations. We showed them the
forms and data we regularly use in analyzing the position of
the banks and the money market each day, except the reports
of individual dealer's position and volume. They also sat
in on the eleven o'clock telephone calls to the Board and
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas (the latter was the other
Reserve Bank being included in the call during that week),
and were informed of conversations with the Treasury on its
position, of our regular routine surveys of the market, of
transactions which are carried out for System Account, the
Bank's account, Treasury account and foreign or member bank
account, and of the information which we supply regularly to
the Federal Open Market Committee and to all of the Federal
Reserve Banks.
The Senator appeared to be well satisfied with his visit
and said he intended to report on it to his Committee. He
gave no indication of his own views as to policy formulation
by the Federal Open Market Committee or the method and means
of conducting its operations. When asked what questions or
criticisms he might have about our performance, he evaded the
question. Dr. Achinstein largely sat by and let the Senator
do the talking and ask the questions. His role seemed to be
to observe and to pull together the information obtained, pre
sumably to brief the Senator before each day's visit, and to
help prepare a report for the Senator.

11/16/55 -33
Chairman Martin stated that he was glad to have this report
of Senator Douglas' visit and that he felt the Committee was indebted
to Mr. Sproul and to the New York Bank for the manner in which they had
handled Senator Douglas' request and visit.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary