A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, October 4, 1955, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Earhart
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Irons
Mr. Leach
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Messrs. Erickson, C. S. Young, Johns, and Powell,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Williams, Bryan, and Leedy, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Atlanta, and Kansas City, respectively.
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Daane, Hostetler, Rice, Roelse,
Wheeler, and R. A. Young, Associate
Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Assistant Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the

10/4/55 -2
meetings of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on September 14 and 26, 1955,
were approved.
Before this meeting there had been sent to the members of the
Committee copies of a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York covering open market operations during the period June 22
September 28, 1955, inclusive, and at this meeting there was distributed
a supplementary report covering commitments executed September 29
October 3, 1955. Copies of both reports have been placed in the files of
the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period since
September 13, 1955 were approved, rati
fied, and confirmed.
Members of the Board's staff from the Divisions of Research and
Statistics and International Finance then entered the room for the pur
pose of presenting an economic review illustrated by chart slides.
Following the meeting, a copy of the text of the review was sent to each
member of the Committee.
The review stated that by late September the economic situation
had advanced to a point where financial developments had become a more
critical factor in the shaping of business trends. Consumer credit had
been rising rapidly to new heights and so also had mortgage credit, sup
porting very active markets for autos and housing. The buoyancy in stock
prices during late September had been especially striking, a buoyancy

10/4/55 -3
that in recent months appears to have been mainly fostered by ebullient
confidence rather than speculation on the basis of credit expansion, for
the growth in stock market credit tapered off following the second in
crease in margin requirements in April and by summer had virtually ceased.
It was at this stage of economic development that announcement of Presi
dent Eisenhower's illness came as a shock to confidence. While it is too
early to assess the economic significance of that announcement, the
immediate response was a sharp set back in stock prices accompanied by a
sharp rise in trading. Events in the stock market often foreshadow
changes in business activity and suggest at least the possibility of more
widespread hesitation and also of some postponements in business and con
sumer spending.
After commenting in some detail on various elements of the economy,
the review concluded with a statement regarding projected reserve needs
for the balance of 1955. This projection assumed that seasonal and normal
long-run growth in demand deposits during the remainder of this year would
be about $4-1/4 billion and that currency in circulation would show the
usual seasonal increase of about three-quarters of a billion. The projec
tion indicated a need for a little over $1 billion of Federal Reserve
credit for the rest of this year-about $500 million in October and most of
the remainder in late November and December when large pre-holiday needs
for credit and money were expected. The review suggested that the Federal
Reserve could supply the reserves needed by outright Treasury bill purehases

10/4/55 -4
or repurchase agreements, or it could refrain from open market action in
which case member banks would need to increase their borrowing. A com
bination of these means could, of course, be used. Despite uncertainties
in the economic outlook, it was suggested that the situation still
appeared to be one in which demands were expanding rapidly while supplies
of industrial products were coming under capacity restraints. In this
situation, a strong case could be made for limiting the volume of re
serves made available through open market operations but such a policy
would need to be pursued with caution in order to avoid the sudden
emergence of undue restrictive tension in credit markets. Under such a
program, the discount rate level might need to be raised further at a
relatively early date. Critical qualitative scrutiny of consumer and
mortgage credits should be continued if not strengthened. Finally, the
System would need to be alert--perhaps more than in most other periods-
to possible shifts in the general economic situation which might call
for modification of current monetary and credit policy.
Mr. Sproul inquired of Mr. Young as to what elements in the
economic situation, aside from mortgage credit and consumer credit,
might be considered to be unsatisfactory.
Mr. Young said that he would add the agricultural situation to
the list of elements which were not satisfactory. However, taking the
economic situation as a whole, it was very strong and the outlook was
very good. The existing situation was just what would be desirable if

10/4/55 -5
it did not present a danger of spiraling prices based on levels of demand
running ahead of supply.
Mr. Thomas felt it important that, as brought out in the economic
review, there had been great expansion in the economy thus far and in
dustry was now approaching capacity levels. Further expansion in demand
could not continue without putting upward pressures on prices,
In response to a question from Mr. Johns as to whether the re
tardation in the rate of expansion reported prior to the President's
illness was attributable solely to limitations of capacity of industry,
Mr. Young said that while there were other elements, he felt that the
approach of output to relatively full capacity was the most important
factor.
The members of the staff who had entered the room for the economic
review then withdrew from the meeting.
Mr. Sproul called for comments regarding open market operations to
be pursued in the light of the review of economic and credit conditions.
Mr. Balderston stated that until after the payment date for the
current Treasury financing (October 11) he would attempt to maintain the
degree of restraint that existed in the market last week. After October
11, however, he would favor still greater restraint such as would be re
flected by a bill rate of 2.30 to 2.40 and negative free reserves of
perhaps $500 million, more or less. Despite the psychological shock to
the business community caused by the illness of our Chief Executive,

10/4/55 -6
Mr. Balderston felt that the current and prospective momentum of recov
ery must be appraised carefully by the Committee. Quality of credits
being granted must be appraised; the approach of production to capacity
in the steel, construction, and other industries must be observed; and
the resultant danger of price and inventory increases must be watched
carefully. Mr. Balderston's concern was that the existing business
momentum was being accompanied by such changes in wages and labor costs
and in raw materials costs as would bring about price rises detrimental
to consumers generally and especially to farmers. He felt that the
price increases now evident and in prospect would be conducive to in
ventory growth that would ultimately cause trouble to the economy.
Therefore, Mr. Balderston felt that in addition to greater restraint
exercised through open market operations after October 11, an increase
in the discount rate to 2-1/2 per cent prior to mid-November would be
called for. This date was mentioned, he said, so that a condition of
relative stability might be established prior to the Treasury financing
to take place in December.
Mr. Szymczak thought that the present situation was one which
called for continuing the present policy of tightness without allowing
the tightness to become so severe as to be a cause, or to be cited as a
cause, of a down turn in the economy, if such a down turn developed. He
did not think that negative free reserves of as much as $500 million
would be desirable and was inclined more to a level of around $300 to

10/4/55 -7
$350 million. He would also allow member banks to come to the Reserve
Banks with discounts for additional funds that might be needed, but at
this time he could not say whether he would favor a discount rate change
later on since the need for such an increase at a later date could not
be appraised at the present time. Mr. Szymczak also noted that the
Treasury now had its books open. Developing trends should be observed
over the next two or three weeks, he said, and in the meantime he would
favor continuing the general policy of tightness discussed at meetings
of the Open Market Committee during the past month although he would not
have quite as much tightness as before the illness of the President.
Mr. Erickson thought that open market policy had been handled
very well recently. He would not go as far as Mr. Balderston in re
straint during the present period. The President's illness had caused
some weakening of confidence in the general economic picture and, while
he would keep pressure on and would let it increase slightly over the
next few weeks, he would not move to tighten the situation sharply. He
hoped that the discount window would be used more and he would not raise
the discount rate at the present time. Mr. Erickson said that he would
favor taking another look at the situation toward the end of this month
to see what the effect of developments had been during the month of
October. He also noted that a very distinct tightening of mortgage money
had become apparent in New England recently.

10/4/55 -8
Mr. Irons said that he generally agreed with the position taken
by the staff in its review. The economic situation is very strong. It
seemed to him that this reflected the consequences of a full production,
full employment situation. The economy was moving nearer capacity in
many respects, and as this point approached less efficient means of pro
duction would be utilized and prices would tend to rise. While it could
not be known what uncertainties might arise as a result of the President's
illness, it seemed to Mr. Irons that the Committee should continue to
exert pressure on bank reserves, the bill rate should be in better rela
tion to the discount rate, and if he were to use a figure of negative
free reserves he would say something in the range of $300 to $350 mil
lion rather than any substantially higher amount. He would not be
prepared at present to recommend an increase in the discount rate and
would wait for two or three weeks to consider such a change. In carrying
out this program, he would resolve doubts on the side of restrictiveness
rather than ease. He also felt that during the next two to four weeks
the day-to-day situation might be such as to make it desirable to allow
the management of the account considerable leeway so as to permit it to
meet, within the limits of the Committee's general policy of restrictive
ness, whatever conditions developed.
Mr. Earhart stated that his views were very close to what he
understood to be the views expressed by Messrs. Szymczak, Erickson, and
Irons, rather than to the more vigorous policy suggested by Mr. Balderston.

10/4/55 -9
Mr. Powell said that he would favor waiting a little longer than
Mr. Balderston had suggested before making any further restrictive moves.
The larger banks in the Ninth District were beginning to borrow quite
heavily again, he said, indicating that the 2-1/4 per cent discount rate
was not offensive to them. If this tendency to borrow were to develop
much further he would feel inclined to recommend to his board of directors
a further increase in the discount rate promptly. After commenting on
economic conditions in the Ninth District as well as in the United States
generally, Mr. Powell said that he was inclined to favor a "go slow"
attitude for a period of two or three weeks with the thought that con
sideration could be given to what further moves might be necessary when
the next meeting of the Committee was held.
Mr. Leedy recalled that for some time he had taken the position
that the Committee should have applied more pressure than it had exerted.
At this particular juncture, however, he felt the situation was sensitive
and that the Committee should not attempt to increase the pressure it has
been applying recently. Developments over the next two or three weeks
would enable the Committee to appraise the situation much better than was
possible today. At that time it might seem necessary to increase the dis
count rate or the amount of negative free reserves. For the present,
however, Mr. Leedy felt that the Committee should continue just about the
same program it has been applying recently although if, from day to day
it appeared that some little increase in pressure could be made, he would

10/4/55 -10
favor that course. In other words, he would resolve doubts on the side
of additional mild restraint.
Mr. C. S. Young expressed the hope that no increase would be made
in the discount rate for several weeks. There was much uneasiness under
the surface, he felt, and he would hope that negative free reserves might
run around the $300 million level during the immediate future, rather
than closer to the $500 to $600 million level.
Mr. Leach said there had been no fundamental change in the econ
omy since the meeting on September 14. It looked as strong as before but
the Committee could not be certain as to the effect the President's ill
ness and the down turn in the stock market would have on business
planning. Once the Treasury financing was behind, Mr. Leach felt that
Committee policy for the next three weeks might be the same as before
the telephone conference meeting on September 26. This would mean restora
tion of the understanding that doubts in carrying out open market opera
tions be resolved on the side of tightness rather than ease. Estimates
of free reserves indicated a substantial negative position during the
next several weeks, Mr. Leach said, and in addition to use of repurchase
agreements to take care of temporary situations outright purchases of
securities probably would be necessary. While he would not tie ex
clusively to any one or even two indicators in measuring tightness, he
was thinking in terms of a level of around $1 billion of member bank
borrowings and short-term interest rates about where they are. This

10/4/55 -11
presumably would mean negative free reserves around $400 million.
Mr. Leach went on to say that there seemed to be some difference
of opinion as to how the Committee's restrictive policy had affected
banks. He was convinced, he said, that in the Fifth District the larger
banks approved the policy and that they had become more selective and
restrictive in making loans. While loans were increasing, this was to
be expected at this season. Mr. Leach did not think the restrictive
policy had directly affected the smaller banks a great deal except that
most of them now have some depreciation in their security accounts.
While he advocated resumption of the degree of restraint that existed
before the President's illness, he would not wish to intensify pressure
at this time by increasing the discount rate.
Mr. Mills said he gathered that all of the comments were moving
toward the same goal. He referred to the economic review which presented
a picture of an active economy which might be approaching a leveling off
period and which might be unusually exposed to psychological influences.
At the same time, he felt the economy needed the influence of credit
restraint. In applying credit restraint, however, Mr. Mills felt that the
Committee should not be too severe. For example, negative free reserves
should not go much beyond the $300 to $350 million level that had existed
recently. The economy may not yet have felt the full effects of the opera
tions of the commercial banking system against a level of free reserves of
this scope. Mr. Mills said that he would favor experimenting for a period

10/4/55 -12
with the program the Committee had already pursued so that it could be
sure it was not shutting down on the availability of credit in a way
that would be harmful to the economy rather than helpful. Until after
October 11 when the Treasury financing payment date would have passed,
the Committee would not wish to move more aggressively by altering the
pattern now being followed. The next positive step to be taken by the
System, he felt, would probably be an increase in the discount rate to
2-1/2 per cent. For the immediate period, however, and considering the
reserve requirements for the remainder of this year which would call for
additional reserves of a magnitude around $1 billion, he felt that a
combination of repurchase agreements, additional discounting at the Re
serve Banks, and direct purchases of securities for the open market
account was called for.
Mr. Robertson then made a statement substantially as follows:
1. The degree of restrictiveness of monetary policy has been
inadequate during the past six months. We have been too
slow to act in the light of the upsurge of economic forces
with inflationary tendencies. Today it is wholly inade
quate. A given volume of negative free reserves today
lacks the restrictive weight of a much smaller volume a
few weeks ago.
2. In the week before the President's illness our action was
wholly inadequate. At the time of the last meeting of
this Committee on September 14th, the New York Bank's
estimate of the average level of free reserves for the
week ending September 21st was -60 million dollars. Yet
despite that estimate, no action was taken to tighten re
serves. The actual figure for the week turned out to be
-116 million dollars. Some market participants misinter
preted this development as a swing toward ease, particularly
in view of the fact that we had been so prompt and precise

10/4/55 -13-
to keep negative free reserves around a level of -250 mil
lion for several weeks preceding. It would seem probable
that if the projection had shown negative free reserves as
much above the target as -60 million was below, credit
easing action would have been taken by the account promptly.
3. The action of the Committee on September 26th to take the
"strings" off the Manager (i.e., relieve him of the obliga
tion to resolve doubts on the restrictive side) in order to
enable him to move to offset unexpected and indeterminable
public psychological reactions to the President's illness
was a sound and correct action. It did not intend, I feel
sure, to seek a back-up in the absence of unexpected
tightening beyond levels contemplated at the last meeting,
although the activity on September 27th and 28th and 29th
would indicate that perhaps that was the understanding of
the Manager of the Account.
4. The purchases during the first few days of last week can be
justified both on the basis of the sharp decline in stock
prices that occurred a week ago yesterday and the sub
stantial decline in reserve positions. However, I can find
no justification for the repurchase agreements entered into
last Thursday, particularly of the magnitude involved
almost a hundred million dollars. They came a day after the
account itself had predicted that average free reserves
would decline from a level of about -350 million dollars to
-330 million and despite the fact that the degree of tight
ness has been consistently overestimated in these projec
tions from week to week in the past.
5. This behavior of the account's operations over the past
three weeks strikes me as crystal clear evidence that we
must find ways and means of more clearly delineating our
judgments and more specifically fixing targets if our
directives are to be properly implemented.
6. The rebound in the stock market on September 27th and its
behavior since then is evidence that the break of Monday,
September 26th, may have been simply a short-lived jittery
reaction to a calamity, based in large part on sentiment,
and was not indicative of any over-all weakness in the
economy. Certainly this morning's presentation of the
economic outlook evidences the continued upward trend of
important economic indicators.
7. Today many people take it for granted that the Federal Re
serve cannot move, and as a result it is disregarded as a
potent force to stop the upward trend. It is being dis
regarded on the theory that it is now too late to act and
that we are frozen into position--as we are to some extent,

10/4/55 -14-
at least. Only a shock could restore the restraint called
for by the economy in order to prevent damage in the way
of unwarranted expansion, and during the next ten days we
can hardly administer a shock and still maintain an "even
keel" during the government financing period. This is so
even though this particular financing is not one that can
be affected adversely by restrictive monetary policy to
the same degree as ordinarily would apply, because of the
volume of available funds in the market and the character
of the offering.
8. Bank loans are continuously moving up, and despite cries of
tightness, the banks seem able both to meet advance com
mitments and expand loans generally without reserve
difficulties. It is possible that between operations in
the Federal funds market and borrowing from the Federal Re
serve Banks, some banks are continuous borrowers and some
even could be characterized as complacent rather than
"reluctant" borrowers. Certainly there has been small
liquidation recently of government securities in order to
meet needs for reserves on which to base credit expansion.
9. Hence, it seems to me that now (during the last two of the
next three-week period) is the time to be putting on the
brakes a little harder.
a. Therefore, I suggest aiming toward between 450 and
500 million dollars negative free reserves during
that portion of the three-week period, provided
that aiming at such a target will lead to a short
term government rate of near 2-1/4 per cent, a
volume of borrowing between one billion and one
and one-half billion dollars, and a reasonable
curtailment of member bank lending.
b. We should refrain from moving too fast in adding
reserves through either outright purchases or re
purchase agreements--movements should be made in
the light of the results achieved through aiming
at the suggested target.
c. In addition, grave thought should be given to an
increase in discount rates as soon after October
15th as possible. The Treasury financing will be
out of the way by then. A fairly even keel will
have been maintained through the government
financing period. Such an increase will not be
wholly unexpected but will evidence a concern with
the maintenance of stability and can be followed
by a more restrictive open market policy at the
next meeting if conditions then warrant.

10/4/55 -15
Mr. Sproul asked that Mr. Rouse comment on two questions that
Mr. Robertson had raised about the operation of the System account: (a)
whether a decline in negative free reserves during the week ending
September 21 might not have been offset by operations for the System
account so that the average level of negative free reserves might have
been considerably higher; and (b) whether it was appropriate to enter into
repurchase agreements on Thursday, September 29.
Mr. Rouse noted that projections of average negative free reserves
during the week of September 21 differed, the projection prepared at the
Board indicating a substantially larger volume than the one prepared at
the New York Bank. While the projections indicated a reduction in nega
tive free reserves on Thursday and Friday of that week, there was also
an indication that there would be a very high deficiency the following
Monday-Wednesday. The System account management did something about the
situation, Mr. Rouse said, through arranging with the Treasury for a
special call which would bring its balance up and thus reduce the volume
of reserves. It was because of this action that an average free reserve
position of minus $120 million for the week ending September 21 was
attained. Mr. Rouse said that he also had in mind that if an attempt had
been made to sell securities from the account to reduce the volume of free
reserves on the Thursday and Friday in question, it would have become
necessary to reverse that operation on the following Monday because of the
expected very tight situation. Such in-and-out operations, he had

10/4/55 -16
understood, were generally not desired by the Committee. Mr. Rouse also
stated that during the week in question when free reserves averaged
negative $120 million, there was no dimunition in the feeling of tightness
that existed in the market.
Mr. Rouse then referred to the repurchase agreements executed on
September 29. He was not at the New York Bank that day but there was a
question whether the System account should facilitate the dealers' opera
tions by picking up some of their bills. Dealer positions were large as
a result of their allotments of new bills on that day and the selling by
corporations and by banks preparing for their September 30 statements.
Also, since the quarterly statement date fell on a Friday, bank borrowing
was large on Thursday to average out against repayment the following day.
As a result of these conditions, there seemed to be a degree of tightness
developing which resulted in the decision to make the repurchase agree
ments. As it turned out, the judgment appeared to have been right, Mr.
Rouse said, in that average negative free reserves that day turned out to
be minus $335 million which was about $36 million higher than on the pre
ceding day. Approximately that volume of negative free reserves has con
tinued up to the present time.
Mr. Robertson said that he thought Mr. Rouse was overestimating
the criticism to be put on in-and-out transactions; he (Mr. Robertson) did
not understand the Committee to be clearly opposed to "in-and-out" trans
actions for the System account if they were not confusing to the market.

10/4/55 -17
Nothing in his statement was designed as criticism of the management of
the account, he said, but rather of the Committee for failing to be more
specific in its directives.
Mr. Shepardson said that there still seemed to be a strong move
ment upward in the economy with considerable indication of further wage
and price pressures. The situation in agriculture did not give promise
of immediate improvement, he said, and with other segments of the economy
moving in the direction in which they appeared to be moving, a further
disparity was developing between agriculture and the rest of the economy.
He felt the System was fully justified in continuing a strong and in
creasing pressure on the credit structure. During the past week an
unusual situation was presented because of the element of uncertainty and
the Committee should continue to watch this closely. On the other hand,
Mr. Shepardson felt that the first shock of the President's illness was
pretty well behind us and that the Committee should continue to exert the
pressure contemplated prior to the meeting on September 26. He would
favor going back to a continuing degree of tightness with some increase in
negative free reserves and with the understanding that, in carrying out
operations for the System account, doubts should be resolved on the side
of tightness. Mr. Shepardson also expressed the view that for a consid
erable period of time operations had been carried on with doubts having
been resolved on the side of ease. While he did not wish to suggest a
precise limit, he felt that negative free reserves should increase somewhat.

10/4/55 -18
He would not suggest an increase in the discount rate at this time. The
System should be looking toward the probability that such an increase
would be advisable when the Treasury's current financing was completed,
but he felt it unwise to make any commitment on this point at present.
Mr. Shepardson went on to say that he gathered from discussions
of this subject that reluctance to engage in "in-and-out" operations in
the past had arisen partly because of the tendency of some elements in
the market to look at changes in the open market account rather than at
the resulting free reserve situation. He suggested that if the amount of
free reserves was a significant index of the degree of tightness, it might
be desirable to try to get the financial community generally to look at
the level of free reserves as such an index and thus to interpret buying
and selling for the System account in those terms. This, he felt, would
give the System more freedom in using the open market instrument.
Mr. Sproul said that he personally did not think the Committee
should take negative free reserves as the index of whether it should be
tightening or easing the market, and he did not think the market should
be brought around to believing that the Committee assumed that negative
free reserves represented the index or that the Committee was relying
solely on that index. In the first place, a good deal depended on the
distribution of reserves, whether they were concentrated in reserve cities
or central reserve cities or spread out over the country; also, on whether
the existing volume of negative free reserves was having effects on the

10/4/55 -19
market which were in accordance with or contrary to the policy the Com
mittee was trying to pursue. The condition of the money market is not
always a direct resultant of any fixed level of free reserves, Mr. Sproul
said, and different levels of reserves could show up in different move
ments of interest rates, in the condition of the dealers in the market,
or in the operations and attitudes of member banks including their
willingness to borrow from the Federal Reserve System. Mr. Sproul did
not feel that it would be fruitful to use negative free reserves as a
single indicator of the direction either of System credit policy or of
conditions in the money market.
Mr. Fulton thought that the uncertainty the country was supposed
to be in was more a matter of conversation than actuality. Businessmen
in the Cleveland District indicate that they have not changed plans for
expansion one iota, he said, and the man in the street is satisfied with
his welfare under the present administration and feels that if a change
in administration comes along there might be some inflation which would
result in his receiving more dollars. With this background, Mr. Fulton
did not feel that actions of individuals in making commitments had been
affected by the incident of the President's illness. One problem, he said,
was the difficulty industry was experiencing in obtaining fairly skilled
workers to operate the machines already available and this was an element
causing production to seem to "top-off." There were still free reserves
in the Cleveland District as a whole. Mr. Fulton felt that the System

10/4/55 -20
should be on the tighter side, that it should resolve doubts in its opera
tions on the side of tightness, and that the discount rate should not be
moved until the Committee could see more clearly whether the economy would
level off in the next couple of weeks. Also, he felt the discount rate
should not be advanced again until market rates had been brought up con
sonant with it.
Mr. Bryan said that he was less certain as to which way the
economy was going than was indicated by some of the other comments. Bank
loans were still going up but marginal borrowers in the Atlanta District
were having difficulty in finding credit. He felt the System's restric
tive policy had been having an effect during the last 60 days and there
was unmistakable evidence that the mortgage market in the Sixth District
had tightened rapidly during the past 30 days. Mr. Bryan was inclined to
attach more significance to the behavior of the equity market than others
had indicated. The situation in the equity market, he thought, was not
fundamentally produced by the President's illness but by a level of prices,
particularly for high quality equities, which was high and had been
predicated on a continuing advance in the economy and in profits. Such a
level of equity prices could not be justified even on the assumption that
the economy would continue stable. Mr. Bryan felt that monetary policy may
have had a basic cause and effect relationship to developments in the equity
market and, in turn, there might be effects from the stock market decline
(and the possibility of further rapid declines) which might well induce a

10/4/55 -21
more cautious approach to expenditures and capital commitments. Neverthe
less, information showed a booming economy and one that could increase
price levels sharply with the result that serious capital distortions in
the economy might develop--something that the System would not desire.
Mr. Bryan's inclination was to go along with the general theory that the
System should not relax pressure and he noted the suggestion for using
a combination of methods to pursue an appropriate degree of tightness:
some reserves to be supplied through open market operations but not the
entire seasonal requirement; some reserves to be supplied through re
purchase agreements, and part of the seasonal requirement to be met dur
ing the fall months at the discount window. He would agree with this
general approach although he thought that the System might find there
would be a sufficient additional tightening if member banks were brought
further into debt at the Federal Reserve Banks. Such a development would
be desirable as a means of offering an opportunity to talk directly with
the member banks on a lender-borrower basis. Mr. Bryan also said that he
was inclined to agree with Mr. Balderston regarding the level of the
short-term rate. Mr. Balderston had suggested a level of 2.30 to 2.40,
which he (Mr. Bryan) would agree with as an experimental approach to
further restraint. As to negative free reserves, Mr. Bryan felt that the
Committee would do better if it would watch the short-term rate rather
than the volume of negative free reserves. He also felt that Governor
Robertson was correct in thinking that it would be necessary for the

10/4/55 -22
Committee to state more precisely than it has in the past just what it
wishes to have the Manager of the System Account do to carry out the
Committee's policy.
Mr. Williams said that his judgment was that the Committee should
exercise restraint but he would not do it in the clear cut and forceful
manner that Mr. Robertson had indicated. Such a program would be too
heavy-handed during the next two to four weeks. Mr. Williams felt that
the reaction stemming from the President's illness was largely emotional
but it could become more important and could extend throughout not only
the domestic economy but into the international picture. His view was
that in this country there was already a tendency to discount the effects
of this emotional reaction. Banks in the Philadelphia District were be
coming more selective in credit extensions and on the whole he felt that
the full effects of the adjustments that would result from this emotional
reaction were yet to be seen.
Mr. Johns said that his views were similar to those expressed by
Mr. Szymczak. This did not mean that he would not sooner or later agree
with the views expressed by Mr. Balderston along the lines of greater re
straint, but he was not yet ready to agree with that position. He also
referred to the comments in the economic review which he interpreted as
indicating that slackening in the rate of economic expansion might have
resulted from an approach to capacity rather than from actions taken with
respect to monetary and credit policy. Mr. Johns expressed doubts about

10/4/55 -23
the desirability of supplying at the discount window too large a propor
tion of the reserves which would be needed during the remainder of this
year. In the St. Louis District banks had not made preparation for their
fall needs. Some of them were warehousing mortgages and were obtaining
funds through the Federal funds market to help in carrying these credits.
Also, some banks were extending credit to finance companies heavily. If
the System were niggardly about supplying reserves through the open
market, banks would be forced into the discount window. These banks would
more and more find it impossible to get funds they needed in the Federal
funds market and would tend to become continuous borrowers at the discount
window. If this developed and if the discount function were to be admin
istered in accordance with what seemed to have been recent decisions, it
would mean that the Reserve Banks later this year would be applying much
more pressure than the System intended through the discount window. Mr.
Johns' preference, therefore, was to rely a little more on open market
operations, and a little less on the discount window than some of the
others had indicated.
Mr. Sproul then made a statement substantially as follows:
1. The President's illness suggests an analogy with our pres
ent economic situation. There has been an unforeseen event,
the ultimate consequences of which cannot be foretold. The
immediate repercussions were sharp in a sensitive nerve
center, but so far we cannot know whether this was wholly
an emotional and psychological reaction or whether it also
has a deeper significance. We can be pretty sure, however,
that the event will leave some scars, and we are now con
cerned with the question of how an otherwise vigorous

10/4/55 -24-
economic organism will function despite the scar tissue.
2. What we can observe at the moment is an economy which seems
to be levelling off at a high level of production, but in
which increasing upward pressure on prices and the demand
for credit may be accumulating. The index of industrial
production, which had increased about five points on the
average in each of the previous three quarters, rose only
two points in the past quarter and some of the more sensi
tive indicators of economic activity have turned down. On
the other side of the shield, there are still strong foreign
and domestic demands for raw materials and for our products
and services, much of the pressure of increased costs on
prices is probably still to be felt, personal savings are at
a lower rate than in recent years, and demands on the
capital and mortgage markets have been exceeding the
accumulation of savings, bringing in increased participation
by commercial banks.
3. The situation is clearly not one that calls for the use of
the oxygen tent of easy money, It does suggest to me, how
ever, that we should not now step up the pressure of credit
restraint as we might previously have contemplated. And I
am fortified in this view by the fact that the strongly
competitive character of the business situation, with its
reflection in buyer's markets at retail for many consumer
goods and in the failure of undue inventory accumulation to
appear, indicates that we have not pressed to the limits of
productive capacity.
4. I continue to believe, therefore, that our best policy for
the immediate future is the continuance of the measure of
credit restraint which we have been trying to maintain for
the past two months. Since the effectiveness of credit re
straint is greatly influenced by opinions about the future,
and since opinions about the future may be undergoing some
revision, I think such a policy of maintained but not
affirmatively intensified pressure will be most conducive
to our objective of contributing to the highest possible
levels of economic activity without inflation, in this
period. And for the next three weeks, of course, such a
prescription is further suggested by the fact that it is a
period which brackets a payment date on a Treasury financ
ing, which will call for additional reserve funds beyond
the seasonal needs of business and agriculture.
5. In so far as figures can be our guide, such a policy might
mean member bank borrowings of around $1 billion, negative

10/4/55 -25
free reserves around $300 million plus or minus, and money
market rates grouped reasonably closely around our present
discount rate, with the Treasury bill rate perhaps above
the discount rate at times. And we shall have to keep a
sharp watch also on the effect of our policy in the capital
markets, which are going to have heavy demands made upon
them during the coming quarter and whose continued active
functioning is necessary to keep our economy going at high
levels.
6. On the basis of the present forecasts of reserve positions,
a policy of this sort will mean some increase in member
bank borrowing, substantial outright purchases for System
Open Market Account, as well as timely use of repurchase
agreements during coming weeks. We shall have to be guided
not only by figures but by feel; by whether or not the
seasonal demand for credit seems to be adding significantly
to tightness in the money market, and by whether signs
appear of gray markets, inventory hoarding, overtime work
and other evidences of increased inflationary pressures.
In summing up his view, Mr. Sproul said that he would share the
views expressed that the Committee should adopt the same general instruc
tion with respect to open market operations that it adopted at the meet
ing on September 14, 1955. From the comments made at this meeting it
seemed that while there were perhaps differences of opinion and various
shades of opinion, the general view expressed by the majority was that
the Committee desired at this time to maintain the degree of credit re
straint that it had been trying to maintain on the basis of the instruc
tion given on September 14 and that this meant it wished to reestablish
the instruction given at that meeting that, in carrying out open market
operations, doubts should be resolved on the side of tightness rather than
of ease. There was agreement with Mr. Sproul's statement of the majority

10/4/55 -26
views expressed at this meeting.
Mr. Sproul then referred to the suggestion made by Mr. Rouse at
the meeting on September 14 that the Committee increase the authorization
for purchases of bankers acceptances from $25 million to $50 million, and
to the memorandum sent to the members of the Committee by Mr. Rouse under
date of September 26 commenting on this recommendation.
Mr. Rouse stated that, as indicated in his memorandum, he felt it
would be desirable to increase the limitation on purchases of bankers
acceptances but that this suggestion did not contemplate any change in
the original concept of the Committee in authorizing such purchases. In
sum, he felt that it would be desirable to spread some of the System's
outright purchases into the acceptance market as a means of further indi
cating that some real use is intended for this means of providing reserves
directly through this channel of business financing.
Mr. Mills stated that he had raised a question regarding Mr.
Rouse's recommendation at the meeting on September 14 and that while he
did not think it was a matter of vital importance one way or the other,
he still questioned the desirability of authorizing an increase in the
limitation. He then made a statement substantially as follows:
The Federal Reserve System's interest in bankers' accept
ances is to foster the use of a form of financing that will
strengthen and enlarge the United States as an international
money market. It is doubtful that an increase from $25 million
to $50 million in the amount of bankers' acceptances that can
be held in the System Open Market Account will go far to serve
that purpose.

10/4/55 -27-
Financing accessibility at competitive international inter
est rates is the first requisite to a greater use of bankers'
acceptances in the United States. New York, on a rate basis, is
now competitive with London and Continental money markets. As
interest rate is not presently a barrier, it is fair to look
upon the lack of widespread currency convertibility as a
principal hindrance to the development of bankers' acceptance
financing on an international scale in the United States. A
greater willingness on the part of our domestic commercial banks
to encourage bankers' acceptance financing at a cost at least
comparable to the cost of the prime interest rate is also neces
sary to the expanded use of this financing vehicle.
A second requisite to the wider use of bankers' acceptances
is the development of a broader investment market for these
instruments. The Federal Reserve System's present policy of
purchasing bankers' acceptances in modest amounts can be helpful
in providing dealers a stopgap market for their offerings pend
ing final distribution to permanent investors. Repurchase
agreements are especially useful in this regard. Direct pur
chases, however, are open to question, particularly if their
effect is to push down the market rate on bankers' acceptances
to an artificially low level, in which event the investment
attractiveness of this instrument is diminished. Obviously, to
raise the System Open Market Account's purchase ceiling to $50
million would aggravate this difficulty, and the more so in that
dealers would have a less salable security to offer and, there
fore, less incentive to press its sale. In other words, ex
cessive System support to the bankers' acceptance market can,
in part, defeat the very purpose for which it is intended.
Instead of raising the System Open Market Account's ceiling
for purchasing bankers' acceptances, a more appropriate policy
would be to retain the present ceiling and in so doing operate
more flexibly as to the total amount held. Implementation of
such a policy would contemplate a wider use of repurchase agree
ments to tide dealers over the short periods necessary to
distribute their holdings, and a lesser use of direct purchases.
Under this program direct purchases would not be made to main
tain a relatively constant holding of bankers' acceptances, but
the total holding would fluctuate in amount with market
conditions and the ease or difficulty with which these instru
ments found investor homes. By these means the System would
continue to exhibit its solicitude for bankers' acceptance
financing but without an interest depressive influence or giv
ing the appearance of coddling the market. By the same token,

10/4/55 -28-
the interest return on bankers' acceptances would better find its
level in the structure of interest yields on high quality in
vestments which would tend to broaden their market and thereby
add zest to dealer incentives for their handling. Under present
conditions a broad and free market for bankers' acceptances
offers the most constructive target at which System policy in
this field of finance can aim.
Mr. Robertson then made a statement as follows:
I will not take up the time of the Committee to repeat my
views on this matter, which I expressed in dissenting from the
Committee's March 1955 decision to purchase bank acceptances up
to $25 million.
In 1954 I resisted this proposal vigorously because I was
concerned about its feasibility and the wisdom of its purpose
to "free demand generally from administered rate constriction
. ." Later, however, this objective apparently was dropped,
and when the Committee decided to enter the bank acceptance
market in March 1955 the Chairman expressed the view of the
majority that the Federal Reserve System should avoid any
"finagling" in the market but should participate in a very
modest way in order to show the interest of the central banking
organization. It seemed to me that this limited objective made
the proposal relatively innocuous, although I felt that the
acceptance market would receive more convincing assurance of
Federal Reserve interest if we resumed the "backstopping" pro
cedure that worked quite well in the 1920's.
In any event, I am unable to see any valid reason for now
raising the permissible maximum from $25 million to $50 million.
As the Chairman said, it was intended that our participation in
the bank acceptance market should be a very modest one. Our
present modest holdings clearly display our interest in the
development of American bank acceptances. To the extent that
the Federal Reserve increases its holdings, the participation
of others is necessarily limited, and the acceptance market is
thereby deprived of the participation of a certain number of
financial and industrial organizations that otherwise would be
holding the additional acceptances taken by us. The more we
take, the smaller is the number of participants in the market
and the more limited are its breadth, depth, and resiliency.
To sum up, I believe we could better strengthen the
acceptance market by standing ready to purchase at a rate
slightly above the current market, rather than by making modest
purchases at the market rate. However, if the Committee wishes

10/4/55 -29
to continue the present practice, an increase in our holdings
offers negligible benefits and would tend to narrow rather than
broaden the self-sufficient market we wish to see developed.
During the discussion that followed, Mr. Szymczak stated that he
favored increasing the authorization to $50 million as recommended by
Mr. Rouse but that he thought that the increase should be used gradually
and that the System account should also make repurchase agreements cover
ing bankers' acceptances. The reason for favoring this procedure was that
he felt this would provide the System with an additional instrument to be
used in furnishing reserves to the market.
Mr. Earhart then moved that the present
authorization for bankers' acceptances be
continued with retention of the limitation
of $25 million, and Mr. Earhart's motion was
seconded by Mr. Mills.
Mr. Earhart's motion was put by the
Chair and carried, Messrs. Balderston,
Earhart, Fulton, Leach, Mills, and Shepard
son voting "aye" and Messrs. Sproul, Irons,
and Szymczak voting "no". On this action,
Mr. Robertson did not vote, stating that he
would not vote to increase the authorization
nor would he vote to continue the existing
authorization for the reasons indicated in
the statement he had made at this meeting.
In response to a question from Mr. Sproul, Mr. Rouse stated that
he had no suggestions to make with respect to a change in the authority
for repurchase agreements with nonbank dealers in Government securities.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded and by unanimous vote, the Com
mittee approved a renewal of the authoriza
tion for repurchase agreements as follows:

10/4/55 -30-
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is hereby authorized
to enter into repurchase agreements with nonbank dealers in
United States Government securities subject to the following
conditions:
1. Such agreements
(a) In no event shall be at a rate below whichever
is the lower of (1) the discount rate of the
Federal Reserve Bank on eligible commercial
paper, or (2) the average issuing rate on
the most recent issue of three-month Treasury
bills;
(b) Shall be for periods of not to exceed 15
calendar days;
(c) Shall cover only Government securities matur
ing within 15 months; and
(d) Shall be used as a means of providing the
money market with sufficient Federal Reserve
funds to avoid undue strain on a day-to-day
basis.
2. Reports of such transactions shall be included in
the weekly report of open market operations which is
sent to the members of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee.
3. In the event Government securities covered by any
such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer
pursuant to the agreement or a renewal thereof, the
securities thus acquired by the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York shall be sold in the market or trans
ferred to the System open market account.
Mr. Rouse stated in response to a question from Mr. Sproul that he
had no changes to suggest in the general directive to be issued to the Fed
eral Reserve Bank of New York.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Committee voted unanimously

10/4/55 -31-
to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York until otherwise directed by
the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (includ
ing replacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities
to run off without replacement) for the System open market
account in the open market or, in the case of maturing securi
ties, by direct exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary
in the light of current and prospective economic conditions and
the general credit situation of the country, with a view (a) to
relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs of com
merce and business, (b) to restraining inflationary develop
ments in the interest of sustainable economic growth, and (c)
to the practical administration of the account; provided that
the aggregate amount of securities held in the System account
(including commitments for the purchase or sale of securities
for the account) at the close of this date, other than special
short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to
time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not
be increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one
or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time
to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; pro
vided that the total amount of such certificates held at any
one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the
aggregate $500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System
account for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury securi
ties maturing within one year as may be necessary from time to
time for the accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the
total amount of such securities so sold shall not exceed in
the aggregate $500 million face amount, and such sales shall
be made as nearly as may be practicable at the prices currently
quoted in the open market.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee should be
scheduled for Tuesday, October 25, 1955. In this connection, Mr. Earhart
raised the question whether the hour for the meeting should be at 10:45

10/4/55 -32
a.m. or 10 o'clock, and after brief discussion it was agreed that the
meeting to be held on October 25 should be scheduled for 10 a.m.
Mr. Sproul then referred to the discussion at the meeting on
September 14 regarding a visit which Senator Douglas proposed to make to
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, probably between October 20 and
November 1, 1955, accompanied by a member of his staff, for the purpose of
observing the handling of open market operations.
Mr. Szymczak reviewed a conversation he had had with Senator
Douglas pursuant to the understanding at the meeting on September 14 dur
ing which he stated that Senator Douglas proposed that Mr. Asher
Achinstein, a member of the regular staff of the Library of Congress,
accompany him on the proposed visit to assist in his discussions of the
matters that he observed.
There followed a discussion of the proposed visit at the conclu
sion of which it was agreed that Mr. Sproul, in his capacity as Vice
Chairman of the Committee, would communicate with Senator Douglas, stating
that he understood the Senator wished to visit the New York Bank and to
bring Mr. Achinstein with him and indicating that he (Mr. Sproul) would be
glad to arrange for such a visit on a mutually convenient date. It was
understood that while the New York Bank would be glad to assist the
Senator and Mr. Achinstein in observing the operations of the securities
desk, information concerning the policy of the Open Market Committee or
transactions for the Open Market Committee would continue to be made

10/4/55 -33
available only through the channels which have been established previously
for formal transmission of information to Committees of Congress.
Mr. Balderston stated that in a letter dated September 22, 1955,
addressed to him as Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors, Congressman
Wright Patman expressed the point of view that the Open Market Committee's
operations should be removed from New York and located in Washington. The
Board's reply of September 29, signed by Vice Chairman Balderston, indi
cated that Mr. Patman' s point of view would be presented to the membership
of the Open Market Committee. By this time, he said, each member of the
Committee had doubtless received a copy of Congressman Patman's letter.
Mr. Balderston said that he wished to record the fact that the request of
Congressman Patman had also been presented to the Committee in formal
session. Although he did not share Congressman Patman's view, because of
the practical difficulties of conducting the desk at a distance from the
New York financial center, he expressed the belief that Congressman
Patman's suggestion should have careful consideration.
Mr. Balderston then moved that
Congressman Patman's proposal be
referred to the subcommittee that has
been studying the housekeeping arrange
ments for the Open Market Account,
pursuant to the action taken by the
Committee at its meeting on March 2,
1955.
This motion was put by the Chair
and carried unanimously.
In response to a question from Mr. Robertson, Mr. Balderston stated

10/4/55 -34
that the intent of his motion was to refer Congressman Patman's letter to
the subcommittee for its consideration with the understanding that in the
normal course the subcommittee would report back to the full Committee on
the matters which it had been requested to consider.
Mr. Robertson recalled that at the meeting of the Committee held
on September 14 it was noted that a subcommittee had not been appointed
for the purpose of reconsidering defense planning for the Federal Open
Market Committee. (This subject had been discussed at the meeting on
July 12, 1955, with the result that Chairman Martin was then authorized
to appoint a subcommittee for the purpose of making such a review.) Mr.
Robertson went on to say that at the meeting on September 14, Mr. Sproul
had suggested that he (Mr. Robertson) might do some advance thinking on
the problem in order to facilitate the work of the Committee. In accord
ance with this suggestion, he said, he had prepared a memorandum regarding
defense planning for the Federal Open Market Committee, and he suggested
that copies be distributed to all members of the Committee and to other
Reserve Bank Presidents following this meeting with the thought that any
comments which the Committee members or other Presidents might wish to
make be transmitted to the Chairman of the Committee prior to the meeting
to be held on October 25. It was his further hope that it would be pos
sible to consider the subject matter at the meeting on October 25, in
which event it might not be necessary to appoint a subcommittee for
further work on this matter.

10/4/55 -35
This suggestion was approved unani
mously with the understanding that the
Secretary would distribute copies of
Mr. Robertson's memorandum following this
meeting.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.