A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, May 10, 1955, at 10:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Earhart
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Irons
Mr. Leach
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Daane, Hostetler, Roelse, and
R. A. Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Assistant Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Gov
ernors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Roosa, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Gaines, Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Erickson, Johns, and Powell, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Mr. Williams, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia

5/10/55 -2
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on March 2, 1955, were ap
proved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the actions of the
executive committee of the Federal Open
Market Committee, as set forth in the
minutes of the meetings of the executive
committee held on March 2, March 15,
March 29, April 12, and April 26, 1955,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Before this meeting there had been sent to the members of the Com
mittee a report of open market operations prepared at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York covering the period March 2, 1955 to May 4, 1955, inclu
sive, and at this meeting there was distributed a supplementary report
covering commitments executed May 5-9, 1955, inclusive. Copies of these
reports have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote the open market
transactions during the period March 2 to
May 9, 1955, inclusive, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
At this point members of the Board's staff entered the room for
the purpose of assisting in a review of the economic and credit situation,
presented with chart slides. A copy of the script of this review sub
sequently was mailed to all members of the Committee.
In opening the review, Mr. Young stated that business recovery is
an accomplished fact; activity is at new high levels. In the current
quarter gross national product is estimated at an annual rate of $375

5/10/55 -3
billion, nearly $20 billion above the low of last year and $5 billion
above the mid-1953 peak. Abroad, strong expansion in activity generally
continues. Notwithstanding rapid expansion in industrial production,
price averages have remained steady. Some industries are operating at or
close to capacity, and supply shortages have appeared in some industrial
materials and prices of metals have advanced both in domestic and world
markets. Manpower and industrial resources in this country are generally
ample for growth. Unemployment, although lower than a few months ago,
continues at a high level. Farm markets continue under pressure from large
supplies and excess capacity. Reflecting advances in consumer buying and
in business orders and output, demand for credit has strengthened and money
rates have risen. Business, financial, and consumer confidence is extra
ordinarily high--possibly too high for sound growth. At this stage, the
task of monetary and credit policy is to foster stable growth in line with
expanding manpower and industrial resources, at the same time restraining
financial over-commitments and dampening speculative excesses.
In commenting on credit and monetary policy, Mr. Thomas said that
the problems are first, how much restraint to impose on the developing
credit expansion; and second, what instruments of policy should receive
emphasis. He noted that the System's policy instruments of regulation are
largely concerned with quantities and with interest rates, but matters of
credit quality may also need to be considered. The System's policy prob
lems are complicated by heavy borrowing requirements of the Treasury. Usual
seasonal expansion in credit and money for the remainder of 1955 would

5/10/55 -4
require over $1-1/4 billion of additional bank reserves, and still more
reserves would be needed to foster growth. As in 1952, the System might
meet the problem of strong pressure for bank credit and monetary expan
sion by holding discount rates stable but requiring that a substantial por
tion of member bank reserve needs be met by increases in borrowing from
and repurchase contracts with the Federal Reserve Banks. An alternative
policy would be to keep member bank borrowing at a relatively low but
still restrictive level, to supply increased reserve demands through open
market purchases, and to exercise restraint through more active use of the
discount rate.
Chairman Martin stated that the economic and credit review pre
sented by the members of the staff provided an excellent background for
the Committee's discussion of its policy and operations. He noted that
he had been unable to attend the meeting of the executive committee held
on April 26, and he called upon Mr. Sproul for a statement with respect
to the discussion at that meeting which had resulted in the calling of a
meeting of the full Committee for today, and for a statement of his (Mr.
Sproul's) views on the current situation.
Mr. Sproul said that the executive committee meeting on April 26
included a discussion of the directive issued by the full Committee, par
ticularly of clause (b) instructing the executive committee to arrange for
transactions with a view, among other things, "to fostering growth and
stability in the economy by maintaining conditions in the money market
that would encourage recovery and avoid the development of unsustainable

5/10/55 -5
expansion . . . ." It seemed clear at that time, Mr. Sproul said, as it
had in the economic presentation this morning, that recovery had been
completed. The Committee was no longer in the stage where it should be
directing policy toward encouraging recovery; its problem now was to con
duct open market operations and to administer credit policy so as to
foster growth and stability in the economy by maintaining conditions in
the money market which would avoid the development of unsustainable expan
sion. That was a shift in emphasis rather than in direction, but the execu
tive committee had felt, Mr. Sproul said, that a meeting of the full Com
mittee was needed to consider the situation for the immediate future and
perhaps for the more distant future, and to consider the possible adoption
of different wording for the instruction from the full Committee to the
executive committee for carrying out open market operations.
Mr. Sproul then made a statement concerning the current situation
substantially as follows:
1. The facts we have to face, or the assumptions we have to make,
as I see them, and excluding war and major strikes, are about
as follows:
(a) The economic situation, which improved quite rapidly
during the winter and early spring, as recovery from
the 1953-54 recession was completed, continues to
show strength but may go forward less rapidly during
the next three or four months. Demands for credit,
in the aggregate, given such orderly economic expan
sion, would be largely related to seasonal require
ments and secular growth, with the usual speculative
fringes. There is, of course, the alternate possibil
ity that inflationary pressures may build up in a
situation such as the present, but as yet there is no

5/10/55
convincing evidence of a spiralling upward
movement of a speculative character. The
ability of the economy to produce a larger
volume of goods and services--and leisure-
representing less than full current utiliza
tion of all available men and machines is
some insurance against such a spiral.
(b) There are still the same question marks about
the third quarter of the year (although they
are smaller than they were), related primarily
to shifting seasonal patterns--or possible
temporary overproduction--whichever you want
to call it, in automobiles, steel, and hous
ing. Some decline in these industries might
be healthy, removing froth in the economy, if
the decline is offset by strength in other
areas as now seems likely.
(c) The particular areas in which credit expansion
has caused and may cause some concern, are
consumer credit, mortgage credit, and stock mar
ket credit. And we shall have to be on the
watch, now, for diversion of too much credit
into the area of inventory accumulation.
(d) Except for this latter use of credit, which
does not yet seem to have done more than keep
pace with expanding business, however, these are
areas which ordinarily are difficult to reach by
general credit restraint, unless you are willing
to carry that restraint quite far, and then often
there is a considerable lag between cause and ef
fect. The risk of such vigorous restraint, in
the absence of more general misuse of credit by
the economy and of clear evidence of substantial
misuse in these areas, is semi-paralysis of
capital markets at a time when we are counting
on active capital expenditures by private in
dustry and state and local governments to help
maintain economic growth--to help offset possible
declines in those sectors of the economy which
have been the driving force in the upturn of the
past few months.
(e) Another complication in formulating the general
outlines of credit policy at this time is the
need for deficit financing by the Treasury. The

5/10/55
Treasury will be coming to the market, possibly
in July and October, for approximately $9 billion
of new money, in addition to substantial refund
ings to be managed as of August 15 and December 15.
(f) This unfortunate Treasury cash borrowing at a time
of high level economic activity and high level in
come, so far as can be seen with any certainty now,
will probably cause a substantial net increase in
bank credit and may be the principal inflationary
influence on the credit side during the last half
of the year. In other words, if the Treasury were
not going to have to come to the banking system for
funds, we might well have nothing more, in the ag
gregate, than the credit demands of seasonal and
secular growth in the private economy.
(g) This poses a difficult but not unfamiliar problem.
Since the Treasury is a necessitous borrower and
cannot reduce its demands, credit restraint to off
set the possibly inflationary effects of Treasury
borrowing must fall most heavily on the private
economy where such restraint may or may not be needed.
(h) Finally, we have the possible consequences of market
lags and market anticipations. So far as lags are
concerned, we know that a market and an economy which
may have seemed to pass by the amber lights we have
flashed so far, may actually be in process of heeding
our signals after a time interval. So far as antici
pations are concerned, we know that a market and an
economy, seeing the cumulation of private and Treas
ury demands for credit during the second half of the
year, and projecting our past policy into the future,
may see red before we intend to flash red.
2. These facts and assumptions suggest to me that we should hold
steady for the next month or six weeks. This does not mean re
versing policy; it does not mean relaxing pressure; it means
preventing further intensification of pressure for the present.
We have had some success in a slow steady application of the
brakes through open market operations followed by a change in the
discount rate. An accentuation of pressure at this time, how
ever, may cause the brakes to begin to grab.
3. Holding steady would mean free reserves ranging around zero and
interest rates in line with the present discount rate. In the
face of the outlook for reserve funds this would mean that we
would have to become buyers of short-term Treasury securities,

5/10/55
on balance, after the end of the month. And unless there
is a change in this situation and in our policy, that would
be pretty much the outlook over the remainder of the year.
The situation which, under an easy money policy, we took
care of by large injections of reserve funds by way of re
ductions in reserve requirements in 1953 and 1954, will have
to be met, to the extent that we believe it necessary to
meet the pressure of demand for bank credit, by modest and
gradual open market operations in the changed circumstances
of 1955. We can then get more tough if the situation seems
to require it.
4. Such a policy would not rule out some further increase in
market rates of interest later on if and as demands for
credit and capital continue to press on supply. And it would
not rule out later consideration of another increase in the
discount rate, even though we may then be net buyers of Treas
ury securities. But it would rule out, for the present, posi
tive steps to increase credit restraint, or permitting it to
increase by inaction. It would require positive steps to pre
vent the pressure of demands, and of anticipation of future
demands, from making policy more restrictive than the present
economic situation requires.
Mr. Vardaman said that he noted Mr. Sproul's reference to three
areas of credit which might cause concern--real estate credit, consumer
credit, and stock market credit--and he inquired whether Mr. Sproul implied
that these areas of credit could not be influenced through general credit
controls.
Mr. Sproul responded that these areas of credit could be reached
by general controls but that the use of general controls to reach them
might have to be more restrictive, and might have more effect on the gen
eral economy, than might be required in the absence of more general misuse
of credit in the whole economy. Mr. Sproul went on to say, in response to
a further question from Mr. Vardaman, that his comments did not indicate
that the System should be considering the use of selective credit controls
at this time, that the Federal Reserve had only one selective credit control--

5/10/55 -9
margin requirements--at present, and that while he personally felt that
it might be useful to have other selective credit controls, there was no
need to consider their use at this stage since the System had no author
ity for making them effective.
Chairman Martin stated that Mr. Sproul had given an excellent pre
sentation of the problem that was pointed up by the economic review and
the charts presented by the staff this morning. He suggested that the
discussion be divided into two parts, the first to be consideration of
Mr. Sproul's suggestion regarding a change in the wording of the direc
tive from the full Committee to the executive committee so as to eliminate
the instruction to encourage recovery, and the second to be consideration
of the policy to be followed with respect to open market operations be
tween now and the next meeting of the Committee.
Mr. Fulton referred to the wording of the directive and inquired
whether the word "stability" was compatible with "fostering growth" in
the economy; that is, whether "growth" was consistent with the objective
of maintaining a stable level of economic activity.
Mr. Sproul responded that he felt "stable growth" was the kind of
growth the Committee was trying to maintain, that it was not seeking a
"static" economy. He could see nothing inconsistent between "stability"
and "growth", if that meaning were given to the directive.
Chairman Martin suggested that "orderly growth" would mean a stable
economy, and he added the comment that it was partly a matter of the meaning

5/10/55 -10
that the Committee wished to read into whatever words it used in writing
its instructions.
Mr. Robertson stated that, in his opinion, we were not now in the
stage where the Committee ought to be fostering growth. Growth was in
herent in the whole situation, he said, and the Committee would be better
off if it were to take out of its directive words indicating that opera
tions should foster growth and were to leave only the direction that opera
tions should foster stability. He agreed with Mr. Sproul's suggestion that
words indicating that the Comittee now wished to "encourage recovery"
should be deleted from the directive, since this was no time for the Com
mittee to be encouraging recovery. He also suggested that some other words
in the present directive were unnecessary. Mr. Robertson then read a sug
gested revision of the first paragraph of the full Committee's directive
to the executive committee which would instruct the executive committee
to arrange for such transactions for the System account "as may be neces
sary or appropriate in the light of current and prospective economic con
ditions with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds to the needs of
commerce and business, (b) to fostering stability in the economy by main
taining conditions in the money market which would avoid unsustainable ex
pansion, (c) to correcting a disorderly situation in the Government securi
ties market, and (d) to the practical administration of the account . . .
Chairman Martin invited other suggestions for change in the direc
tive and Mr. Leach suggested consideration be given to amending clause (b)
of the first paragraph of the Committee's directive to provide that the

5/10/55 -11
executive committee should arrange for such transactions for the System
account "as may be necessary in the light of current and prospective
economic conditions and the general credit situation of the country, with
a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs of
commerce and business, (b) to fostering growth and stability in the econ
omy by maintaining conditions in the money market that would be consistent
with a high level of economic activity and that would avoid the development
of unsustainable expansion, (c) to correcting a disorderly situation in the
Government securities market, and (d) to the practical administration of the
account . . . ."
Following a rereading of the suggestions by Messrs. Robertson and
Leach, Chairman Martin stated that he would dislike removing from the di
rective the concept of "growth." This concept, he said, was inherent in
stability, but his view was that it was desirable to have it set forth ex
plicitly in the full Committee's directive.
Mr. Sproul stated that he too would be reluctant to see the policy
directive leave out any reference to growth in the economy. He felt that
a retention of some word to indicate that the Committee was conscious of
the need for growth in the economy--a word which would reflect the Commit
tee's concern with and interest in that aspect of economic activity--would
be desirable.
Mr. Balderston stated that in view of the present amount of unem
ployment in the economy, he felt the Committee should look on growth as
one of the problems with which the Committee was concerned, although he

5/10/55 -12
was not greatly concerned with the particular words used so long as the
idea was in the directive. He also suggested that clause (c) of the full
Committee's directive indicating that operations should be with a view
"to correcting a disorderly situation in the Government securities market"
implied the existence at this time of a disorderly situation, and he felt
it would avoid any such implication if it were changed to read "to correct
ing disorderly situations in the Government securities market."
Mr. Shepardson agreed with the latter suggestion, stating that this
clause had struck him as implying the current existence of a disorderly
situation in the Government securities market which needed correction.
During the foregoing discussion Mr. Vardaman withdrew from the
meeting.
Chairman Martin stated that the Committee should not overlook the
fact that the directive of the full Committee would be published in the
open market policy record. He also cautioned that changes should not be
made which might be construed as having more significance than was intended.
There followed a further discussion of the suggestions that had
been made during which Mr. Earhart inquired whether much if any change of
policy was contemplated in the Committee's operations at the present time.
It was the consensus that little or no change in policy was con
templated at the present time but that a change in wording would be for
the purpose of adapting the directive to the existing situation which no
longer called for encouraging recovery.

5/10/55 -13
After some further discussion, Chairman Martin suggested that each
of the suggestions made seemed to be driving at the same point but that it
was difficult for the Committee to rewrite a directive which had been care
fully developed over a period of years, on the basis of various considera
tions, some of which were of a legal nature. The present directive, he
noted, might contain implications which the Committee would not wish to
change without thorough consideration, including advice of counsel and
other members of the staff.
Mr. Thomas referred to Mr. Robertson's suggestion which would re
move from the first part of the full Committee's directive the provision
that operations be in the light of "the general credit situation of the
country" leaving as a general standard only a reference to "current and
prospective economic conditions." It was Mr. Thomas' view that the phrase
referring to the general credit situation was put in the directive inten
tionally to indicate that consideration was to be given to qualitative
factors in the credit picture, and he felt it might be unfortunate to re
move from the directive the specific indication that the general credit
situation was a consideration in determining operations for the System
Account.
Mr. Mills concurred inthis view, adding the comment that the phrase
was a recognition of the statutory responsibilities of the Open Market Com
mittee.
There was a further discussion of the several suggestions made,
at the conclusion of which Chairman Martin suggested that the least change

5/10/55 -14
feasible be made in the language of the directive at this meeting, which
would mean taking Mr. Sproul's suggestion that the words "encourage recovery
and" be deleted from clause (b) of the directive that would be issued today,
to make that clause read "to fostering growth and stability in the economy
by maintaining conditions in the money market that would avoid the develop
ment of unsustainable expansion . . . ." He also suggested that Counsel
be asked to consider the several suggestions made during this discussion,
with a view to submitting for consideration at the next meeting of the full
Committee whatever suggestions for change might seem to be desirable.
Chairman Martin's foregoing sug
gestions were approved unanimously.
Chairman Martin suggested that the Committee next consider the
policy to be followed during the immediate future. He referred to a sheet
distributed at this meeting showing a pattern of recent and projected re
serve changes which indicated a volume of free reserves during the state
ment weeks ending May 11 and 18 averaging a little over $400 million, to be
followed by a fairly rapid decline in the level of free reserves to a nega
tive position during most of the month of June. Chairman Martin inquired
of Mr. Sproul whether his suggestions as to open market operations were es
sentially that the Committee should maintain an "even keel" during the next
several weeks.
Mr. Sproul responded that his suggestion would mean allowing market
forces to have their effect in rapidly taking free reserves out of the mar
ket, following the present temporary surplus of such reserves in the market.

5/10/55 -15
Mr. Thomas stated that the projections indicated a very easy situa
tion during the current and next succeeding week, and then a gradual tighten
ing through the next several weeks, building up to a negative free reserve
of around one-half billion dollars early in July and again at the end of
August. Mr. Thomas also referred to differences between the estimates pre
pared at the Board's offices and those prepared at the New York Bank, which
showed a much greater increase in needed reserves. The widening margin
of "negative free reserves" between the two estimates is mainly attributable
to a fundamental difference in method. The projections at the Board are
based on rigid assumptions of only the customary seasonal variations with
an estimate allowing for growth in deposits at a 3 per cent annual rate;
whereas the figures prepared at New York are forecasts based on factors
which the Bank expects to occur, such as a more than seasonal increase in
bank credit, deposits, and currency in circulation. The result is that the
figures prepared at the New York Bank indicated that about a half billion
of additional reserves would be needed to cover the growth in reserve re
quirements.
Chairman Martin commented that he wished the swings in the actual
volume of free reserves were not so great, and he inquired of Mr. Roosa as
to the possibility of trying to smooth out some of these swings.
Mr. Roosa stated that the Committee had just had a clear indication
of the problem of smoothing out the swings in free reserves and that the
management of the System account would like to have guidance from the Com
mittee on this particular point. Yesterday, he said, it was decided to roll

5/10/55 -16
over the System account's holdings of bills in the amount of $74 million
even though it was realized that at this time free reserves were higher
than the Committee wished them to be. This was a difficult decision to
make, he said, for the reason that the Committee previously had indicated
that System account operations might confuse the market as to System policy
if the account were to be in and out of the market too frequently. Conse
quently, since the projections made it appear that the System account would
be back in the market making outright purchases by the end of May, it was
felt that it would be confusing if the account showed a runoff in bills and
a reduction in holdings during the current week, when market conditions had
not changed broadly, to be followed later on this month by purchases of bills.
The choice was, on the one hand, whether the account should be in and out
and risk the confusion and the possibility of seeming to buffet the market
from side to side; or whether, on the other hand, it should not attempt to
avoid swings such as had taken and were taking place. Mr. Roosa pointed
out that one of the difficulties in using repurchase agreements is that they
can not be used to take up slack unless there previously has been a purchase.
Otherwise, it would be necessary to make an outright sale. Last week, he
said, the Treasury had agreed to "juggle its calls" and by cancelling one
call, had avoided bringing a large volume of funds into the Treasury which
would have tightened the situation at a time when it was already tighter
than desired. Mr. Roosa stated that the present situation highlighted the
complexity of the problem. From such indicators as the rates on Treasury

5/10/55 -17
bills, Federal funds and dealer loans, the market did not appear to be
easy. On the other hand, the current level of free reserves might be
considered much too high according to the executive committee's instruc
tions. The System account could have run off bills yesterday or it
could now sell bills, and it might be that the executive committee today
would wish to instruct the New York Bank to sell bills with the knowledge
that it would be necessary to buy bills back toward the end of this month.
Mr. Roosa's question was whether the smoothing of operations was of enough
importance to warrant the System account being in and out of the market
on an outright basis at the risk of confusing the market as to System
policy, or whether the Committee would rather permit the wider swings to
occur so long as there was no decided change in the market atmosphere.
Chairman Martin stated that he favored minimum intervention in the
market but that he also thought the System account should try to minimize
the sweeping moves indicated by the projections of free reserves. If the
Committee was going to look to a level of reserves, it ought to try to
exercise its influence to bring about that level.
Mr. Earhart said that he generally favored as little intervention
as possible. However, he wondered why at the time the Committee was find
ing it necessary to buy some bills, it provided a favored rate for repur
chase agreements.
Mr. Roosa responded that the fundamental point in the lower repur
chase rate--l.6 5, compared with a discount rate of 1-3/4--was the feeling
of the New York Bank, in the light of the executive committee's general

5/10/55 -18
instruction, that as far as possible the account should avoid interven
tion on an outright basis, and the indication at the meeting of the
executive committee on April 26 that it would be preferable to do as
much as possible in adjusting market conditions through the use of re
purchase agreements. The account management did not wish to go to the
dealers and notify them that it was policy to take repurchase agreements;
it seemed preferable to approach them through the market price. Mr.
Roosa then described the changes in volume of repurchase agreements on
May 4 and 5 which resulted after the rate was lowered to 1.65, stating
that the total repurchase account in those two days came up to around
the $200 million level. Mr. Roosa expressed the judgment that few, if
any, of these additional repurchase agreements would have been in the
account toward the end of last week if the lower rate had not been made
available. Making funds available through repurchase agreements meant
that the funds furnished to the market would automatically be taken out
through the repayment of the repurchase agreements, and Mr. Roosa felt
that this was a case in which the use of the lower rate on repurchase
agreements had avoided or minimized intervention by the System account.
Even so, he said, it was the account management's feeling that the volume
of repurchase agreements that had been gotten was not as large as would
have been desirable on some days.
Mr. Thomas noted that the yield on bills last week was low be
cause of two special factors: the demand for bills by persons who did

5/10/55 -19
not wish to exchange maturing Treasury securities into the new 15-month
notes, and the general shortage of bills in the market. In order to put
reserves into the market through repurchase agreements at that time, it
was necessary to put them in at the lower rate since dealers would not
borrow from the Federal Reserve and carry bills or other securities at
1-3/4 per cent when bills were yielding less than 1-1/2 per cent. He
also noted that outright purchases of securities were made at rates lower
than the repurchase rate of 1.65.
Mr. Mills stated that he would like to suggest reasons why it
would be undesirable and unnecessary to cause the withdrawal of reserves
from the market over the next two weeks, even though the level of free
reserves will rise to a higher level for a few days than might be other
wise desired. The reasoning, he said, went back to a fear that the ac
tions of the Committee might become an unstabilizing influence in the
market. There had been an admirable discussion of the state of the
economy this morning, Mr. Mills said, but any discussion of the economic
situation was of necessity at a static point. The Committee might wish
to bear closely in mind the "cause and effect" of its policy, as Mr.
Sproul had put it, and particularly the sensitivity that seemed to be
developing in the market which might cause a broader range of swings than
was desired. Mr. Mills then made a statement substantially as follows:
Determination of an appropriate short-run open market
policy is being complicated by a combination of market condi
tions and extraneous influences. As to the latter, one needs
only to read the current flow of financial and business news

5/10/55
letters to be aware that investors' thinking is troubled
by the past course of System actions and their interpreted
foreshadowing of future System policy actions.
A cumulative investor judgment seems to be in the making
that the System foresees enough inflationary danger in the
rapid pace of the business recovery as to deserve both a con
tinuing and a mounting policy of credit restriction. This
attitude also seems to have been abetted and aggravated by
short-selling on the part of U. S. Government security deal
ers as well as by comment from financial market news writers
that a restrictive credit policy carries only the meaning of
higher interest rates and lower prices for U. S. Government
securities.
The unsatisfactory reception given to the Treasury's new
issue of 2 per cent bonds of August 15, 1956, has further dis
turbed investment sentiment by raising the thought that the
new issue will not be able to hold its par price on the market.
Furthermore, market analysts apparently have been in doubt
whether the System's direct purchases of $97 million of U. S.
Treasury bills were intended to represent support of the
Treasury's financing operation or a signal that the System was
indicating its readiness to supply, within reason, such new
reserves as will be necessary to support legitimate credit
growth through the remainder of 1955.
To resolve the doubts that have arisen, it would seem
best that the System should sit tight for the near future and
ride along with the volume of reserves now in the market, even
though natural factors may raise the supply over the next two
to three weeks to a level higher than might otherwise be con
sidered suitable to a System policy of credit restraint. It
is fitting that presently outstanding repurchase agreements be
allowed to drain that volume of reserves from the market, but
any action beyond that to withdraw reserves would be ill-con
sidered in that the market would be led to the conclusion that
the reserves previously supplied through direct Treasury bill
purchases had only been intended to give support to the Treas
ury's financing operation and not as a signal of the System's
future policy intentions. In fact, it is fortunate that the
$97 million of Treasury bills that were purchased outright will
be disclosed in two rather than in one of the Weekly Condition
Reports of the Federal Reserve Banks, in that such action will
be taken as confirming the System's intention to supply the
market with new reserves as needed and not to subject the mar
ket to any further reserve pressure at this time and unless
business expansion should unexpectedly tend to get out of hand.

5/10/55 -21-
During this period that any action is withheld from
withdrawing the reserves previously supplied by direct Treas
ury bill purchases, natural factors will on estimate intro
duce a considerable volume of new reserves into the market.
Inasmuch, however, as alert market observers will be able
to trace such additional reserves to temporary factors,
there is only a minimum possibility of any erroneous inter
pretation of System policy suggesting a change toward ease
and, consequently, there would seem to be little likelihood
of any important price reaction in the U. S. Government
securities market to the temporary appearance of a relative
surplus of reserves. As a practical matter, it is quite
probable that such surplus of reserves as develops will serve
a worthwhile purpose of lubricating the market over the May
17th payment date for the new Treasury 2 per cent notes of
August 15, 1956.
Relatively plentiful reserves available to the market
at that time should assist the adjustments to be made by in
vestors in the reinvestment of the proceeds of maturing U. S.
Treasury savings notes and the proceeds of the maturing 1-1/8
per cent Treasury certificates of indebtedness that also come
due on May 17th and are not offered for exchange into the new
2 per cent Treasury notes. A heavy attrition has occurred in
the maturing 1-1/8 per cent Treasury certificates of indebted
ness and, as indicated, plentiful reserves available to the
market as of May 17th should be helpful in smoothing out rein
vestment programs even though the impact of the attrition for
a very brief period might inject a substantial amount of new
reserves into the market via a rapid reduction in Treasury
balances at the Federal Reserve Banks. Here, too, alert mar
ket observers will not be apt to misinterpret the situation
but, instead, will regard it as a normal phenomenon and one
which the System has permitted as a means of facilitating re
investment programs.
All told, therefore, there are seemingly good and suf
ficient reasons for the System to have a hands-off policy in
the market over the next two to three weeks, other than al
lowing repurchase agreements to terminate without renewal.
Chairman Martin said that the thing he questioned in Mr. Mills'
statement was whether the market was really as alert to these changes as
Mr. Mills seemed to think. Even if it was, Chairman Martin said, he
thoughtthe Committee should try to do something to get the market more

5/10/55 -22
accustomed to a more normal type of operation. It was hard for him
to read into the modest changes that had taken place in the supply of
free reserves as much as Mr. Mills seemed to read into them.
Mr. Williams stated that information coming to his attention
indicated that the market was interpreting the situation about as Mr.
Mills had suggested.
Mr. Earhart stated that he had had several comments to the effect
that the System account's purchases of bills last week and the lower rate
on repurchase agreements represented "support of the Government securities
market."
Mr. Robertson doubted the need for a reduction in the repurchase
rate, but he approved purchases of bills in order to get free reserves
back on "an even keel" in line with the thinking of the executive commit
tee at its meeting on April 26. If the policy was still one of maintain
ing an even keel, which he thought it should be, Mr. Robertson stated
that the only solution at this stage was to sell securities and to absorb
reserves. This course would be easily understood by anyone trying to
understand System policy. If what the committee was trying to do was to
maintain approximately a zero level of free reserves in order to maintain
modest restraint, its actions ought to speak for it. Therefore, he ad
vocated that the Committee now absorb some of the free reserves in the
market.
Chairman Martin stated that that got back to an analysis of the

5/10/55 -23
projections of free reserves. If the System account had been more active
in the market there would not have been such wide swings, he said. The
justification for stepping in--no matter what the interpretations as to
policy--was that the Committee had tried to maintain an even keel during
the period of Treasury financing. Stepping into the market did not make
the Treasury issue a success, Chairman Martin said, and the psychological
influence of the action could not be accurately evaluated. However, in
his view the action was intended to restore to the market the free re
serves that the committee had anticipated would be in the market at the
time the decision was made at the meeting on April 26 to maintain an even
keel during the period of the Treasury financing.
Mr. Roosa stated that the swings in free reserves recently had
been so great as to make us tend to forget the timing. At the time the
repurchase rate was lowered to 1.65 on May 4--and the System account in
determining how it should proceed throughout the day was trying to read
the Committee's mind--the management of the account was aware of the fact,
on the basis of developments on Monday and Tuesday, that the statement
for the week ending May 4 would show negative average free reserves well
in excess of $100 million. This situation had developed largely out of
unexpected swings in the Treasury's balance. As indicated before, the
Treasury had been persuaded to cancel one of its calls for $283 million
of funds which otherwise would have been taken out of the market. This
factor helped reduce the $100 million figure but it still appeared that
there would be less than zero free reserves for the week ending May 4

5/10/55 -24
although in the end the average for the week was plus $12 million. Mr.
Roosa went on to say that this small plus of free reserves resulted only
after action had been taken to lower the repurchase rate to 1.65, in
order to do as much as possibly could be done in a very temporary way.
Mr. Robertson inquired of Mr. Roosa what were the factors that
had led to the judgment that repurchase agreements would not have been
entered into if the rate had been maintained at 1-3/4 per cent instead
of having been reduced to 1.65 on May 4.
Mr. Roosa responded that this was just a matter of judgment at
the time. As the System account saw the situation from dealers' reports
coming in, telling their money position and what they might be doing, it
was the account's understanding that during the day on May 4 repurchase
agreements would largely be taken up. Also, that dealers would not be
ready to make any new repurchase agreements on rights (which was the
form of securities they had most readily available) at the 1-3/4 per cent
rate. This was because dealers could get funds at out-of-town points at
rates as low as one per cent.
Chairman Martin stated that the Committee could learn a great
deal from a study of this period. A number of contributing factors such
as the Treasury's calls had caused difficulties. He felt it desirable
to have had a discussion of the projections of free reserves which have
been so wide. He again said that, if the Committee were to talk about
some level of free reserves, it probably should assume more responsibility
for evening out these wide fluctuations than it has at times in the past.

5/10/55 -25
Mr. Thomas stated that the actual day to day fluctuations had
been in the past, and would be in the future, much wider that the figures
shown on the projection sheet, which were weekly averages and also that
actual weekly fluctuations would be wider than projections, which assume
no change in Treasury balances and only average changes in other items.
He also commented that efforts were being made to work out with the Treas
ury a means whereby the influence of erratic changes in the Treasury's
balance on the volume of reserves could be reduced.
Chairman Martin then reverted to the policy to be followed during
the next few weeks. He said that he did not share the apprehension of
Mr. Mills regarding signals given to the market by changes in the volume
of free reserves. He did think it true that if the Committee was in the
middle of the stream, it should not change signals. Chairman Martin sug
gested that all members of the Committee study the period we had just
been through and think about the suggestion that, if some level of re
serves was desired, the System should try to smooth out wide fluctuations
so as to come closer to having that desired level of reserves.
Mr. Sproul stated that as he saw it, the Committee was now aiming
at a level of reserves around zero, not expecting to be able to pinpoint
any particular figure. During the week ending May 4 we ended up with
average free reserves of $12 million, which was as near as possible to
coming out where the Committee aimed. He thought that the Committee
could say that the mistake or error in the projections was due to unfore
seen developments. Mr. Sproul then referred to projections for the weeks

5/10/55 -26
ending May 11, May 18, and May 25. After the end of May, it was antici
pated that there would be almost a continuous negative free reserve posi
tion, sometimes in substantial amounts. Mr. Sproul said that he would
prefer to have reserves taken out of the market during the next statement
week from repayments of repurchase agreements, and to allow market factors
to do what they could to reduce reserves during the following week. By
the end of the month, the projections indicated that free reserves might
be down to the range of around zero.
Chairman Martin stated that this program seemed appropriate for
the immediate future. He noted that this discussion was in a meeting of
the full Committee and that the policy to be set would apply for a period
of approximately six weeks until the next meeting of the full Committee.
Mr. Sproul stated that on the basis of the projections prepared
at the Board's offices as well as those prepared at the New York Bank, it
should be contemplated that some purchases of bills might be necessary dur
ing the period between now and the next meeting of the full Committee. He
suggested that the instruction from the full Committee include that pos
sibility even though no positive direction were to be given.
Mr. Mills stated that he would concur in Mr. Sproul's reasoning.
Mr. Robertson said that he was in general agreement but that he
thought the Committee should get the level of free reserves down. If
natural forces would do this, fine. If not, he would favor selling secu
rities from the System account in the immediate future. The main thing,
he said, was to keep in mind that the Committee's policy was one of moder
ate restraint. He inquired whether there was any thought that repurchase

5/10/55 -27-
agreements should be made available from here on out at a rate below
that of the discount rate.
Mr. Sproul responded that he did not think so, that he thought
the repurchase agreements at the lower rate would go off today except
with respect to repurchase agreements based on "rights", and that after
today, if the repurchase window is open, the rate would be 1-3/4 per
cent.
In response to Chairman Martin's inquiry as to what additional
instructions were needed, Mr. Riefler stated that he thought nothing
additional was required from the full Committee.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the following directive
to the executive committee was ap
proved unanimously:
The executive committee is directed, until otherwise
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange for
such transactions for the System open market account, either
in the open market or directly with the Treasury (including
purchases, sales, exchanges, replacement of maturing securi
ties, and letting maturities run off without replacement), as
may be necessary, in the light of current and prospective
economic conditions and the general credit situation of the
country, with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in
the market to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to
fostering growth and stability in the economy by maintaining
conditions in the money market that would avoid the develop
ment of unsustainable expansion, (c) to correcting a disor
derly situation in the Government securities market, and
(d) to the practical administration of the account; provided
that the aggregate amount of securities held in the System
account (including commitments for the purchase or sale of
securities for the account) at the close of this date, other
than special short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treas
ury, shall not be increased or decreased by more than
$2,000,000,000.

5/10/55 -28
The executive committee is further directed, until other
wise directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, to arrange
for the purchase direct from the Treasury for the account of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (which Bank shall have
discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue par
ticipations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) of such
amounts of special short-term certificates of indebtedness as
may be necessary from time to time for the temporary accom
modation of the Treasury, provided that the total amount of
such certificates held at any one time by the Federal Reserve
Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate $2,000,000,000.
Mr. Robertson suggested that the Committee bear in mind the pos
sibility of an increase in the discount rate, if additional pressure on
the market was needed during the next few weeks.
Mr. Balderston stated that he shared this view.
Mr. Riefler noted that in accordance with the action of the full
Committee at its meeting on March 2, 1955, a procedure had been made ef
fective by the executive committee at its meeting on March 29, 1955,
whereby the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized to purchase
bankers' acceptances up to an amount of $25 million. It was understood
that the authorization for this procedure would continue in effect until
changed by the Committee.
Mr. Sproul stated that he would like to make one fact clear. All
of us, he said, including himself, were inclined to get into the habit
of thinking that we controlled the whole situation when actually the Fed
eral Reserve controlled only a part of the picture. The Federal Reserve,
with its monetary and credit controls, was not in control of the whole
economic situation, and it should not get into the habit of thinking
that it was.

5/10/55 -29
Chairman Martin concurred heartily with this statement,
Mr. Leach inquired whether the executive committee had any author
ity to take any action in a period of Treasury financing which would be
intended solely to assist in making a Treasury offering a success, or
whether that would require action by the full Committee, as was his under
standing.
Chairman Martin responded that his understanding was the same as
Mr. Leach's.
Mr. Riefler stated that in accordance with the understanding at
the meeting of the full Committee on March 2, Mr. Vest, General Counsel,
had prepared a draft of a resolution which dealt with actions that would
have to be taken in the event the full Committee were to decide to
abolish the executive committee, and a letter transmitting this draft of
resolution was being distributed to all members of the Committee today.
Mr. Robertson suggested that at the next meeting of the full
Committee, further study be given to the form of certain continuing
policies relating to operations for the System open market account, along
the lines discussed at the meeting on March 2, and it was understood that
this matter would be placed on the agenda for consideration at the June
meeting.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.