A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on
Thursday, December 8, 1955, at 10:20 a.m., E.S.T. This was a telephone
conference meeting and the location of each individual is indicated in
parentheses after his name in the following list of those in attendances
PRESENT: Mr. M artin, Chairman (Washington)
Mr. S proul, Vice Chairman (New York)
Mr.
Balderston (Washington)
Mr. Earhart (San Francisco)
Mr, Fulton (Cleveland)
Mr. I rons (Dallas)
Leach (Richmond)
Mr. M ills (Washington)
Mr, Robertson (Washington)
Mr,
Shepardson (Dallas)
Mr.
Szymczak (Washington)
Mr.
Mr. Vardaman (Washington)
Mr. Treiber, Alternate Member, Federal Open
Market Committee (New York)
Mr. Riefler, Secretary (Washington)
Mr, Thurston, Assistant Secretary (Washington)
Mr. Thomas, Economist (Washington)
Mr, Vest, General Counsel (Washington)
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
(Washington)
Mr, R. A. Young, Associate Economist
(Washington)
Mr, Rouse, Manager, System Open Market
Account (New York)
Mr, Carpenter, Secretary, Board of
Governors (Washington)
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board
of Governors (Washington)
Mr. Koch, Assistant Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors (Washington)
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors (Washington)
Mr. Roosa, Assistant Vice President,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (New York)

12/8/55 -2.
Chairman Martin asked that Mr. Rouse review the situation in
the market this morning,
Mr. Rouse said that this meeting arose out of developments
yesterday afternoon. In late trading, there was a psychological dete
rioration in the market in the last three-quarters of an hour which
apparently was feeding upon itself. The three groups--dealers, country
banks and city banks, and nonfinancial corporations--may have been
"kidding" each other, but the story got around that country banks were
not interested in bidding in the Treasury's bill auction tomorrow. The
city banks thought their corporate customers were not interested, and
the underwriting banks became less interested themselves. In terms of
rates, the auction price for the new bills was estimated at about
2.35 per cent on Tuesday; yesterday the talk was in terms of 2-1/2 per
cent; and in the "moonlight" discussions late yesterday there was talk
of the possibility of 2-3/4 per cent, or even 2-7/8 per cent. The money
position of banks has not been adverse. Net borrowed reserves in the
first four statement days of the past week were running a little over
$300 million, and in the past three days, while net borrowed reserves
have been over $500 million, the market has been relatively comfortable
because of accumulated excesses. The situation does, however, reflect
in part the relatively unsatisfactory experience that the market is
having on the recent Treasury financing exchange, with no buying going
on and with the new securities quoted at par with a bid just under par

12/8/55 -3
and some trading under par. These developments, as reported by the
senior traders at the principal security houses, were such as to suggest
an incipient disorder in the market and it was believed desirable to
alert the Committee to that possibility,
In response to Chairman Martin's inquiry as to his program,
Mr. Rouse said that the situation in the market for Government securities
was related to the general situation in the capital market, Municipal
inventories of dealers were very heavy, probably in excess of $400
million. Also, recent issues of corporate securities have not been
successful and dealers' inventories are building up. There is an
atmosphere of gloom and uncertainty. Purchases of bills totalling
$85-1/2 million were made for the System account yesterday and the
account was now in the process of asking for tenders of bills by
dealers-it was anticipated that the account would purchase in the
neighborhood of $125 million for cash today. That concluded Mr. Rouse's
report.
Chairman Martin asked what in the way of authority Mr. Rouse
thought might be needed during the course of the day, and Mr, Rouse said
he thought the existing amount of authority was satisfactory. The account
is still able to buy bills. He did not think buying bills would necessar
ily prove to be the answer to the situation if disorder appeared to be
developing, but Mr. Rouse said he did not anticipate such a development
although there was still a possibility. His only suggestion was that it

12/8/55 -4
would be desirable to have the Committee available in case more authority
were needed. Mr. Rouse also stated that the authority given by the Com
mittee on November 30 for purchases on a when-issued basis of the new
one-year 2-5/8 per cent Treasury certificates had been used to the extent
of purchasing $167 million. This authority lapsed yesterday since today
the securities became outstanding rather than when-issued securities.
Mr. Rouse added the comment that the new securities presumably are in
the short-term area encompassed by the Committee's instruction approved
at the meeting on March 2, 1955, and their purchase technically would be
justifiable if it appeared desirable that such purchases be made,
Chairman Martin suggested that the Committee stay alerted to
developments in the market today. His hope would be that repurchase
agreements, use of the discount window, and outright purchases of bills
would handle the situation.
Mr. Rouse said that in addition to buying bills outright, he
was making clear to dealers that there was no reason to think that the
repurchase window would not continue to be open through the end of the
year as it has been in previous years.
Mr. Mills stated that there had been a precedent in the past
on occasions where there has been a "stickiness" in a Treasury financing
offering where the Federal Reserve Banks had communicated with the more
important member banks in their districts to encourage participation in
a particular offering. In the present case, where the central reserve

12/8/55 -5
city banks were feeling the pinch of tight money more than the out-of
town banks, there could be good reason for the Federal Reserve Banks,
depending on developments during the day, to contact the out-of-town
banks by way of suggesting reasonable participation in the tax antic
ipation bill offering and stating that where the discount window is used
to support that participation, it would not under present circumstances
be regarded as a violation of the general understanding against contin
uous borrowing.
Mr. Sproul said that he was getting in touch with the banks in
New York and reminding them of their responsibility as underwriters in
connection with a Treasury tax anticipation offering such as this, and
he felt this would be taken as an indication that the discount window
will be open in connection with borrowings for reserves needed to perform
that function.
Mr. Mills commented on a point raised by Mr. Fulton that member
banks might need encouragement to understand that if they were not in a
position to redistribute satisfactorily the securities they acquired
within the ten to fifteen day period that is estimated in some quarters
as the life of their tax and loan accounts, they would have the facilities
of the discount window to carry them for a somewhat longer time until a
desirable redistribution might bee ffected,
Chairman Martin stated that this meeting had been for informa
tional purposes only and that no additional authority was being asked at

12/8/55 6.
the present time. He expressed the hope that the System account would
not have to go into purchases of the new 2-5/8 per cent certificates
any further than it already had done, if that could be avoided. He added,
however, that the judgment on such purchases had to be related to develop.
ments in the market and that the Committee would stay alerted for any call.
Mr. Sproul referred to t he recent performance of the market in
connection with the Treasury offering and said that the market might give
weight to that factor out of proportion to its real importance, He thought
it might be helpful if the System account were to buy some of the 2-5/8
per cent certificates, which would fall within the Committee's instruction
that operations be confined to short-term Treasury securities, although
such purchases would not fall within the clause indicating a preference
for bills. However, the New York Bank would keep the Committee informed
and if it thought purchases of the 2-5/8 per cent certificates would be
desirable it would let the members of the Committee know promptly,
Chairman Martin stated that for his part he would be guided by
the judgment of Mr. Sproul and of Mr. Rouse and others on the desk.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned at 10:37 a.m.
Secretary.