A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, October 25, 1955, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Earhart
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Irons
Mr. Leach
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Messrs. Erickson, C. S. Young, and Powell,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Williams and Leedy, Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Kansas
City, respectively
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Daane, Hostetler, Rice, Roelse,
Wheeler, and R. A. Young, Associate
Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Assistant Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York

10/25/55 -2
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
October 4, 1955, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been sent to the members of the Com
mittee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York covering
open market operations during the period October 4-19, 1955, inclusive, and
at this meeting there was distributed a supplementary report covering com
mitments executed October 20-24, 1955. Copies of both reports have been
placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Mr. Rouse stated in response to a question from Chairman Martin
that the only comment he had to make in connection with the report was
that the average yield at the auction of Treasury bills yesterday was 2.23
per cent compared with the level of 2.333 per cent established at the
previous auction. This morning, he said, bills were quoted at 2.18 per cent.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the open market transactions during
the period October 4-24, 1955, inclusive,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
A report of an audit of the System open market account made by
the Division of Examinations of the Board of Governors as at the close of
business March 18, 1955, was submitted to the Secretary of the Committee
under date of April 8, 1955, in accordance with the action of the Federal
Open Market Committee at its meeting on June 21, 1939. Copies of the
audit report were sent to each member of the Committee under date of
April 12, 1955, and the report was presented for consideration by the
Committee at this meeting.

10/25/55 -3
Without objection, the audit report
referred to was noted and accepted.
Chairman Martin called upon Mr. Ralph Young for a statement on
the economic situation. A staff memorandum relating to economic and
financial developments had been sent to the members of the Committee under
date of October 21, 1955, and at this time Mr. Young summarized conditions
substantially as follows:
The economic situation is still one of advance but with the
pace of advance in terms of physical output slowing down with the
approach of capacity operations.
GNP for the third quarter is put at 392 billion dollars,
up 7 billion from the preceding quarter, and a further sizable
gain is in prospect for this quarter. Industrial production is
edging up further and the October index may reach 142. Durable
goods output, especially in producer equipment lines, has
recently been and still is, the main influence in this rise.
Steel production last week was at a new high, 98.9 per cent
of capacity. Nondurables output, after slackening over the
summer, has been rising again in late weeks. With final
sales large and continuing to rise, inventory accumulation
has remained moderate; in August, it was mainly at manufacturers.
New car sales have continued at high levels, thus enabling
a considerable cutback in dealer stocks during the model
changeover period, a process which will extend through this month.
New model output in November and December is scheduled to reach
earlier peak rates. Used car sales hold up at about a third
above a year ago, with stocks and prices changing little.
Household durable sales have regained and are holding their
high early summer level, and output has expanded further from
mid-year.
With consumer durable sales at peak or close to peak levels,
instalment credit outstandings have continued to rise at a
6 billion dollar annual rate. Some slim evidence suggests a
halting of terms liberalization, but it is too early to judge
these indications. How far terms liberalization has already
carried is indicated by data for one large finance company showing
that about 20 per cent of July and August new car contracts carried
an unpaid balance in excess of the dealers cost.

10/25/55
With recent wage increases now working into the income
stream, personal income in September showed a further sub
stantial rise. Income is now 7 per cent larger than a year
ago. The rise in income has, of course, supported rising
retail sales and in September these were 11 per cent over a
year earlier. Department store sales in the first half of
October apparently increased further from the high August
September level.
With consumer markets strong, manufacturers' sales have
also been rising and in August were 22 per cent above their
low of last year, Manufacturers' new orders in August ex
ceeded sales by 5 per cent, putting unfilled orders a tenth
higher than last year and equal to two months sales.
Construction continues to maintain its high spring level,
with business construction rising and residential building
sliding off. New mortgage credit for the purchase of new and
old houses in August was well above any previous monthly total
and September held close to this volume.
Confidential information on the residential mortgage and
construction markets, collected by Federal housing finance
agencies, and just available to us, indicates that mortgage
credit in most urban markets is quite tight and tending tighter.
Reduced availability of FHA and VA funds is emphasized in field
reports, and likewise weakness in the secondary market. The
new house market is reported to be firm, but sales of existing
homes are said to have slowed down. A combination of market
conditions, financing troubles, and a cost-price squeeze on
new house construction is causing a cutback in builder plans,
which some market reporters believe will develop into a slow
down of new home building activity next spring. This pessimistic
digest of many local real estate market reports needs to be viewed
in the perspective of the very high levels of home completions
and starts of the past several months,
The labor market continues to exhibit strength. Civilian
employment is running about 2.6 million over a year ago, with
unemployment down to 3.2 per cent. The unemployed are showing
a fairly high turnover. Also, a comparatively high proportion
of the unemployed are women. The manufacturing work week has
now reached 41 hours,
Hourly earnings of factory workers in September were up
5 per cent above a year ago and weekly earnings were up 8 per
cent.
The agricultural picture continues to be dominated by excess
supply and sagging prices. Price declines in recent weeks have
reflected mainly larger marketings of meat animals and consequent
lower prices to clear markets. Although hog prices are a fourth

10/25/55
lower than a year ago, the present relationship with feed
prices is not too discouraging to fall hog production. The
price-feed relationship for dairy products and eggs has
recently been quite favorable to output expansion. The large
cotton crop this year foreshadows both another acreage cut
back and a lower price support level for 1956. Yesterday's
rather sharp break and partial recovery in cotton futures
prices, reflecting among other things increased crop prospects
abroad as well as here, emphasizes the cumulative supply
demand disequilibrium affecting this crop.
Industrial prices have risen since mid-year about 3 per
cent. The first rise was in industrial materials and, then,
accompanying or following this summer's wage increases, it
has spread to many intermediate and finished products. Mar
kets for industrial materials have been hesitant in recent weeks,
but at the intermediate product stage a new advance in steel
prices seems to be in the testing phase. Consumer prices rose
slightly in September, reflecting increases in meats, dairy
products, fuels and apparel.
In Europe, the boom is continuing. World trade has again
picked up, according to July and August figures. The London
market continues tight and tomorrow Chancellor Butler will
bring forward his new series of economic and fiscal measures
to meet Britain's balance of payments and internal inflation
plight. Other items on the world financial front include
increases in the discount rates of Canada and South Africa.
Reference is frequently made these days to an alleged down
turn showing by the National Bureau's eight leading business
cycle series. Without arguing the merits or demerits of this
mechanical forecasting approach, it may be of interest to note
the latest indications. A simple count of the most recent
changes reported--some from July to August, some from August
to September, and some from September to October--shows five
series registering advances, two registering declines, and one
registering no change.
On the basis of a broader look at these series over
several months, about all that one can say is that most of
them are showing moderate fluctuations at advanced levels,
rather than definite trend lines in one direction or the other,
Two series do show a trend--new orders for consumer durables
show an advance, and residential building contracts a decline.
Stability in basic commodity prices, another leading index
series, has reflected advances in industrial materials offset
by declines in prices of foodstuffs. Altogether, it would seem
to be forcing a conclusion to infer that any indication of a
turn in the business situation is brought to light by this
composite of data.

10/25/55 -6
In response to an inquiry from Mr. Balderston, Mr. Young stated
that information available regarding the construction industry showed that
nonresidential construction has been rising for some months and that this
rise has tended to offset the decline that has been showing up in residen
tial construction contracts since late last spring.
Mr. Thomas said that one of the interesting and significant devel
opments in the credit situation was that the Treasury's balance has been
holding up better than expected. Outlays have been less and revenues have
been larger than were estimated. On the basis of this development,
Mr. Thomas said that Treasury borrowing needs would probably be less than
had been anticipated, but it probably would have to obtain around a billion
dollars in December either through a new Treasury issue or through some
issue by the Federal National Mortgage Association or the Commodity Credit
Corporation. Another striking development has been the large volume of new
securities issues. Notwithstanding the tightness in the money market,
prices of bonds have gone up and long-term yields down. Corporate secu
rities issues have been running higher than last year and the total for
1955 is likely to exceed that for 1954, and, although State and local gov
ernment issues have been less than last year, they have increased recently
and there is a large list of prospective issues. Mr. Thomas indicated the
possibility that the recent rise in the prime lending rate at commercial
banks might bring out more issues of securities, noting that utilities have
been borrowing heavily from banks and the increased prime rate might induce

10/25/55 -7
them to refund into capital issues. Already both finance companies and
utilities have been moving in this direction.
Mr. Thomas also commented briefly on developments in the stock mar
ket and in figures of bank credit. The money market, he said, recently has
been characterized by generally firm short-term rates; the bill rate had
risen above the discount rate although it had been a little easier during
the last few days. The decline in longer-term rates may reflect some shift
ing from stocks to bonds, suggesting that some investors might feel that
the rise in interest rates had reached its peak, At any rate, the bond
market has been firm. Increases in nearly all major categories of loans
have taken place. The increase in business loans slowed down during Octo
ber after rising considerably during September. The money supply showed
more than a seasonal increase in September and currency in circulation has
continued to increase at more than the usual seasonal rate. Reserve needs,
which have been somewhat greater than projections presented at the meeting
on October 4, have been suplied by System open market operations. Net
borrowed reserves since that meeting have been exceptionally stable,
Mr. Thomas noted, around the $300-400 million level.
Projections indicate that, in the absence of System operations, net
borrowed reserves would rise to more than $500 million by the week of Novem
ber 9 and increase further in the last week of November and during December.
Mr. Thomas indicated that the situation could be handled through a small
increase in member bank borrowings and some use of repurchase agreements,
with a minimum of outright purchases for the System account. Even toward

10/25/55 -8
the end of the year the sharp seasonal rise in need for reserves might be
handled with little outright purchases. Mr. Thomas expressed the view that
there was no evidence that present policy has been too restrictive. Expan
sion continues in the business area and slackening in the rate of expansion
appears to reflect more an approach to capacity than any decline in demand.
There may be a question whether credit policy has been sufficiently restric
tive in view of the underlying elements in the picture and the firmness in
the bond market.
In response to a question from Chairman Martin, Mr. Thomas stated
that estimates indicated approximately three-quarters of a billion of ad
ditional Reserve Bank credit would need to be provided between now and the
end of the year. This amount could be supplied by increasing member bank
borrowings and repurchase agreements to a total outstanding amount of
between $1 and $1.5 billion in November and December.
Mr. Sproul then made substantially the following statement:
1. We still haven't too much to go on, in the way of facts
and figures, in order to come to a judgment as to the economic
effects of what may be the altered outlook of businessmen and
consumers as a result of the President's illness, the immediate
reaction of the stock market, and the possible longer term
politico-economic consequences of theseevents, nationally and
internationally. So far as the present and the near-term future
are concerned, however, we think we can see the general shape
of the domestic economic situation. The growth of economic
activity is continuing although at a slower physical rate than
earlier in the year. Some signs of inflationary pressures are
present, but they do not seem to be carrying through to specula
tive excesses in such things as the accumulation of inventories
or in spiraling prices. Particularly encouraging in this respect,
perhaps, has been the responsiveness of raw material prices to
increased supplies, and the indication in preliminary estimates

-9-
of Gross National Product that inventory accumulation in the
third quarter of the year was at a slower annual rate than in
the second quarter ($3 billion as against $4 billion). The
banking figures for the third quarter appear to have repeated
much of the pattern of the first half of the year, taking account
of seasonal influences. There was a substantial rise in bank
loans, an almost equally substantial decline in investments,
total loans and investments were little changed, and liquidity
was further reduced. Both investments and loans were up during
the first half of October, partly due to Treasury sale of secu
rities during that period. The money supply declined during the
first three quarters of the year, and it is now anticipated that
the growth during the fourth quarter will bring about a total
increase of about 2-1/2 per cent for the year as a whole which,
in the light of the growth of the economy, does not indicate
too great pressure from the money side, even allowing for in
creased velocity.
2. The Treasury's position is coming modestly into line
with the economic situation. It now appears that a surplus in
the cash budget of $1.5 to $2 billion can be expected in this
fiscal year, and it may be larger if expenditures hold steady
and receipts continue to increase. The Treasury's direct cash
borrowing needs during the remainder of the present half year
are not large--perhaps in the order of $1 billion. And this
borrowing is still at least a month or so away as is the next
refunding of $12.2 billion of notes and certificiates which
mature December 15. The problems of debt management are not
an immediate handicap to the exercise of freedom of judgment
with respect to credit policy.
3. There has been considerable speculation as to the
effect that recent events might have on credit policy. One
body of opinion has been that policy will now be relaxed be
cause of the shock which business confidence has recently
received. Another body of opinion has held that inflation is
still the enemy, that we haven't done much to combat it, and
that it is late but maybe not too late to do more. Then there
is the middle view between these two extremes. My own view is
that, so far as general credit controls are concerned, we shall
do well to maintain the pressure we have been exerting, but
that we should not be driven to harsher measures, either in an
attempt to convince the market we haven't relaxed, or in an
attempt to make up for what some consider to have been our past
shortcomings in the way of vigorous and timely action. I think
the banking figures which, week after week, show that the Sys
tem has not relaxed its restrictive policy, will take care of
the first group. I don't know quite what the second group wants

-10-
since our economy in so many respects has been performing so
well. If we could have gotten rid of the imperfections which
have been apparent in the mortgage credit and consumer credit
fields by way of a general credit policy, which did not stran
gle other business, we should have tried it, but I doubt if it
could have been done given other national policies. And if
there were some way general credit policy could redress the
imbalance between industrial prices and farm prices, which is
threatening economic and political distortions, I would be for
it; but there isn't.
4. The short-term market or credit market has been show
ing a natural response to pressure, in terms of rising rates
of interest, as seasonal demands for credit press against a
supply which is increasing, with our aid and consent, but not
increasing to the extent of meeting all demands at a fixed
price. The capital market, which had begun to show signs of
responding to pressure a few weeks back, has been less tract
able, in the sense that it has rebounded and become, if anything,
too buoyant. But this may have been temporary. The mortgage
market is under pressure but not so great, I think, as the ad
vocates of an ever ascending housing boom would have us believe.
5. I should say that, in order to maintain but neither to
relax nor increase pressure, we should continue to feel our way
meeting some of the need for reserves, which now stretches ahead
for several weeks
(a) with a more or less continuous volume of repurchase
agreements, thus having a current check on our re
serve projections while at the same time helping the
bill market to function;
(b) making some outright purchases of bills which we
would expect to run off after the turn of the year;
and
(c) keeping the banks substantially and perhaps increas
ingly in our debt at the discount window.
6. As of today, I wouldn't want to assume the hasard of
the possible reactions to an increase in the discount rate which
might create greater concern about present economic conditions
than would be warranted. It may be that this situation can be
felt out during the next month, however, without any commitment
on the discount rate by an increase in our repurchase rate,
particularly if the Treasury bill rate goes substantially above
the present discount rate and stays there.
In response to a question of Chairman Martin's, Mr. Sproul said

10/25/55 -11.
that his view would be that figures of net borrowed reserves might range
around $300-400 million between now and the next meeting of the Committee.
Mr. Szymczak said that he felt much as Mr. Sproul had expressed
himself, Figures were not available to indicate whether a change in busi
ness plans for plant and equipment expenditures had resulted since the
President's illness. Mr. Szymczak did not think the Committee should relax
its policy at all, but he doubted the advisability of pursuing a tighter
policy especially at this season of the year. He would concur with the
thought of keeping negative free reserves in the $300-400 million area.
He would not increase the discount rate. He would use repurchase agree
ments freely to meet temporary needs in the market, and he would do whatever
was required in the way of direct purchases for the open market account in
order to have negative free reserves in this general area.
Mr. Erickson said that he could not add much to the views already
expressed. He would have in mind negative free reserves between $300 and
$400 million, but would resolve doubts on the side of larger negative free
reserves. He would not raise the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Irons said he was in agreement with the general views expressed
with respect to the uncertainty in the economic picture and with respect to
the effects of the System policy of restraint. He would maintain about the
degree of tightness maintained in recent weeks and would resolve doubts on
the side of pressure rather than ease.
Mr. Earhart said he was in substantial agreement with what had been

10/25/55 -12
said thus far. He was inclined to feel that enough demand was likely to
be forthcoming during the remainder of this year to maintain pressure on
output capacity, but he believed that a measure of caution had been in
duced by the President's illness that worked in the same direction as the
Committee's restrictive policy. Mr. Earhart also thought we might be close
to a decline in rate of growth in demand. Under these conditions he ex
pressed the view that it would be better to maintain about the degree of
restraint the Committee had been maintaining rather than to increase pres
sure at present. Mr. Earhart said that he had been unable to reconcile the
easing of interest rates in the capital market as indicated by long-term
securities' prices, with the action of rates on short-term securities and
evidence, which he cited, that mortgage money had been quite tight. He
thought the tight mortgage situation was caused partly because of over
commitments by savings and loan associations and others.
Mr. C. S. Young said the picture in the Seventh District was about
the same as that given by others. He noted particularly tightness in the
real estate credit picture and commented on letters being sent out by
builders' associations raising a question as to what the Open Market Com
mittee would do about the tightness in the mortgage market. While much of
this could be discounted, Mr. Young thought that the comments had some
basis. He also noted that increased interest rates on savings were being
offered by banks for the purpose of attracting deposits and that some banks
had eliminated service charges as another means of attracting deposits. The
agricultural situation in the Midwest was a disturbing element in the picture.

10/25/55 -13
Mr. Young felt that the Committee's restrictive policy had had an effect,
and he hoped that no change would be made in the discount rate at this
time.
Chairman Martin next called upon Mr. Leach, who made a statement
substantially as follows:
Current developments indicate to me that our policy of re
straint is working quite well. Economic activity continues to
move upward, but the rate of expansion has apparently slowed
down and there are few, if any, signs of speculation, gray mar
kets, bottlenecks, or excessive inventory accumulation. Business
leaders and the public are still optimistic but their optimism
has been tempered considerably.
In the credit area we have not yet seen the full effect of
the tightening actions that have been taken, particularly in the
area of mortgage credit. A survey made last week of bankers and
businessmen in various sections in the Fifth District fully sub
stantiates the report that commitments for mortgage money are
becoming more difficult to obtain. There has been strength in
the long-term Government securities market in recent weeks, but
I suspect that it is largely based on wrong expectations and will
prove temporary.
I realize, of course, that prices of manufactured products
have been subject to upward pressures and that these pressures
may intensify as we get closer to productive capacity, Such a
development could call for more restrictive measures, but for the
time being I favor maintaining about the same degree of pressure
as during the past three weeks. To me, this means discounts close
to $1 billion, net borrowed reserves in the neighborhood of $400
million, and a long bill rate fluctuating around the discount rate.
I would not advocate an early increase in the discount rate, for
such an increase would have its principal effect in the capital
market and that effect might be much stronger than we would like.
Mr. Leedy said that he did not differ with the views expressed as
to policy for the next two or three weeks although he arrived at his con
clusions perhaps by a different process. He thought that changes in prices
of raw materials might not be as useful as a guide as the increases that

10/25/55 -14
have been occurring in prices of industrial goods. What could be done
through monetary policy to deal with this situation in the light of its
reflection of wage increases was a question. As to the next few weeks,
he would aim at the upper side of the suggested range of $300-400 for net
borrowed reserves. He would give no encouragement to the press and others
who were speculating on the possibility of a change in the direction of
easing monetary policy and, as a matter of fact, Mr. Leedy said that by
aiming for negative free reserves on the higher side of the suggested range,
the Committee might give notice that an easing was not in the picture. He
would meet temporary needs in this period as largely as possible through
repurchase agreements rather than outright purchases and he would not make
a further change in the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Mills said that he would second what Mr. Leedy had said. He
believed there was an abnormal sensitiveness in the market at present to
whatever System policy is, or whatever new direction it might take. That
being the case, we certainly should not act to ease our policy, if for no
other reason because a shift in that direction could be misconstrued as an
official foreshadowing of a decline in economic activity that is not be
lieved to be in early prospect. That would leave a decision on forward
policy as to the degree of tightness that might reasonably be exerted. The
discussion this morning had generally moved toward continuation of the
present pressure, Mr. Mills said, as reflected in negative free reserves up
to a range of around $400 million. There is increasing comment in the

10/25/55 -15
financial press on the direction of policy and an assumption that the
System is moving along a narrow rut and continuing to let the pressure of
negative free reserves of $300-400 million make policy for us. Sooner or
later, if that is the Committee's policy, the market would make its own
price determinations and the Committee would risk losing the advantages of
flexibility in handling its policy through the actions of the Manager of
the Open Market Account, Perhaps for the next three weeks, until the next
meeting, the Committee might wish to consider as its guide the pressure of
demand on the commercial banking system for seasonally new credits, as re
flected in the weekly reports of reporting member banks. If there is a
consistent rise in the total volume of bank credit in all of its various
classifications, the financial community would understandably assume that
the pressure of that credit against the supplies of reserves would bring
about an increasing tightness. Mr. Mills felt the Committee could test
the future more aggressively than had been suggested. If the natural forces
for demand for credit express themselves vigorously, the Committee might
allow negative free reserves to rise to $$00 million, feeling its way cau
tiously and observing the effects on interest rates and sensing what the
business community felt as to the availability of credit. To attempt a
policy of that sort would mean eschewing any rigid directive to the Manager
of the Open Market Account as to limits within which action could be taken.
It would contemplate "feel" of the market as against developments. Three
weeks ago, Mr. Mills said, he would have favored an increase in the discount
rate but subsequent developments would scout that as now being desirable.

10/25/55 -16
Mr. Robertson made a statement in substantially the following
form:
I think all will agree that the business and credit out
look presented to us this morning remains exceedingly strong.
Practically all of the economic indicators continue to point
sharply upward. There are few chinks in the wall of business
prosperity.
The situation appears to me to call for somewhat additional
credit and monetary restraint. Despite the drop in free re
serves to around a level of minus 400 million dollars over the
last week or two, money market conditions have actually eased
somewhat rather than tightened. There appears to be increasing
complacency developing, both among member banks as to being in
debt to the Federal Reserve and in the financial community in
general, as to the degree of restraint that can be imposed by
the Federal Reserve in a situation like the present. Recent
developments in short- as well as long-term credit and capital
markets seem to indicate that the financial community senses
that somehow the Federal Reserve has been hamstrung, that it
is powerless to exert further restraint.
I think that this situation should be remedied, and
promptly. As I see the picture, in order to avoid an actual
increase in ease in credit and money markets, one of two things
must be done over the next few weeks. Either we shall have to
increase the discount rate or, alternatively, allow free re
serves to drop to a substantially larger negative figure. I
strongly prefer action on the discount rate, mainly because I
am not sure that even a substantially larger volume of negative
free reserves at this time of year would bring about the desired
amount of restraint. The complacency that has accompanied the
recent change in free reserves from minus 300 to minus 400 mil
lion dollars confirms my judgment. It seems to me such com
placency might not be dissipated by a further change in free
reserves to minus 500 or even minus 600 million.
Consequently, I hope this Committee will adopt a policy
designed to achieve further restraint, and direct the Manager
of its Account to permit the volume of negative free reserves
to drop to between 500 and 600 million, in the event the dis
count rates are not raised within the next two weeks. I feel
confident such action will not be too restrictive. I hope it
will be adequate to moderate the upward movement of the
economy and stem the inflationary pressures.
Mr. Shepardson referred to Mr. Sproul's comment on the disparity

10/25/55 -17
between the agricultural situation and the general industrial picture. He
stated that he had just returned from a week's visit through the Midwest.
He had been impressed in his discussions with persons in that area that,
notwithstanding the decline in some farm prices and a good deal of talk
about the present decline in hog prices, the general reaction was that the
outlook is good. The cattle industry feels quite confident, Conditions
in most of the range territories are good, and feed prices are favorable
for the coming season for all classes of livestock producers. Even in the
case of hog producers, Mr. Shepardson said, the general attitude was not
too unfavorable. This general situation along with other factors caused
him to feel that continued pressure on credit extensions was necessary.
He was not sure that he would wish to go as far as Mr. Robertson had sug
gested, but he felt that policy during the next few weeks should be one
of keeping net borrowed reserves on the upper side of the $400 million
figure mentioned rather than on the down side. He was not sure that an
increase in the discount rate would be in order at this time and for the
present would think the procedure should be to tighten a little further
through increasing the amount of net borrowed reserves as indicated.
Mr. Fulton said that in the Cleveland District activity had con
tinued at a very high rate. There seemed to be more uncertainty in the
minds of those observing developments than in the minds of the businessmen
who were putting out tremendous sums to increase production facilities.
New orders had increased and were firm. The only hampering factor,
Mr. Fulton said, was the shortage of skilled labor to operate the factories.

10/25/55 -18
Real estate operators were in somewhat of a "squeeze" but were still
claiming they could sell houses before the foundations were dug,
Persons who had the down payments could get mortgage money even though
financing was being referred to as a problem. Bankers and financial
institutions had become accustomed to operating with negative free re
serves around $350 million. Mr. Fulton said he agreed with Mr. Mills that
from now until the end of the year natural forces should be permitted to
tighten the situation. He would favor higher negative free reserves, and
the discount rate might well be looked into. However, he would favor
waiting on the latter point until after the next meeting of the Committee.
By then the Committee could see whether the recent increase in the prime
rate had helped its restrictive policy. On the whole, Mr. Fulton felt that
additional restriction was called for and he was certain that the Committee
should not "float along on a level plane" when the market was demanding
more funds.
Mr. Williams said that there was a feeling of confidence and opti
mism in the Philadelphia District. He noted that capital expenditures in
1955 will total around $308 million or 28 per cent above the forecast for
such expenditures at the close of 1954. The estimate of capital expend
itures for 1956 was now $286 million, about 7 per cent below the probable
actual total for 1955. With respect to these figures, Mr. Williams noted
what seemed to be a persistent tendency of manufacturers to overstate prob
able declines and to understate prospective increases in capital expenditures

10/25/55 -19
for a future period. His feeling was that the Committee should maintain
the existing degree of pressure and "put a little more power into the foot
on the brake." He would not go as far as Mr. Robertson, but if any move
in direction were to be made during the next few weeks it should be toward
a slight increase in pressure and the Committee should be prepared to move
promptly in either direction if that seemed advisable.
Mr. Powell said that if negative free reserves were kept in the
neighborhood of $300-400 million at this time of year the Committee's
action would be misunderstood. It was expected that banks would increase
their borrowings at this season, and he could see no reason why the Com
mittee should not let borrowings proceed to the normal limits without
indulging in open market operations as a means of reducing the effect of
such borrowings. If negative free reserves rose above $500 million during
the next three weeks he could see no reason for concern. He would hesitate
to do anything as drastic as increasing the discount rate again at this
time of year, feeling that that might be misconstrued as indicating that
the System was trying to eliminate the normal seasonal expansion of credit.
He did not think the Committee desired to keep business from having the
normal seasonal credit increase which would be followed by a seasonal
decline. Mr. Powell said that he would leave open market operations almost
completely dormant during the next three weeks, letting banks obtain needed
reserves by borrowing. He thought there would be no unusual borrowing
which would force the Committee to change that policy before the next
meeting.

-20-
Mr. Balderston said he continued to be concerned about the rise in
industrial prices stemming from wage adjustments on the one hand and on the
other from the fact that production is pressing on capacity in numerous
industries. Therefore, he would move in the direction of greater restraint
than we have had in the past three weeks. He would not now favor a change
in the discount rate until there had been opportunity to see more clearly
what, if any, importance the change in prime rate has had. Concretely,
Mr. Balderston said, he would hope the Committee would aim at these targets:
(a) a bill rate somewhat in excess of the present discount rate, (b) nega
tive free reserves of approximately $500 million but certainly in excess of
$100 million. He felt it extremely important that actions of this sort
serve as a signal that the Committee was not being "taken in" by any of the
views appearing in the press as to imagined changes in the business mind
since the illness of the President. Some of these press comments, he felt,
were designed to bring about changes in policy which would be politically
beneficial next year; we were in the midst of talk which was difficult to
interpret except in the light of an election year coming up. He suspected
that businessmen may have changed their minds in some respects because of
the President's illness, but he could not find clear evidence of that having
happened.
Chairman Martin said that he had had the benefit of having heard
the comments of the others this morning. He wanted to start by indicating
his reaction to the President's illness in September. He was in Rome at
the time and felt it was as dramatic a shock in Europe as any event that

10/25/55 -21-
had occurred in his lifetime. While this was a broad statement he was
judging by discussions he had had with correspondents and others. Word
of the President's illness came at a time when nothing of that sort
was expected and at a time when inflation was uppermost in the minds of
many, and when the President had assumed a leadership as a result of
the Summit Conference, which had resulted in a bulge in confidence out
of all proportion to any other recent events. Without being disrespect
ful in any way, Chairman Martin said that he thought the announcement
of the President's illness had a very helpful influence because it de
flated the "confidence bulge" that had been blown up out of all
proportion to what was justified.
Chairman Martin went on to say that he was among those who
believed the Committee had been dilatory in approaching the build-up
in the spring and summer of the year, If the System had acted more
dramatically earlier it would have been in a better position at this
time. However, he agreed completely with Mr. Sproul that, even if this
were true, that was not a reason at this later juncture to put more
burden on monetary policy than that policy could bear. If he were
correct that the System would have been better off to have increased
pressure faster earlier this year, that was no reason to try to press
things at this juncture. The Christmas trade is upon us, Chairman
Martin said, and he thought it would be colossal. He was convinced

-22-
that much of the bulge that was exploded by the President's illness
would be rebuilt. In other words, he thought business has a confidence
which, if put in terms of the stock market may well see prices rise to
the old highs even though there would be some drag.
Chairman Martin said that his own thinking ran completely with
what he sensed to be the majority view expressed this morning except
that he leaned very strongly on the side of not relaxing, and he would
not be the slightest bit worried about a substantial rise in net
borrowed reserves for a limited period above the $400-500 million
range. In other words, he would make whatever errors were made on the
side of dispelling the idea that the System was going to ease its
policy. He thought it would be unfortunate to let market commentators
interpret policy for the System.
It was a problem how to sum up this policy, Chairman Martin
said. He thought no change in the basic directive of the Committee
to the New York Bank was called for and, specifically, clause (b) of
paragraph 1 of the directive which called for open market transactions
with a view "to restraining inflationary developments in the interest
of sustainable economic growth" seemed to meet the views expressed.
Chairman Martin inquired whether there was any other view as to the
wording of the general directive, and none of those present indicated

-23-
a different view. The Chairman then went on to say that the discussion
had revolved around Mr. Sproul's suggestion that, as a rough guide, a
range of $300-400 million for net borrowed reserves be used as a target
for the next three weeks. He said that he assumed, however, Mr. Sproul
did not intend that this be an exact target.
Mr. Sproul said that he thought too much emphasis had been
placed in the discussion this morning on some particular figure or fig
ures of negative free reserves. He did not know whether it should be
$300 or $400 or $500 million. He thought it more important to consider
the effects as conditions developed in the money market. If $300 million
of net borrowed reserves were accompanied by a further run-up in short
term interest rates which seemed to be creating greater tightness than
the Committee intended, that would call for one action; if a $500 million
level was not bringing about that sort of response, then it might not
require any action. Mr. Sproul thought the Committee should be paying
more attention to the market effect on interest rates and credit exten
sion than to any particular figure of negative free reserves. Also, if
the Treasury bill rate should go above the discount rate and stay there,
the rate on repurchase agreements might be raised, thus giving an
indication of the Committee's willingness to see rates move up some
what without actually raising the discount rate. Mr. Sproul
reiterated that he thought too much attention had been paid to "free"

10/25/55 -24
reserves and that more attention should be paid to (a) member bank bor
rowings, (b) the level of reserves, (c) the reaction in the market to these
developments, and (d) changes in interest rates. He also said, in response
to a question from Mr. Thomas, that he would include developments in the
bond market as well as in the short-term market as another factor to be
observed, in terms of the effectiveness of the Committee's policy and
whether it was carrying through. As he had indicated before, the present
buoyancy might be based partly on market expectations which the Committee
would not wish to make come true by its policy. There had been a temporary
dearth of new offerings which was now being remedied and which would con
tinue to be remedied in the next few weeks.
Mr. Rouse referred to the suggestion that the repurchase rate might
be permitted to rise above the discount rate, and he expressed the view that
such an increase need not depend on whether the average issuing rate for
new issues of Treasury bills rose above the discount rate.
Mr. Pobertson inquired what Mr. Sproul might have in mind as an
average issuing rate on bills, and Mr. Sproul responded that he had no
specific figure in mind although he would think the average issuing rate
would move higher if the Committee policy were carried out in line with the
discussion at this meeting. This did not mean that the repurchase rate
would need to be administered in accordance with changes in the bill rate
if that rate should go down for one week. However, if changes in Treasury
bill rates and other short-term rates and the attitude of banks toward

10/25/55 -25
making loans contributed to a feeling of ease greater than had been main
tained recently, then it would be appropriate to allow negative free
reserves to rise. Mr. Sproul went on to say, in response to a further
question from Mr. Robertson as to what degree of restraint the Committee
wanted to maintain, that in terms of the bill rate he would think it would
be a rate fluctuating around the discount rate.
Mr. Leach said that he thought there had been a tendency in dis
cussions to attach too much importance to small changes in net borrowed
reserves. He had mentioned $400 million of borrowed reserves as a desir
able target, but he would not be concerned if the results showed borrowed
reserves of $500 million. After all, he said, there would not be a tre
mendous increase in pressure if we should supply an additional $100 million
of needed reserves through the discount window.
Chairman Martin said that this pointed up the problem that the
Committee had been wrestling with for the last several years. He did not
know how it could be resolved. None of the members of the Committee
thought of these figures as exact goals; they were target figures only.
It seemed to him that, whatever was used as a guide, the majority opinion
expressed today leaned on the side of restraint but not dramatically. He
thought this might be as good a summing-up as the Committee was likely to
get at the moment. One or two of the comments this morning were on the
side of more negative reserves; some would maintain the status quo and not
get any tighter; but none had indicated they wanted to ease the situation.

10/25/55 -26
The Committee was dealing with a series of imponderables. It seemed to
the Chairman that the consensus of the meeting was that the Committee
should maintain a restraining influence on the market but that it did not
wish to increase that pressure drastically. He inquired whether any one
could suggest a clearer statement of what the Committee had in mind for
the next three weeks.
Mr. Shepardson said that it seemed to him that the discussion
might indicate some firming of pressure so that there would be no doubt as
to which way the Committee was inclined.
Chairman Martin said that this was another shade of emphasis on
the same consensus he had tried to state. He again inquired whether there
were any other suggestions for phrasing the consensus of the Committee more
accurately.
Mr. Sproul stated that he thought Chairman Martin's preceding
phrasing--"to maintain a restraining influence on the market but not to
increase pressure drastically"--expressed the majority sense of the Committee.
Mr. Rouse said, in response to a question from Chairman Martin, that
he thought the intent of the Committee was reasonably clear from the dis
cussion. There had been an even keel during the last three weeks and the
Committee would like to keep up the pressure during the next three weeks
and have a little more.
It was understood that the policy to
be pursued by the Committee would be in
terms of Chairman Martin's suggestion that,
until the next meeting, operations be with

10/25/55 -27
a view to maintaining a restraining
influence on the market without in
creasing pressure drastically.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted unan
imously to direct the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York until otherwise di
rected by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (includ
ing replacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities
to run off without replacement) for the System open market
account in the open market or, in the case of maturing securi
ties, by direct exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary
in the light of current and prospective economic conditions and
the general credit situation of the country, with a view (a)
to relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs of
commerce and business, (b) to restraining inflationary develop
ments in the interest of sustainable economic growth, and (c)
to the practical administration of the account; provided that
the aggregate amount of securities held in the System account
(including commitments for the purchase or sale of securities
for the account) at the close of this date, other than special
short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to
time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not
be increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one
or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such certificates held at
any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in
the aggregate $500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System
account for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury securi
ties maturing within one year as may be necessary from time to
time for the accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the
total amount of such securities so sold shall not exceed in
the aggregate $500 million face amount, and such sales shall
be made as nearly as may be practicable at the prices currently
quoted in the open market.

10/25/55 -28-
It was also understood that the
Committee approved a renewal of the
authorization for repurchase agreements
as follows:
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is hereby authorized
to enter into repurchase agreements with nonbank dealers in
United States Government securities subject to the following
conditions
1. Such agreements
(a) In no event shall be at a rate below whichever
is the lower of (1) the discount rate of the
Federal Reserve Bank on eligible commercial
paper, or (2) the average issuing rate on the
most recent issue of three-month Treasury
bills;
(b) Shall be for periods of not to exceed 15
calendar days;
(c) Shall cover only Government securities matur
ing within 15 months; and
(d) Shall be used as a means of providing the
money market with sufficient Federal Reserve
funds to avoid undue strain on a day-to-day
basis.
2. Reports of such transactions shall be included in the
weekly report of open market operations which is sent
to the members of the Federal Open Market Committee.
3. In the event Government securities covered by any such
agreement are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant
to the agreement or a renewal thereof, the securities
thus acquired by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
shall be sold in the market or transferred to the Sys
tem open market account.
Mr. Thomas said that some of the discussion of the mortgage situa
tion implied that there had been an actual cutback in the amount of
mortgage funds available. He noted that more mortgage loans were now being
made than at any previous time in history and inquired whether the situa
tion was not one in which demand for funds was simply exceeding the supply,
particularly now that there had been some restraint on additions to avail-
able funds.

10/25/55 -29
Mr. Earhart said that in the Twelfth District the tightness in the
mortgage situation was the result of the increased demand for such funds.
Mr. Rouse noted that in the case of the Federal savings and loan
associations, some of the reaction was related to the decision by the
Federal Home Loan Bank Board to cut off additional supplies of funds.
Mr. Erickson said that in the Boston area savings banks, which
formerly had from 40 to 45 per cent of their deposits placed in mortgages,
more recently had found that they were getting closer to the 60 per cent
legal limit for such investments and that this was adding to the feeling
of tightness for such funds.
Mr. Leedy commented that a well-informed person in the residential
building field had expressed the opinion in the presence of Governor
Shepardson and himself that the manner in which action was taken by the
Home Loan Bank Board in curtailing credit to savings and loan associations
would have a definite effect on building starts, and also that recent public
statements regarding warehousing of mortgages would have the effect of
cutting back mortgage extensions.
Mr. Roelse commented on a conversation he had had last week with an
official of a New York savings bank who gave the impression that some of the
savings and loan and other mortgage lenders had gotten into an overextended
position earlier this year and were now in process of cutting back on their
commitments in order to get their institutions back into line. This would
have an effect on builders over the next few months but the situation, ac
cording to this official, might get pretty well in balance by the end of

10/25/55 -30
1955 and, by the spring of 1956, there would be a freer flow of mortgage
money. By then, a good volume of mortgage money could be expected to be
available.
Mr. Shepardson referred to Mr. Leedy's comment and to a state
ment he had heard in the Midwest last week that there would be a very
material school-building program within the next year or so which would
tend to offset any shrinkage in residential construction.
Mr. Sproul said that there seemed to be a growing attitude in
the residential building industry that any amount of funds should be forth
coming to support a growing volume of building that had been stimulated by
the easy terms. This was resulting in diverting more and more of the mort
gage credit to banks rather than having it go to institutions which mainly
accumulated savings, such as savings and loan associations, savings banks,
and insurance companies.
Chairman Martin asked that Mr. Robertson comment on a memorandum,
prepared under date of September 29, 1955, on defense planning for the
Federal Open Market Committee.
Mr. Robertson stated that copies of the memorandum were distrib
uted in accordance with the understanding at the meeting of October 4 and
that the only suggestion received thus far was one from Mr. Irons, who
raised the question whether all Federal Reserve Banks might be designated
as alternate agents for the Committee. Mr. Robertson indicated why, on
the basis of the test at the relocation center in June of this year, it

10/25/55 -31-
would seem preferable not to designate all Federal Reserve Banks as agents.
Mr. Robertson also said in response to a question from Mr. Earhart that
the suggestion for training individuals contained in his memorandum would
apply to individuals at Federal Reserve Bank branches as well as at head
offices.
Mr. Sproul made a statement substantially as follows:
The following comments are suggested to me by Governor
Robertson's helpful memorandum on emergency planning.
1. All Federal Reserve Bank planning is now going forward
on the basis of no Federal Reserve Bank or branch being
able to carry on its functions in its usual location.
This means setting up of relocation centers and I see no
reason why we should plan for the conduct of open market
operations on a different basis in case of an emergency.
2. Federal Reserve Open Market Committee planning must re
late to
(a) operations having to do with monetary and credit
policy,
(b) operations having to do with our responsibility for
the Government securities market, and
(c) operations having to do with the immediate needs of
the United States Treasury.
3. So far as monetary and credit policy is concerned, outright
purchases may have to be made to supplement member bank
borrowing.
(a) All Federal Reserve Banks might be authorized to make
direct purchases from holders of Government securities.
(b) Some Federal Reserve Banks might be authorized to make
purchases for System Open Market Account either direct
from commercial banks or through the Government securi
ties market, if functioning.
4. The Government securities market might be disorganized or
temporarily non-existent and we might wish to provide a
market or prevent disorderly conditions in the market.
5. Immediate Treasury needs might have to be met by direct
purchases from the Treasury.
6. (a) Advance authorities will be needed to make it possible
for these operations to be carried out.
(b) There will have to be personnel at the selected re
location centers to handle whatever open market opera
tions are undertaken by individual Federal Reserve Banks.

10/25/55 -32
(c) Location of the System Open Market Account.
The probable location of a Government securities
market, if functioning, the fact that a large part
of the Government securities that ordinarily pass
through the market are held by banks in New York City,
and the possible availability of experienced personnel
suggests the primary location of the System Open Mar
ket Account at the relocation center of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York. Supplementary facilities
might be located at one or two other relocation centers
of Federal Reserve Banks and if New York's relocation
center is not able to function, available members of
its staff might be moved to one of the other reloca
tion centers.
7. In order to develop specific arrangements drawing on
Governor Robertson's memorandum and these comments I think
it would be desirable to appoint a subcommittee to be
assisted by informed staff members,
Chairman Martin noted that under a previous action by the Commit
tee he was authorized to appoint a committee for the purpose of studying
defense planning for the Federal Open Market Committee and said that, in
the absence of objection, he would proceed to appoint such a committee
No objection to this procedure was indicated.
Chairman Martin stated that another letter had been received from
Congressman Wright Patman under date of October 17, 1955, in which Mr.
Patman inquired as to the Board's views regarding provisions of the
Internal Revenue Code which permit banks to treat capital losses on securities
as fully deductible from ordinary income. Mr. Patman had inquired whether
this provision of the Internal Revenue Code conflicted with Board policy,
for example in a period when policy sought to restrain excessive expansion
of bank credit. At Chairman Martin's request, copies of the letter were

10/25/55 -33
distributed, and he stated that he would be glad to receive any sugges
tions regarding the answer to be made to Mr. Patman.
There was agreement that the next meting of the Committee would
be set for 10:45 a.m. on Wednesday, November 16, 1955.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Assistant Secretary