A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, November 13, 1956, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Johns
Mr. Mills
Mr. Powell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymcsak
Mr. Vardaman
Messrs. Allen, Leedy, and Williams, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Irons and Mangels, Presidents of the Fed
eral Reserve Banks of Dallas and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Abbott, Hostetler, Parsons, Roelse,
and Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Chairman Martin reported that advices of the election by the
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and Chicago of Mr. Fulton as a mem
ber and Mr. Allen as an alternate member of the Federal Open Market
Committee for the remainder of the period ending February 28, 1957, had
been received, and that they had executed and sent to the Secretary the

11/13/56 -2
required oaths of office.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, Mr. L. Merle
Hostetler was elected as an associate
economist of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee to serve until the election of his
successor at the first meeting of the Com
mittee after February 28, 1957, with the
understanding that in the event of the
discontinuance of his official connection
with the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland
he would cease to have any connection with
the Federal Open Market Committee.
Chairman Martin stated that, in accordance with the suggestion
at the last meeting of the Committee, and if agreeable to the other
members of the Committee, he would appoint Messrs. Robertson, Shepardson,
and Hayes as a special committee to study and comment on the report dis
tributed at the previous meeting on open market operations during
Operation Alert 1956, with Governor Robertson as Chairman of the special
committee.
These appointments were approved
by unanimous vote.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on October 16, 1956, were
approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York covering open market operations during the period October 16,
1956 through November 5, 1956, and at this meeting a supplementary re
port covering commitments executed November 7 (November 6 was a

11/13/56
holiday) through November 9, 1956, was distributed, Copies of both
reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.
Mr. Rouse stated that there were two things in connection with
the above reports on which he would like to comment. The first point
related to the purchase of special January 16 Treasury bills and, in
that connection, he read the following paragraph from page 2 of the
supplementary report:
The market purchases on Friday included $3 1/2 million of
the special January 16 Treasury bills, bringing total purchases
of this issue since the last meeting of the Committee to $20.5
million. Total dealer offerings were $118 million in the
Friday go-around, of which nearly $35 million were January 16
bills and $52 million were February 7 bills. The special bills
have regularly been quoted at yields several basis points above
nearby regular issues, so that on a strict "best price" basis
System account purchases might have been concentrated in this
issue. However, the Account Management felt it would have
been inconsistent with the present operating instructions of
the Federal Open Market Committee to have concentrated our
purchases in the January 16 bills in view of the imminent
Treasury offering of another special issue. While the securi
ties involved in this case are Treasury bills, the market
clearly views the new special bill as a "companion" issue to
the January 16 maturity, and large purchases by the System
account of this maturity would be regarded as an attempt to
clear the market of the issue so as to improve reception of
the new bills. Added to this was the possibility that pur
chases by us would affect the rate on the outstanding special
bill and, as a result, make it more difficult for investors
to use the January 16 bills as a guide in pricing tenders for
the new special issue.
Mr. Rouse noted that at the time of the last meeting, when the
subject of System account purchases of this issue had been discussed,
the Committee had not known that the Treasury would offer another
special Treasury bill similar to the January 16 issue. Therefore, the

11/13/56 -4
problem of giving the appearance of direct support to a Treasury
cash offering had not been discussed by the Committee.
Mr. Rouse's second point referred to the difficulties created
by the Middle East crisis in the bankers' acceptance market where the
foreign demand is the principal component of the market. He said that
foreign holders were allowing their acceptances to run off with the
result that dealers' portfolios were building up to a point where they
were having difficulty in carrying the bills. In that situation they
approached the Federal Reserve Bank for repurchase agreements at a
3 per cent rate and these requests were granted to a total of over
$8 million. Outright holdings of the New York Bank have been built
up somewhat during the last couple of weeks, to about $20 million, as
a supplementary method of providing reserves to the market. He then
commented on the amount of bills outstanding, pointing out that the
proportion of the System's holdings to the total was about 3.4 per
cent. As a result of the existing situation, he said he expected
that acceptance rates would be increased with the hope that dealers
would be able to move acceptances at the higher rates.
Mr. Thurston stated that the ticker reported this morning that
acceptance rates had been increased by 1/8 per cent.
Mr. Rouse then said that at the September 14, 1955, meeting of
the Federal Open Market Committee he suggested that the limit on the
authority of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to purchase bankers'

11/13/56 -5
acceptances for its own account be increased from $25 million to
$50 million outstanding at any one time. This suggestion was dis
cussed at the meeting on October 4, 1955, but for reasons presented
at that time the increase was not approved. Mr. Rouse expressed
the view that it might be appropriate to reconsider the suggestion
at this time. Increasing the authorization to $50 million would
mean that the New York Bank would be authorized to hold up to 7 or
8 per cent of the present market supply; Mr. Rouse said that in his
opinion this would not constitute an unduly large share for the
System.
In connection with Mr. Rouse's comment, Mr. Mills stated that
there was now before the Board of Governors a memorandum prepared by
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York relating to the purchase of
bankers' acceptances by the New York Bank for the account of foreign
central banks with the Reserve Bank's guarantee of payment and the
appropriate limit that might be placed by the Board of Governors on
such purchases. The memorandum clearly presents the fact, Mr. Mills
said, that the bankers' acceptance market in the United States is
almost monopolized by the purchases of foreign central banks so that
free acceptances that might be absorbed by domestic purchasers are
in relatively small volume. This presents the problem that if dealers
have a sure and steady market for bankers' acceptances with foreign
central banks, there is less incentive for them to develop a buying

11/13/56 -6
clientele outside of that area, which creates a condition hindering
the development of the broad market for bankers' acceptances desired
for the United States. Mr. Mills added that if increased purchases
of bankers' acceptances were made by the New York Federal Reserve
Bank to accommodate foreign central banks the problem of broadening
the bankers' acceptance market would be complicated further. More
over, if due to uncertainties in the international situation, foreign
central banks later reduced their holdings of bankers' acceptances,
the Federal Reserve System in an effort to stabilize the bankers'
acceptance market might end up as the residual buyer of this type of
paper.
Mr. Rouse said that if the present situation continues for any
length of time it would be necessary for dealers to establish rates that
would find a domestic market because the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York had not been a residual buyer under the present arrangement as it
had been in earlier years when there had been a schedule of posted
buying rates. The New York Bank, he said, had maintained a portfolio
of from $10 to $20 million of acceptances in recent months but had not
been, and had tried to avoid any impression that it was, a residual
buyer.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period October 16
through November 12, 1956, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Prior to this meeting a staff memorandum on recent economic and

11/13/56 -7-
financial developments in the United States and abroad had been
distributed to the members of the Committee under date of Novem
ber 9, 1956. At this time, at Chairman Martin's request, Mr. Young
summarized the current economic situation as follows:
The big question mark with regard to the economic
situation is, of course, the Middle East war crisis.
While this has been and still is the major uncertainty,
response of international markets for goods and securi
ties appears to have been less volatile than in many
other crises of comparable gravity. For primary com
modity markets, this may symptomize a basic shift
occurring in supply-demand relationships in the world
economy, for in a few key industrial countries there is
some evidence of slackening pressures from capital in
vestment, even though in others inflationary pressures
from investment boom are still manifest.
Domestically, demand, output, labor market, com
modity price, and credit demand developments, as well
as business psychology, all index general buoyancy and
strength. Reduced growth in the money supply, rising
money market yields in response to heavy credit and
capital demands, and investor hesitancy in bidding for
stocks, are to some extent reflective of cumulative
pressure from restrictive monetary and fiscal policies.
Upward price drift for industrial prices continues
to be the highlight of domestic trends. The average of
such prices is now 2 per cent higher than at midyear and
7 per cent higher than at mid-1955. New model automobiles
have been marked up about 7 per cent above last year, and
late model used car prices are up about 10 per cent. With
a heavy backlog demand for steel, steel scrap has moved
back to around record levels. On the other hand, copper
prices, reflecting cumulative additions to output capacity,
have been lowered to mid-1955 levels. Textile prices
recently have been raised moderately.
Further increases in industrial prices this past month
have been offset by lower prices for farm products and
foods, so that the general average of wholesale prices has
held steady. Farm prices in early November were 5 per cent
under the year's high and about 2 per cent above last year's
early fall level. Cattle prices were about the same as
last year, while hogs were higher. Prices of fruits and
vegetables and grain prices were somewhat higher and firmer

11/13/56
than last year at this time, and cotton prices a little
lower.
Consumer prices have advanced to a new high, a little
over 2 per cent above a year ago. Higher food prices
raised consumer prices last spring, but since then the
further rise has reflected mostly advancing rental and
service costs as well as higher prices for fabricated con
sumer goods.
Industrial production in October is estimated at one
index point above the advanced level of 144 reached in
September. Reflecting especially a sharp increase in auto
assemblies and further gains in producers' equipment and
military output, it is probably registering a further rise
this month of another index point or two. Output of non
durables is apparently maintaining the advanced September
rate. Industrial productivity, as measured by output per
manhour, which showed little gain from early 1955 to mid
1956, has been advancing significantly in recent months.
With new model introductions partially complete, new
car sales picked up in October, but were still a fourth
under a year ago. Used car sales held at the low Septem
ber rate, a fifth under last year's sales. Both new and
used car stocks at the beginning of November were about a
fifth lower than a year ago. Manufacturers and dealers
appear to feel that market reception to new models is
quite up to their optimistic expectations. In the third
quarter, some 3 out of 4 new car sales were instalment
financed. Continuation through the fall of this high a
proportion of instalment sales, especially if the pro
portion of long maturities holds as high as recently,
would indicate some underlying weakness in the new car
market.
Sales of household durables at retail outlets in
September were a tenth higher than a year ago, but in
October apparently slipped off some. Instalment financ
ing of household durables has played an important part
in maintaining the volume of instalment credit extensions
in recent months.
Recently revised figures for the value of new con
struction show a modest decline from a high of $44.8
billion at midyear to $43.9 in October, mainly reflecting
reduced expenditure for residential construction.
Private nonresidential and public construction have
maintained record levels.
Housing starts for October were at about the annual
rate of one million units registered in September, but
builders are reported in recent plans to be rather un
certain about the starts volume for 1957. Discounts on

11/13/56
Federally underwritten mortgages have apparently averaged
close to 4 per cent recently, with the result that offer
ings to FNMA have risen to about $50 million a week and
standby commitments to around $15 million. This rate of
acquisitions and commitments, if maintained, will exhaust
available uncommitted FNMA funds by the year-end.
Broad demand strength still features the labor market.
Nonfarm employment, seasonally adjusted, reached a new high
of 51.5 million for October, 1.2 million higher than in
October 1955. Unemployment remained at 1.9 million, 2.8 per
cent of the civilian labor force. The average work week has
declined a little, but average hourly and weekly earnings
have risen further. Wage settlements concluded continue to
reflect willingness on the part of larger industrial enter
prises to commit themselves for further automatic wage in
creases in the future.
With employment at peak levels and earnings on the rise,
personal income has been showing further substantial increase.
At $331 billion in October, personal income was $20 billion
or 6.5 per cent up from last year. Sizable payments to farmers
under the Soil Bank program were a factor in raising October
farm income.
Business inventory holdings, seasonally adjusted, rose
again in September. Retail distributor stocks were down, but
manufacturers and wholesale inventories were up considerably.
While inventory increases over the past year have been re
lated fairly closely to higher production and marketing, growth
has now reached a point where inventory volume will need to
be watched closely.
Retail sales were down moderately in September, reflect
ing especially reduced auto sales. Little further over-all
change was shown in October. Department store sales were up
slightly in September, but down rather sharply in October,
the trade attributing the decline mainly to adverse shopping
weather.
Developments in the Middle East confront Britain and
Western Europe with a possible critical oil shortage, and
also higher prices for tin, copper, rubber, wool, sugar,
cocoa, fats and oils, and other commodities affected by
heightened pressure on world shipping capacity. These de
velopments will greatly complicate the balance-of-payments
problem for some countries. At the same time, moderation
of demand pressures growing out of heavy capital investment
programs is indicated by available data for such countries
as Britain and Germany. In other industrial countries,
such as Belgium, Netherlands, and Canada, demand conditions
are such as to still press against supply, resulting
recently in some additional restrictive monetary or fiscal
actions.

11/13/56
Following a discussion of the possibility of involuntary
inventory accumulation at this time and of demand expectations in
automobile and residential loans, Mr. Thomas commented on current
financial developments as follows:
Principal financial developments in recent weeks have
been continued pressure on capital markets from large
volume of new issues offered and awaiting offering. Bond
yields have risen to postwar highs. Corporate profits are
showing signs of levelling out or declining. Bank credit
has shown a much more moderate rate of growth than in
1955. Expansion in the money supply has been slightly
less than seasonal. Member bank borrowed reserves are
not as large as in earlier periods, but tightness has
continued in New York. Federal Reserve open market opera
tions to meet seasonal and growth needs will be a little
less than had been projected. Treasury cash income con
tinues larger than in the same period last year, reflect
ing the higher levels of employment and income and the
step-up in advance payments on corporate income taxes,
Corporate tax liability seems to be little if any larger
than last year. Treasury expenditures have been little
more than last year, although there was a pick-up in the
rate of defense spending in October.
Net cash borrowing by the Treasury, allowing for
redemption of savings bonds and other debt retirement,
will amount to less than $3 billion in the current six
month period, compared with $5.3 billion last year. The
calendar year will show a net repayment of $7 billion,
the first of any significant magnitude since 1948. The
Treasury should be in a position to retire $8 to $10
billion of debt in the first half of next year, which
would cover about $2 billion for continued redemption
of savings bonds and attrition on maturing issues and
$3.2 billion of March tax bills and leave $4-$5 billion
for retirement of other issues in June. One of the con
cerns of debt management will be to provide maturities
that can be retired at that time.
Capital markets continue under pressure, with a
substantial volume of new security issues coming on the
market and more in prospect. New corporate issues since
midyear have been about a fourth larger than last year.
While State and local Government issues have been smaller,
a large volume of these are on the calendar for

11/13/56 -11-
future offering, and recent voting authorized another $2.3
billion of issues. Market yields on outstanding bonds have
risen above 1953 peaks, and yields on new issues continue
to show a wide margin above those on seasoned issues.
Corporations need to borrow in capital markets to
finance large capital issues. Their funds from internal
sources have been smaller than last year because of some
what lower profits, with larger dividend payments. The
increase in bank loans has been less than last year.
Corporation purchases of Government securities have been
relatively small this year. It appears likely that they
have reduced their liquidity positions to such an extent
that they will again need to borrow substantially in March
and June to cover tax payments.
The levelling out or decline of corporate profits in
many industries show the effect of the squeeze of rising
costs, To some extent these costs are being covered by
rising prices or are offset by increased productivity, but
the course of profits in coming months will be most signifi
cant. If strong consumer resistance should prevent price
rises or lead to declining sales with reduced profits, then
businesses may be less inclined to continue to increase
capital expenditures. It is through this channel that im
pact of credit restraints and cost increases may begin to
appear.
Bank credit growth has slackened perceptibly. Total
loans and investments of city banks showed little change in
the five weeks ending October 31. Commercial loans probably
increased less than is normal for October, and other types
of loans increased less than in other recent years. Bank
holdings of Government securities actually declined slightly,
notwithstanding the issuance of the $1.6 billion tax bills,
which were purchased initially by banks. Since midyear
there has also been no net increase in total loans and in
vestments at city banks and a smaller increase at country
banks than in other recent years. The loan expansion has
been smaller and bank sales of Government securities to
obtain funds to lend also have been less than last year.
These changes in the situation no doubt reflect in part
restraint on lending by banks because of the continued
tight reserve positions and the lowered liquidity status
of banks. Complaints of inability to obtain credit would
indicate that credit demands are still large.
Analysis of business loans by types indicates that the
seasonal industries have been obtaining generally as much
credit as is usual, with a greater than usual increase for

11/13/56 -12-
food processors and commodity dealers.
The heaviest borrowing of a nonseasonal nature has been
by companies in the petroleum, chemical, and rubber industries
and by public utilities. Repayment of loans by borrowers in
the metal industries, which has been substantial since mid
year, shows some signs of slackening. Reduction in sales
finance company borrowing at banks has been greater than at
the same time in other recent years, although their new
issues in the capital market have also been smaller.
Finance companies are likely to have substantially in
creased credit needs in the next few months, as automobile
production and sales expand. It appears that slackened
credit demands in some lines has been accompanied by in
creases in others, but it is significant that the aggregate
growth has been less.
The money supply appears to have shown less than the
customary seasonal increase in October and has shown no
seasonally-adjusted growth since midyear. The increase in
the past twelve months has been about 1-1/2 per cent. Such
growth as has occurred has been principally at banks outside
leading cities. Velocity of deposits, on the other hand, in
the third quarter of the year was 8 per cent larger than a
year ago, and probably higher than at any time in the past
25 years.
The slackened growth in bank deposits has been reflected
in bank reserve needs, which have increased less than pro
jections on the basis of the usual seasonal and growth pat
tern. Hence the increase in Federal Reserve holdings of
Treasury bills has been somewhat less than projected. Sys
tem operations, however, together with the other factors
affecting the supply of reserves, have kept member bank net
borrowed reserves at a somewhat lower average level than
that prevailing a year ago and substantially below that of
last spring.
Further tightening in money markets and restraint on
bank lending, despite reduced bank borrowing to obtain re
serves, reflects in part the lowered liquidity position of
banks and particularly the continued pressure on New York
City banks. In recent weeks borrowings at the Federal Re
serve Banks have declined at both country banks and reserve
city banks, while New York banks have continued to borrow
heavily both at the Reserve Bank and in the Federal funds
market.
Reserve projections for the remaining weeks of the year,
which contain the period of peak demands for reserve funds,
are made uncertain by the usual highly uncertain and erratic

11/13/56 -13-
element of float. If average net borrowed reserves remain
around the recent level of $250 million, between $500 mil
lion and $800 million of additional Federal Reserve credit
will be needed during the next seven weeks. A correspond
ing reduction would be needed during January. Because of
the high float to be expected next week, System purchases
will not be needed until the following week. Needs are
likely to be largest in the last week of December.
A portion of the temporary variations in reserve needs
can probably be met through the liberal use of repurchase
contracts, particularly if the market bill rate continues
close to or above 3 per cent. Some outright purchases will
be needed in the next few weeks, followed by sales or run
offs of bills in January.
After Mr. Thomas' statement, Chairman Martin said that inasmuch
as there were indications that the next few weeks might be a difficult
period, he would suggest that another meeting of the Committee be held
on November 27. This would not mean, he said, any change in the time
set for the meeting on December 10 which is to be followed by a meet
ing on December 11 with Congressman Patman's subcommittee. All the
members of the Committee were agreeable to a meeting on November 27
at 10:00 a.m.
There then ensued a discussion of the current economic and
credit outlook and what the credit policy of the Committee should be
in the next two weeks. Mr. Hayes made the opening statement as follows:
1. There seems to be no doubt that business conditions
in general will make a highly satisfactory showing through
the fourth quarter. Among the favorable elements may be
mentioned the high and rising gross national product, the
prospect of record Christmas sales, the apparently good
initial reception of the the new automobile models--although
it is still too early to appraise automobile prospects
accurately--and above all continued growth in capital ex
penditures for plant.

11/13/56 -14
2. At the same time, there is some further accumula
tion of evidence tending to confirm what we suggested at the
last meeting, i.e., that the upward momentum of the boom may
be losing some of its force. Apart from the possibilities
inherent in the highly uncertain international situation, we
do not see any major new influences on the horizon which
would be likely to cause renewed acceleration of the upward
trend in business and prices. Among the items which may
point to some slowing down in the upward trend of capital
expenditures are the decline in seasonally adjusted Septem
ber figures for industrial construction, the failure of
machinery orders to record any gain in September, and a
declining trend in structural steel orders over the last
few months. Furthermore, the profit squeeze which has been
in evidence now for nearly a year, taken in conjunction with
the sharply reduced liquidity of our industrial corporations,
at least raises a question as to whether some capital spend
ing programs may be discouraged simply for lack of funds, in
addition to the dampening effect of lower earnings themselves.
3. It appears that residential construction, which is
currently at a level of one million units per annum, is not
likely to increase and may well decline. There have also
been a number of signs of weakening in demand for consumers
goods. Preliminary estimates of total retail sales in October
show no change from September, when sales were lower than in
August. Department store sales in October dropped 6 per cent
from September and were only 1 per cent above a year ago
despite higher retail prices. Price tendencies are still up
ward in finished goods, both at the wholesale and at the retail
level, but a number of industrial raw material prices had been
declining until the Middle East situation erupted.
4. In the area of bank credit, the growth of loans on a
country-wide basis has been somewhat slower in the last month
or so than had been expected, but loans in the New York area
have risen substantially for the past two weeks. Looking back
over the year, we find total loans and investments of com
mercial banks up only about $1 billion in the first nine months
as against $5 billion in the whole of 1955. The nine months'
increase in money supply is less than 1 per cent.
5. Bank liquidity has, of course, been cut sharply and
it is probable that, because of this factor, the restraining
effects of any given level of net borrowed reserves are more
severe than would have been the case a year or so ago.
6. The Treasury's cash offering for payment this week
will be followed soon by a major refunding operation, so that
it is incumbent on the System to maintain an "even keel" in

11/13/56 -15-
the Government securities market. The capital markets are
still in a sensitive condition, and this may become accentu
ated in the area of municipal issues in view of the very
sizable new bond authorizations voted on Election Day.
7. The degree of tightness in the banking structure,
especially in the money centers, is probably as great as it
has been at any time in the last two years. Member banks in
New York and Chicago are now short some $800 million, if we
include net purchases of Federal funds. While the current
Treasury bill offering will give the money center banks a
means of easing their liquidity position temporarily, the
ultimate effect of the Treasury's borrowing operations will
be to put additional pressure on the market.
8. Under these circumstances it would seem advisable
to maintain about the same degree of credit restraint as has
prevailed recently, but we would be very reluctant to see
that restraint appreciably intensified, especially in view
of the uncertainties created by the disturbed international
situation, the need for maintaining receptive market condi
tions for the Treasury's offerings, and the possibility that
some of the straws in the wind mentioned above may really
point to a leveling off of the current boom. We can see no
justification for a change in discount rates at the present
time, nor would we favor any change at this time in reserve
requirements. Later on, if it should become clearly desirable
to reduce the pressure on the banking system, as seems possible,
we might wish to explore the desirability of a small reduction
in reserve requirements in New York and Chicago as a method of
pinpointing our action in those areas where money is tightest
and as a step toward an ultimate goal of lower and more
uniform requirements. For the time being, open market opera
tions seem to be the only suitable means for implementing our
policies, and we would urge that primary attention be given
to the "feel" of the market, with consideration also of the
relationship between prevailing Treasury bill rates and the
discount rate. We would think a bill rate consistently 10 or
15 basis points above the discount rate, for example, would be
a sign of inappropriate tightness. While the actual level of
System-wide net borrowed reserves would be a secondary con
sideration, we would lean toward maintaining the statistical
position in approximately the range of the past few weeks;
but we would see no reason for concern if the float bulge
produces statistical free reserves even larger than last
month, so long as there is no "sloppiness" in the money market,
Mr. Erickson stated that conditions in the Boston District con
tinued strong. Nonagricultural employment was at a record in September

11/13/56 -16.
Weekly earnings and hours of factory workers were up in most States.
New business corporations were at a rate more than 5 per cent over
last year. For the first nine months the shoe business was ahead of
last year which was a good year. Construction was up 20 per cent in
September over a year ago. Deposits in mutual savings banks, on a
sample basis, were up 7.1 per cent over a year ago; they were still
growing but not at the same momentum as earlier. In March of this
year the Bank conducted a survey covering 115 manufacturers which
indicated that plant and equipment expenditures would be 21 per cent
ahead of 1955. A confirming survey in October indicated a 20 per cent
increase over last year and a preliminary estimate of a 12 per cent
increase in 1957. Only one of the 115 concerns mentioned lack of
ability to obtain funds as a reason for postponement of plans. The
most prevalent reasons given for postponement were inability to get
steel and to hire engineers, a manpower shortage.
Mr. Erickson would make no change in the Committee's directive
to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, in the discount rate, or in
the degree of tightness during the next two weeks. His reasons were
the international situation and the Treasury financing. He would not
be concerned about a temporary ease in that period due to changes in
float.
Mr. Irons commented that general activity in the Dallas District
continued at a high level. Nonagricultural employment had reached
another new high. Petroleum production was down about 1 per cent but it

11/13/56 -17.
was the feeling that conditions in the Middle East might result in
some increase during the next two months. The actual increase, he
said, would not be very much since the problem was one of distribu
tion facilities rather than production. The construction picture in
the Eleventh District was about the same as for the nation as a whole
with residential construction off somewhat. Retail trade had shown
little change and the increase expected this year had not occurred.
Bank loans had increased at a slower rate than a year ago. Bankers
with whom Mr. Irons had talked--and their comments were borne out
by the figures--indicated that the credit situation was not as tight
and the demand as reflected in actual loans was not as strong as they
were from four to six months ago. The Dallas District seemed to have
hit its peak in demands for credit and pressure on the banks in May
and June of this year. Member banks had not been borrowing heavily
and the Dallas Bank was not bothered by continuous borrowing. Confi
dence in the district in the general situation is strong.
Mr. Irons felt there were indications of further strength in
the national situation rather than a tapering off of activity. There
fore, he suggested no change in current credit policy. While he agreed
that the credit situation should not be made tighter, he would be
reluctant to see it eased. He felt the System should maintain a firm
position and the bill rate should be kept close to the discount rate.
He would make no change in the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Mangels reported that on the West Coast activity continued

11/13/56 -18
on the strong side with employment up from a year ago but with a
recent slight reduction in total mining and manufacturing. In
September insured unemployment increased slightly but the October
employment figures showed a compensating gain which brought them
back to the August levels. In retail trade department and furniture
stores showed some decline in September and that decline still existed
in preliminary figures for October. Automobile registrations were 27
per cent lower in September than August but in October were increased
again. In the San Francisco area reports indicated that the new
model cars were being received with considerable satisfaction, but
in the Oregon-Washington area there were reports that the reception
had not been quite as good as anticipated. Residential permits were
at the lowest level for 1956 but over-all construction showed a
greater increase than for the country as a whole. The decline in
residential construction continued to affect the lumber situation in
the Northwest and production, unfilled orders and prices were down,
while stocks were up. Some of the smaller mills had felt the reduc
tion in prices of plywood and they were considering an increase in
prices. How that would affect them was not certain since there were
orders for only three weeks production at the mills. Plans for spring
housing developments appear to be lacking, and there are no large
groups of housing starts being planned in some areas of the district.
Some bankers had estimated as low as 800,000 housing starts for the

11/13/56 -19
country for 1957. Other estimates were under one million or a little
over one million. Bank loans continued to be in demand and there was
considerable pressure for bank credit with loans up. Member bank
borrowing was also increasing but the district was still a net lender
with the difference between borrowings and purchases of Federal funds
on the one hand and loans to banks and sales of Federal funds on the
other of about $100 million on the credit side.
Mr. Mangels made the further statement that while activity in
his district continued high, as had been indicated, he sensed some
slight modification of the degree of optimism felt in the past. While
that change was not evident there was an undercurrent of "stop, look,
and listen."
Mr. Mangels agreed with Messrs. Hayes and Erickson that there
should be no change in the directive or the discount rate for the next
two weeks. He said that the System should not maintain any greater
degree of tightness and if any mistakes were made in policy execution
they should be on the side of ease. The influence of Treasury financ
ing and the international situation should be watched closely.
Mr. Powell stated that conditions in his district continued
at a satisfactory level. The district was not highly industrialized
but industrial employment was very high and there was an especially
low level of unemployment. The unusually long period of favorable
weather had allowed very heavy shipments of iron ore from the mines
of Minnesota and Michigan so that that part of the district was feeling

11/13/56 -20
very optimistic. Agriculture was doing better with a very fine corn
crop in most of the area. The drought area in South Dakota had had
a three-inch rain during the last few days and was optimistic. Bank
loans in the district were considerably higher than a year ago and he
thought city banks would have to return to a borrowing position some
time in the near future. Borrowings from the Federal Reserve Bank at
the moment were small.
Mr. Powell favored continuing a policy which would "keep an
even keel" for a variety of reasons, including the international situa
tion, Treasury financing, and a possible build up of inventory-a
development which the System should watch closely. The even keel
policy should be followed, he said, until the country could see how
some of the factors that were unpredictable now would work out.
Mr. Allen said that much that he might say about the economic
and credit outlook had already been said. Manufacturers of agricultural
machinery in his district have stated that they have experienced a
noticeable but not a high increase in sales of agricultural machinery
at the retail level. Loans to metal fabricators which had declined
for some months had begun to move in the other direction. There were
rumors of another increase in steel prices. Employment was increasing
because automobile companies were hiring again for production of the
new models and some of the plants were working six days a week. The
automobile people were feeling that they would not be able to tell

11/13/56 -21
until the end of December and possibly the middle of January whether
the new cars would be well received. It would take that long to fill
the channels and take care of ordinary sales. One of the very largest
manufacturers was saying privately that if the industry does not sell
six million cars next year the Federal Reserve System would be to
blame. Another important point mentioned by Mr. Allen was the decision
of Sears-Roebuck and Company to refinance $200 million of maturing term
debt through the sale of consumer time paper to banks. On the question
of policy, Mr. Allen would support what had been said during the meet
ing up to this point.
Mr. Leedy referred to the drought situation in the Tenth
District as continuing to be a serious one. While there had been
rains they had been spotty and had not materially changed the picture.
October throughout most of the district was one of the driest months
on record. As a result the district was confronted with a problem
of pastures and there had been sizeable liquidations of livestock.
The wheat lands in the western part of the district generally had taken
soil bank payments which had been an important offset to lack of in
come from crops. There was increased employment in the important
assembly plants which were going on an overtime basis at least temporar
ily. The banks in the district had not had the demands for credit
experienced in most other districts. Some of the country banks in
Nebraska had been borrowing more or less continually because of the
drought but the Federal Reserve Bank was not much concerned about that

11/13/56 -22
situation. There had also been sizable borrowings by the Omaha
banks and the "oil" banks in Tulsa and Oklahoma City.
Mr. Leedy was in agreement with the statement that the
hands of the System were pretty well tied so far as credit policy
was concerned during the next two weeks because of Treasury financ
ing and the uncertainty in the international situation. Aside from
that he felt on balance that there was somewhat "less steam in the
boiler" than there had been and the Committee was in a period of
uncertainty that was going to require careful watching. That meant,
he said, that for the immediate future there should be no change in
the Committee directive, in open market policy, or in the discount
rate.
Mr. Vardaman gave an outline report on his motor trip made
during the month of October through parts of the States of Virginia,
North Carolina, Tennessee, Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri,
Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and
Maryland. Distance traveled was about 3,800 miles, visiting twenty
seven principal cities and numerous small towns, meeting primarily
with individuals and groups engaged in small business and professions.
Mr. Mills said that his views of near-term System credit policy
were in line with the consensus already expressed. Specifically, he
was in complete agreement with Mr. Hayes' appraisal of the economic
situation and would second his suggestions for flexibly adapting
the System's credit policy to developments in the economy that are

11/13/56 -23
within the realm of possibility.
Mr. Robertson said he could not see the "straws in the wind"
that other members of the Committee seemed to see that would indicate
a slackening in the economy. It appeared to him that the Middle East
crisis would likely result in an increase in Federal spending, and
with more money in the picture, it would be more necessary than ever
that the System maintain restraint. Therefore, he would align himself
with Messrs. Irons and Vardaman, as he understood their statements,
that restraint certainly should not be lessened. He would dislike
very much during the next two weeks to see any mistakes on the side
of ease in the execution of policy and if mistakes have to be made
he would make them on the side of restraint. In other words, he would
do whatever was necessary to maintain the existing degree of restraint
without any slackening.
Mr. Shepardson said that in view of the uncertainty created by
recent foreign developments, he would hesitate to change existing policy
until the Committee could see which way developments turned. It ap
peared to him that the Committee had been getting some of the results
that it wanted to achieve and that it should maintain about the line
that it has been following. He said he was particularly concerned
with the factors presented by Mr. Young relating to price increases
and, while he recognized that the System can not control all of the
factors involved in the price situation, he felt it should keep it
self in position to do what it can to resist further price increases.

11/13/56 -24
Therefore, with the present uncertainties and the latent pressures
that are still in the economy he favored holding as nearly as pos
sible to the degree of restraint which has been exercised during
recent weeks.
Mr. Fulton said activity in his district continued at a very
high pace with unemployment at the lowest level in over a year and it
is impossible to employ skilled workers. The machine tool industry
has a large backlog of orders which is increasing and deliveries are
being postponed. Steel is working at over rated capacity levels but
there is still a marked shortage in structurals, plates, and bars
which are not being promised until the first quarter of 1958. The
automobile industry is living off of its inventory and currently is
taking on 15 per cent of steel mill output instead of the actual 20
per cent of current production. The estimate in the Fourth District
is that 6,750,000 cars will be produced next year. How that many cars
will be financed is a matter still to be settled but a further lengthen
ing of instalment terms might become the rule rather than the exception.
Another development is that further tightening in the steel picture
might come from the tanker program being talked of for the transporta
tion of oil, Mr. Fulton did not think that such a program could be
carried out without the allocation of materials which would be to the
detriment of the takers of present production.
Mr. Fulton felt there are serious pressures in the price field.
Automobile prices have gone up about 7 per cent. Coal and freight rates

11/13/56 -25
have increased and the price of scrap metal in Cleveland has gone as
high as $78.00 a ton on at least one sale. These developments, added
to wage increases that are a part of the recent wage agreement, portend
higher steel prices after the first of the year. He looked for a strong
seasonal upswing in loans. Some businesses have used their working
capital and if there is any disposition on the part of business to buy
ahead in inventories the demand would be very strong. The low liquidity
position of many of the banks is aiding System policy in that banks are
screening loans. In these circumstances, he did not think there is any
reason for a relaxation of the policy now being followed and if any
error is to be made it should be for the purpose of holding the line
and should not be on the side of ease. He would keep the bill rate in
close relation to the discount rate and would make no change in reserve
requirements or the discount rate until pressures appeared more vigor
ously than is the case at the present time.
In response to an inquiry from Governor Vardaman as to whether
the automobile companies had been assured by the steel industry that
their needs would be taken care of, Mr. Fulton stated that it was a
foregone conclusion that since the automobile manufacturers are steady
customers of the steel companies their needs will be taken care of and
there will be no restriction on the manufacture of automobiles because
of a lack of steel.
Mr. Williams commented that recent information as to future
expectations had come to the Philadelphia Bank from two special sources,

11/13/56 -26
(1) the annual survey of capital expenditures, and (2) conversations
with 13 economists representing manufacturing, retail stores, rail
roads, and banks.
The survey indicated an increase in capital expenditures of
13 per cent in 1957 with a concentration of 43 per cent in petroleum,
63 per cent in chemicals, and 6 per cent in primary metals. Four of
the remaining 13 classes planned increases, with nine planning to spend
less than currently. On the question of inventories the results of the
survey had been less than satisfactory in past years because of the
rapidity with which the inventory situation could change. Therefore,
the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia did no more than ask for a
general opinion about inventories and the consensus was that they were
satisfactory at the present time.
Mr. Williams then referred to comments of six of the 13
economists previously mentioned which he summarized as follows:
1. (Chemical company) Expects a gross national product
of $430 billion as the average for 1957. Excess capacity is
being built into the American system but it will not show up
or become serious until about 1958 or 1959. One of the
company officials earlier had pointed out that the company
was getting a substantial percentage of sales from products
that were not in existence 10 years ago--the implication
being that the chemical industry would continue to develop
and bring out new products to keep the industry booming
forever. The economist's reply to a reference to that
statement was that the chemical industry is also making
things that they wish they were not making any longer.
2. (Railroad) Economists had pretty well sold their
managements that the American economy probably was growing
at a rate of about 3 per cent a year and as a result of
that we may be making capital investments much too fast
with the result that we may be building toward an ultimate
collapse that could be serious.

11/13/56 -27-
3. (National bank) Customers are complaining about
the profit-margin squeeze. Productive capacity is adequate
in many lines and prices have not gone up as much as expected.
Tight money together with prospective overcapacity is making
for ever tougher competition.
4. (Steel company) The steel industry is liquidating
inventory. As we enter 1957 production is at capacity and
will probably continue so through most of the second quarter.
The second half of the year, however, is expected to be lower
than the first half. Thus far so far as plate steel is con
cerned at this company, the demand should hold up throughout
most of the year. In this line they look for very little
decline in 1957.
5. (Hardware manufacture) Recently there has been a
softening in new orders which is expected to continue through
January and February of 1957 but the company still has a huge
backlog. The reason for this situation is a price increase
announced some time ago which stimulated a flow of new orders
to get in under the wire. 1956 has been the company's best
year ever and they expect 1957 to be even better. Dollar
volume in 1956 will be 25 to 35 per cent higher than 1955
and although they expect 1957 to be still higher the per
centage increase will not be as great as the 1956 increase
over 1955.
6. (Linoleum and related products) They expect 1957
business to be somewhat larger in dollar volume than 1956.
The standard forecast in terms of gross national product
ranges from $420 billion to $425 billion. Are rather in
clined toward the latter figure. Most of the increase in
dollar volume for 1957 is expected to come from price in
creases due to rising wages stimulating higher costs and
higher prices. Feel that we are in danger of pushing our
productive capacity in the American economy too fast, but
that this will not show up to be a serious problem before
1958 or 1959, perhaps late in 1957. As far as business
confidence is concerned the profit outlook is now less
favorable than it has been recently. As far as the building
and construction industry is concerned, expect a somewhat
higher over-all dollar volume in 1957, again due largely to
price increases. With respect to housing starts, they are
thinking in terms of 1 million for 1957. Repair and
modernization business is going to help that along. The
crest in commercial construction is expected to be reached
in about 12 to 18 months. Industrial construction is still
strong, with considerable backlog of orders. Tight money is
a major but not the only factor in the construction outlook.

11/13/56 -28.
7. (Department store) Department stores' downtown
sales in the spring of 1957 are expected to be 3 per cent
lower than the spring of 1956. Expect a leveling off of
sales in the suburban stores. Over all 1957 is expected
to be close to 1956.
Mr. Williams thought there should not be any great change in
the next two or three weeks in the Committee's short run policy. There
were expectations of the need for purchases of securities between now
and the end of the year which would run off in January but his assumption
was that the present degree of tightness would not be increased. He did
not favor any change in the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Johns was not aware of anything pertaining to the Eighth
District which needed to be discussed at any length. Member banks in
the district had been in relatively easy reserve positions. There had
been some member bank borrowing largely for seasonal purposes but that
had slackened recently. He had made some limited inquiries from some
of the large member banks, mostly in St. Louis, recently to see if they
had an answer for the failure of loan volume to show expansion accord
ing to the traditional seasonal pattern. There was some diversity in
the replies but the interesting response was that the banks were not
concerned because the loan demand had not gone down last spring and,
therefore, they were very happy with the present volume. It may be
that there are growing evidences of a leveling out of the boom but
it was Mr. Johns' impression that the national economy was operating
at or approximately at capacity. In that situation, he would not
like to see any easing of the degree of restraint that had been imposed

11/13/56 -29
in recent weeks. Neither would he recommend any further tightening
during the next two weeks.
Mr. Szymczak said that while there are some weaknesses develop
ing in the economy they are not serious. It will not be possible to
judge how serious they might become until after the first of the year
or perhaps in February of next year. In the meantime, he felt that
the international situation would be expansionary in its net effect;
also during the next two weeks there would be the important problem
of Treasury refunding as well as the new money bills of almost two billion
dollars. For these reasons he would not alter in any way the policy
or practice that had been pursued in the last few weeks. He felt that
when the Committee meets again on November 27 it should take a look at
the discount rate because the over-all economic situation appears to be
inflationary.
Mr. Balderston expressed the view that there was no question
that the Committee should maintain existing open market policy between
now and the middle of December because to do otherwise would not be
"playing fair" with those responsible for Treasury financing. However,
he was concerned about a mixture of developments that confused him.
On the one hand he sensed that there may be another increase in steel
prices as well as a demand for higher freight rates. An increase in
steel prices would increase inflationary pressures in the spot where
they have been the worst, i.e., metals and metal products. Since the
Second World War, prices of industrial commodities have climbed 23 per

11/13/56 -30
cent; metals and metal products have gone up twice that amount. Mr.
Balderston felt that if prices were raised further that action would
accentuate the cost-price squeeze that is being disclosed in the third
quarter reports. The other factor in the national situation that
puzzled him was his feeling that expansion of plant by the use of
capital already raised might mean excess capacity even next year.
If that appeared, it would bear down on prices and perhaps bring about
some liquidation of inventories. Consequently, he felt that the im
mediate problem is to watch for inventory accumulations in the weeks
immediately ahead. The current policy should be continued for the
present, but the Committee should watch these divergent influences be
cause they may present problems later on.
Chairman Martin stated that as he understood the discussion it
was the consensus that there should be no change in the existing directive
to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or in the discount rate, although
there was some indication that the Committee might be alert to a change
in the rate later. He suggested that the members of the Committee ap
proach the November 27 meeting with an open mind on the entire economic
picture. The other members of the Committee concurred in Chairman
Martin's statement.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York, until other
wise directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (in
cluding replacement of maturing securities, and allowing

11/13/56 -31
maturities to run off without replacement) for the System
open market account in the open market or, in the case of
maturing securities, by direct exchange with the Treasury,
as may be necessary in the light of current and prospective
economic conditions and the general credit situation of the
country, with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in
the market to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to
restraining inflationary developments in the interest of
sustainable economic growth, and (c) to the practical
administration of the account; provided that the aggregate
amount of securities held in the System account (including
commitments for the purchase or sale of securities for the
account) at the close of this date, other than special short
term certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to
time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall
not be increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to
one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special
short-term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the
Treasury; provided that the total amount of such certificates
held at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not
exceed in the aggregate $500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System ac
count for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury securi
ties maturing within one year as may be necessary from time
to time for the accommodation of the Treasury; provided that
the total amount of such securities so sold shall not exceed
in the aggregate $500 million face amount, and such sales
shall be made as nearly as may be practicable at the prices
currently quoted in the open market,
Further reference was made to the question raised by Mr. Rouse
earlier in this meeting with respect to an increase in the limit on
the total amount of bankers' acceptances that may be acquired by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and held at any one time. Chairman
Martin suggested that the memorandum prepared by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York with respect to purchases of bankers' acceptances
for the account of foreign central banks be circulated to all of the

11/13/56 -32
Presidents so that the matter raised by Mr. Rouse could be taken up
at a later meeting. Mr. Rouse stated that an addition to the memo
randum could be prepared and sent to the Board of Governors and the
Presidents which would comment on the purchase by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York of acceptances for its own account. There was
unanimous agreement that this course should be followed.
At the request of Mr. Hayes, Chairman Martin commented briefly
on his observations during his recent trip to Europe.
Mr. Leedy inquired whether there would be any objection on the
part of the Presidents to postponing the December meeting of the Presi
dents' Conference with the understanding that it would be held in con
nection with one of the meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee
in January. After a discussion, the suggested postponement was agreed
to by all of the Presidents.
Mr. Rouse reported that the Emergency Training Program approved
at the meeting of the Committee on January 10, 1956 was now in operation
and the first two trainees were at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Assistant Secretary