A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, August 7, 1956, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Johns
Mr. Mills
Mr. Powell (Part of Meeting)
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Fulton, Alternate
Messrs. Bryan, Leedy, Treiber, and Williams,
Alternate Members, Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Leach, Irons, and Mangels, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Dallas, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. E. C. Harris, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Abbott, Parsons, Roelse, Willis,
and Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Chairman Martin noted that advice had been received of the elec
tion of Mr. Hayes as a member and of Mr. Treiber as alternate for Mr.

8/7/56 -2
Hayes as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, effective
August 1, 1956, to serve for the unexpired portion of the term end
ing February 28, 1957. Messrs. Hayes and Treiber had taken the
oaths of office for their respective positions prior to this meeting.
Chairman Martin suggested that Mr. Hayes be elected Vice
Chairman of the Committee succeeding Mr. Sproul, whose resignation
became effective June 30, 1956, and Mr. Balderston stated that he
would second this proposal.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, Mr.
Alfred Hayes was elected Vice Chairman
of the Federal Open Market Committee, to
serve until the election of his successor
at the first meeting of the Committee
after February 28, 1957, with the under
standing in the event of the discontinuance
of his official connection with the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York he would cease to
have any official connection with the Fed
eral Open Market Committee.
In welcoming Mr. Hayes as a member of the Committee, Chairman
Martin described the procedure followed in conducting the meetings and
their use as a means for discussing all System matters relating to
credit policy, with participation including not only Committee members
but also the Presidents who were not currently serving as members of
the Committee. He emphasized the point that these discussions are for
the purpose of giving the different parts of the System the benefit
of views of others and that expression of views during such discussions
should not be taken as committing a person to any particular view if

8/7/56 -3.
the matter came to a vote.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of
the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee held on July 17, 1956, were
approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the mem
bers of the Committee a report covering open market operations during
the period July 17 through August 1, 1956, and at this meeting a
supplementary report covering commitments executed August 2 through
August 6, 1956, was distributed. Copies of both reports have been
placed in the files of the Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period July 17
through August 6, 1956, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
At Chairman Martin's request, Mr. Young made a statement on
the economic situation, supplementing the staff memorandum distributed
under date of August 3, 1956. He said that the composite of data
recently becoming available confirms, as pointed out at the last
meeting, that economic activity has resumed an upward slant. Work
stoppage for over a month in the steel industry, serious as it has
been for activities affected, has not apparently greatly damped
expansive trends. Abroad in most industrial countries, output con
tinues at close to record levels. With productive resources in
major industrial countries intensively utilized, wage and other
costs tending upward, demand pressures strong, and business psychology

8/7/56 -4
on the buoyant side, pricing conditions in commodity markets in
these countries can best be generalized as firm to rising. New
international tensions arising out of the Suez Canal incident are
a source of fresh uncertainties and, for internationally traded
commodities under a strengthening demand situation, have precipitated
sharp price increases.
Mr. Young then presented the following comments on specific
developments and situations:
(1) Reflecting mainly work stoppages in steel and
related industries and some reduction in nondurables out
put (notably textiles and paperboard), industrial produc
tion for July is presently estimated at 135. The index
will recover some in August but will not regain its June
level because of time necessary to restore full-scale
steel output, belated effects on steel consuming indus
tries of short materials and parts supplies, and new work
stoppages in the aluminum industry. Increased output of
auto parts and equipment for 1957 models is expected to
about offset effects on the over-all index of reduced
auto assemblies for model changeover.
(2) Construction activity in July, as measured by
value put in place, was at a record high and 3 per cent
above a year earlier. The advance reflected especially
increased outlays for industrial construction and some
further rise for commercial building. Residential and
public construction were about maintained.
(3) Employment in mid-July showed maintenance of
record job levels, so that little change was registered
in unemployment figures, which exclude for the most part
workers on strike. Unemployment claims for the last
week of July totaled 1.2 million, up 140,000 from last
year, mainly reflecting layoffs in the automobile and
related industries.
(4) Personal incomes in June showed a further
moderate increase, reaching a record annual rate of
$324 billion, up $7 billion from the end of year and
$18 billion over a year ago. The wage component of
personal income, which accounts for nearly 70 per cent
of the total, is currently under upward push from wage

8/7/56
-5-
rate adjustments in the steel and aluminum industries
and from automatic cost of living adjustments affect
ing before long possibly a million workers.
(5) Reflecting rising disposable incomes, consumer
takings at retail continued strong in June and at depart
ment stores in July. Passenger car sales, in the first
20 days of July, new and used, were off from June, but
only by about the usual seasonal amount. With new model
shutdowns approaching, this encouraged manufacturers to
maintain or increase assemblies moderately. New and used
car inventories about held even. Judging from department
store figures, sales of household durables in July con
tinued to show strength, although sales of major ap
pliances were off from their high year-ago volume.
(6) The rate of instalment credit expansion,
seasonally adjusted, slackened further in June and probably
also again in July. This slackening, as in other recent
months, reflects an overtaking of new extensions of credit
by the steady climb of repayments on previously incurred
debts. While further liberalization of downpayment terms
in instalment financing has apparently been checked,
available information suggests that the proportion of
credit written on very liberal terms has continued to rise.
(7) Manufacturers' sales in June held close to record
May levels, and, while new orders were off, they continued
to exceed sales, thus adding further to unfilled orders.
Inventories at manufacturing levels extended their rise,
with the increase concentrated in nondurable lines, but
distributive inventories, especially at retail, were off
some. Thus, the total rise in business inventories was
probably less than in other recent months. The work-off
of steel inventories at the manufacturing level in July,
with relatively small change in distributive inventory
positions, is expected to result in some decline in the
over-all business inventory position for this month.
(8) At wholesale, prices of industrial materials,
especially metals and rubber, have recently moved upward,
some of them influenced by the Suez Canal crisis. Lumber
and plywood have weakened some from earlier in the year
and textiles fibres other than wool have continued on the
soft side. In steel, smaller producers who continued in
operations and steel warehouses have advanced prices by
an average of about $10 a ton, slightly more than the
$8.50 increase announced yesterday by the major producer.
Since mid-July a number of producers of finished metal
products and of tires have raised their prices.

8/7/56 -6
(9) Average prices of farm products have changed
little in the past two months after advancing 10 per cent
from December to mid-June. Recently meat prices have
moved up sharply and grains have advanced some. Cotton,
however, has declined over the past month to about the
level of the new crop future. Fruits, vegetables, fats
and oils have declined moderately.
(10) Consumer prices at mid-June were 1.5 per cent
higher than a year ago, most of the rise occurring in
May and June. Judging from recent retail price tendencies
for food, services, and rents, a further advance for con
sumer prices seems likely to mid-July.
(11) Reflecting the strong international situation,
U. S. exports showed a marked rise in June. Exports of
non-agricultural products rose very sharply, and a further
advance was registered for agricultural exports.
(12) Abroad in industrial countries, heavy capital
investment by business enterprise continues to provide a
major expansive impulse. The latest plant and equipment
surveys conducted this spring in such countries as Canada,
Britain, and Sweden all show substantial upward revisions
from similar surveys made last fall. The French economy
is under special pressure because of the drain on resources
resulting from military operations in Algeria.
In concluding his presentation, Mr. Young suggested that a
special comment might be in order. With intensive utilization of avail
able resources in this country and with its aggregate demand resuming
expansive tendencies, he said, price strength in many markets and up
ward price pressures in other markets are to be expected. In a limited
business cycle sense, these price characteristics may be called infla
tionary. They are not inflationary, however, in the sense that they
result from lax or irresponsible financial policy--fiscal and monetary
on the part of the Governmental authorities. The problem faced by the
economy at this time is not inflation fed in this way, Mr. Young said,
but rather inflation fed by the competitive spending, investing, and

8/7/56 -7
borrowing propensities of a highly optimistic business and consumer
public. The dangers are in misdirected use of resources, unwise
judgment as to business and investment opportunity, overoptimism as
to management's ability to pass along higher wages and other costs
into higher prices, overcommitment of credit based on a discounting
of the future that is too favorable to the present, and a cumulative
deterioration in the quality of credit. At this stage of a very long
business upswing--interrupted by only two minor cyclical setbacks,
and at the present high level of commodity prices--established as a
result of war, postwar, and post-Korean monetary and fiscal inflations,
these dangers are very real. The practical challenge to monetary
policy at this phase, Mr. Young said, is to minimize the dangers by
fostering as economical or efficient an allocation of scarce resources,
including savings, as can reasonably be effected by market processes.
Chairman Martin next called upon Mr. Thomas, who commented on
credit developments as follows:
Credit developments in the last three weeks have not
been particularly striking, reflecting the summer lull.
Comparisons with previous years are vitiated by the deferment
of the midsummer Treasury cash financing to a later date
than usual this year. The most striking developments were
sharp decreases in bank deposits and loans at New York City
and Chicago banks, in contrast to relatively little change
at banks in other leading cities. Commercial loans de
clined moderately in July, and loans on securities and hold
ings of securities also declined. The total money supply is
estimated to have shown a small further increase on a
seasonally adjusted basis in July, although less than in
July of 1955.
Capital market offerings, which were very large in
July, are expected to be more moderate in August but may
exceed the total for August of any previous year. Reports

8/7/56
continue to indicate a large volume of issues in prospect,
including both public offerings and private placements.
Some of the proceeds of issues by finance companies may be
used to pay off bank loans. There are indications that
some of the corporate demand for bank loans is for relatively
long terms and for capital purposes. State and local Govern
ment financing is expected to be fairly moderate in August
which will help dealers lighten heavy inventories, but large
offerings are in prospect for the fall months.
The demands on the capital markets have been reflected
in a further rise in corporate bond yields to new highs on
both outstanding securities and new issues. Yields on
Treasury bonds, which declined in May and June, have again
risen to or above previous highs for this year and are close
to 1953 highs. Stock prices have generally been close to
highs of the year. Yesterday's sharp drop may reflect in
part a technical reaction. In contrast to bond yields,
Treasury bill yields have continued relatively low, reflect
ing strong demand for liquidity instruments at a time when
they were in reduced supply and the low level of net borrowed
reserves, which reduced pressures on banks as compared with
last spring.
The Treasury's offering of $3 billion of 2-3/4 per cent
tax anticipation certificates maturing next March will provide
an additional supply of short-term securities and may relieve
some of the demand pressures, although two-thirds of the pro
ceeds will be used to retire debt. This offering apparently
has been popular in contrast to the earlier exchange offering
of some $12 billion of one-year-plus notes at 2-3/4 per cent,
on which attrition totaled almost $900 million. The Treasury
may need to borrow an additional $2 or $3 billion of cash
toward the end of October.
Looking ahead, rough estimates of capital and credit needs
that would be consistent with relatively full and sustained
employment without inflation, indicate that credit growth during
the remainder of this year should be less than last year. How
ever, reports indicate continued strong demands. Banks are
reported to be considering a further rise in the prime rate and
also are considering stricter requirements as to maintenance
of minimum balances, as well as limitation of the prime rate to
a smaller group of borrowers. In this situation, particularly
in view of recent upward pressures on commodity prices, it
would seem that borrowers should be forced to endeavor to raise
funds from savings before resorting to bank credit and that
there should be continued limitation of credit and monetary
expansion to a very moderate rate. There seems to be a general
recognition and expectation in financial circles of the need

8/7/56 -9
for tight money. Last fall, banks found it necessary to
keep their borrowings at a relatively high level--$800
million to $1.1 billion--and System open market operations
were moderate and were used mostly in periods of particu
larly heavy needs. Policy questions before the Committee
at this time are whether operations should be directed
toward maintaining some predetermined level of net
borrowed reserves and, if so, at what level; or, should
purchases except those to moderate temporary wide swings,
be held off until clearly needed to relieve undue pres
sures?
In response to a question from Mr. Harris, Chairman Martin
stated that he thought the suggestion that the Treasury might issue
additional bills to take care of investor demand for short-term securi
ties was still under consideration and that there was a possibility
that such an offering would be made.
Chairman Martin then called upon Mr. Hayes, who made a state
ment substantially as follows:
1. For several months there has been a close balance
between the forces of inflation and deflation, but settle
ment of the steel strike appears to have tipped the balance
in favor of the former. The sizeable increases in steel
workers' wages and steel prices are likely to start a chain
reaction in other industries. Already there is some evidence
that this is taking place.
2. Even before settlement of the steel strike there
were signs of increasing confidence in the business outlook.
The so-called "weak spots," especially automobiles and hous
ing, appear at least to have stabilized, while some of the
"strong spots" seem stronger than ever.
3. Consumer demand is high; business and public capital
outlays are very large; total employment recently attained a
new high. Residential construction, while well below last
year's record, is still at a very satisfactory level if
viewed in longer perspective. Excess dealers' stocks of
automobiles are being liquidated.
4. Prices in many areas seem to confirm a tendency for
effective demand to outrun available resources. In June, the
consumer price index rose to a new high record, and a further
increase is probable. Price rises in basic materials will

8/7/56 -10-
soon be reflected in higher prices of finished goods, some
of which have already appeared.
5. Long-term interest rates are under pressure. The
market apparently expects heavy demands for capital and credit.
6. Demand for bank credit was very strong in the first
half of the year. While it may be not quite so strong in the
second half, after allowing for seasonal influences it will
doubtless still be very substantial. The seasonal expansion
in loans should be under way within a month.
7. The business and credit situation calls for a policy
of restraint on the part of the Federal Reserve. We shall of
course wish to make reserves available to meet seasonal require
ments and the basic need of long-term growth. The System made
it clear in June that it was prepared to supply sufficient re
serves to avoid a severe credit squeeze. Gross member bank
borrowings recently have been around the $700 million mark.
8. Under present conditions, with inflationary pressures
growing, reserves for seasonal needs should be provided only as
the needs occur. To provide them in advance of needs might
cause confusion, create easier money market conditions, and
tend to encourage a too rapid expansion of bank credit.
9. The Treasury closed its books last night on its cash
offering of $3 billion tax anticipation certificates, to be
paid for August 15. In view of the Treasury financing, we
should try to maintain an even keel in the money market and
credit conditions for the next couple of weeks. Thereafter,
assuming that business conditions continue in accordance with
expectations, we may need to move toward more restraint.
10. Recognizing that "net borrowed reserves" are not an
infallible measure of credit restraint, we should nevertheless
seek to keep them at a level of about a quarter of a billion
dollars through completion of the Treasury financing--there
after trending upward and perhaps reaching $400 million during
the subsequent two weeks.
11. Since May 23, 1956, the general directive from the
Committee to the New York Bank has directed open market trans
actions with a view to "restraining inflationary developments
in the interest of sustainable growth, while taking into
account any deflationary tendencies in the economy." Since
the balance of influences in the economy is now clearly on the
side of expansion and possibly inflation, we should consider
the desirability of dropping the clause "while taking into
account any deflationary tendencies in the economy."
12. The tense and unpredictable situation in the Middle
East suggests that any changes in credit policy should be
decidedly cautious until that situation has been further
clarified.

8/7/56 -11
13. The officers of the New York Bank believe that
there should be no change at this time in the Bank's
discount rate. We should be alert to the possibility of
increasing the rate within the next month or so if condi
tions then warrant it. Incidentally, a few of the directors
at the last board meeting of the Bank spoke of this possi
bility.
Mr. Johns said that he and others at the St. Louis Bank had
been considering and debating the problems stated by Mr. Young at the
conclusion of his presentation and the questions posed by Mr. Thomas
at the end of his presentation. This group, which includes members
of the Board of Directors who serve on the executive committee of the
St. Louis Bank, doubts whether in the present situation there may not
be danger that the monetary authorities might attempt to do more than
they can reasonably be expected to do and to assume more responsibility
than really belongs to them. That, however, does not say that the
monetary authorities should not do what they reasonably can do. There
fore, Mr. Johns said, his group was inclined to agree with the position
stated by Mr. Hayes, namely, that in the period between this and its
next meeting the Committee should have a target range for net borrowed
reserves around the $400 million mark, although it should not move too
quickly to that figure in view of the payment to be made shortly for
the current Treasury offering. At the moment, Mr. Johns said, the
St. Louis Bank contemplates no change in its discount rate.
Mr. Bryan reported some feeling at the Atlanta Bank that the
recent wage increases do not necessarily lead to as much inflation as
we might think. However, that view rests upon certain hypotheses as

8/7/56 -12
to future behavior of the economy and whether, in the business cycle,
these price increases produce unemployment and other developments that
would be as undesirable as inflation. The general assumption at Atlanta,
Mr. Bryan said, was that the economy needs restraint at the present time.
The problem is how to apply that restraint in terms of magnitude and
instruments to be used, Mr. Bryan said; should reserves first be sup
plied through the open market only when clearly needed and for the pur
pose of relieving evidences of disorder in the capital markets, to be
followed by an increase in the discount rate; or should the System flag
down the economy soon with an increase in the discount rate and then use
open market operations? Mr. Bryan said that he was inclined to supply
reserves in a niggardly way through the open market and then to in
crease the discount rate, although it might be well to tell the banking
system promptly that it should be reluctant in making commitments for
fall borrowing.
Mr. Williams described economic activity in the Philadelphia
District as continuing at a high level, despite some soft spots. Resort
business this summer has not lived up to earlier expectations although
there is optimism concerning August and part of September. Agriculture
is one of the soft spots. On the whole, however, the economy is operat
ing at a high level. Loans at banks increased slightly last week after
a mild decline over the preceding five weeks. Mr. Williams said there
is some evidence that the small growth in deposits in the Philadelphia

8/7/56 -13
area is in part the result of the small balances maintained by
borrowers located outside the area, and banks are considering
ways of bringing about a more desirable relationship in this re
spect. Some banks are clearly pessimistic about meeting loan
demands without borrowing, Mr. Williams said, and this leaves
the Reserve Bank with the prospect of a continued discount problem.
The banks are sensitive to this situation and have had discussions
with selected large corporate borrowers and put them on notice re
garding the restrictive policy they expect to follow regarding loan
extensions during the fall months. The general approach the Phila
delphia Bank is taking to the discount problem, Mr. Williams said,
is to continue to discuss it with the banks. The spirit of the
Reserve Bank's approach, he said, was constructive restraint. The
banks seem to expect that the Reserve Bank will move before too long
to a higher discount rate.
Mr. Fulton said that, with wage settlements having been made
by several key industries of the Cleveland District, with substantial
increases, and with the coal settlement coming up, he anticipated a
surge of business rather than any hesitancy. The price increase
announced for steel was smaller than expected but would result in a
substantial increase in costs for users of steel, and they would also
have increased labor costs. For some time, Mr. Fulton said, he had
felt the Committee's policy had not been sufficiently restrictive to

8/7/56 -14
contain the pressures building up in the economy. He felt it would
be only a short time until a rise in the discount rate would be
completely appropriate. In the meantime, there should be no slack
in the money market and net borrowed reserves should be higher than
they have been for some time. Mr. Fulton said that he agreed with
Mr. Hayes that the Committee should look forward in the reasonably
near future to taking such steps as will dampen the inflation which
is not only in the making but which is actively in operation.
Mr. Shepardson said that everything pointed to further pres
sures on the upward side, even more definitely than the Committee
had been thinking in the past few weeks, and we should be in the posi
tion of exercising further restraint for the period immediately ahead.
Apparently it would be desirable to hold the present situation through
the Treasury financing, but his hope would be that the Committee would
be as quick to take up any unexpected slack as it had been to take up
unexpected tightness. It was Mr. Shepardson's view that, since the
last meeting at which the emphasis in discussion was on the side of
tightness, the operation of the System account had tended to let
developments toward ease run, while it had been quick to offset any
developments toward tightness. He hoped that the Committee could
begin to tighten the situation as it approached an expansion period
around the beginning of next month. Mr. Shepardson said that he
also felt that toward the end of this month or early in September
it would be appropriate to increase the discount rate.

8/7/56 -15
Mr. Robertson stated that, in line with what had been said
this morning, he felt that for the future the Committee should employ
a greater amount of restrictiveness. It should not credit monetary
policy for keeping an even keel when things go well and deny responsi
bility when inflationary pressures seem to get the upper hand. Mr.
Robertson said he agreed with Mr. Hayes that the reference to taking
account of deflationary tendencies should be deleted from clause (b)
of the first paragraph of the Committee's directive to the New York
Bank. He would disagree with Mr. Bryan that open market operations
should be used to take the load of restriction first, and let the
discount rate take second place, his feeling being that the time is
rapidly approaching when the Reserve Banks should consider increasing
discount rates. Mr. Robertson said that it seemed clear that every
one who had commented thus far at the meeting agreed that the battle
for the next few months was one of fighting inflation and that the
System should do it with every possible tool that it had. He would
be reluctant in adding reserves through open market operations and
would take advantage of every opportunity to tighten the situation,
moving in one direction. He would not set any goal for negative
free reserves but would hope that they would move upwards.
Mr. Mills then made a statement substantially as follows:
I am disturbed by the policy recommendations that have
been made against the background of the inflationary factors
foreseen by Mr. Young and Mr. Thomas in their discussion of
the economic situation. Adoption of these recommendations

8/7/56 -16.
under present tight money conditions would, in my opinion,
compel a continuance of the contraction in bank loans and
investments that has gone on for some time in the face of
a substantially lower level of negative free reserves than
was the case earlier this year, and obviously would not
provide for the seasonal expansion of bank credit for which
we have previously agreed to supply reserves. A 2-3/4 per
cent rate for Federal funds and a relatively high volume of
Federal Reserve Bank discounts give evidence of tight money
conditions. A still better indicator of tightness, that
opposes the superficial evidence of ease implied by the
reduction in negative free reserves, is the constant use week
after week of around $1-1/2 billion of funds borrowed by the
reporting member banks from the Federal Reserve Banks and
from others. If new reserves had really become available in
quantity, it is certain that bank loans and investments would
not have fallen and banks would have had less need for
borrowed funds.
In short, the type of policy that is favored would force
a further contraction of bank credit just at the time seasonal
demands for credit must be met through reserve support. More
over, such a policy would tend to induce added weakness in the
prices for long-term U. S. Government securities when investor
confidence may already be unsettled by the international ten
sions resulting from the Suez Canal crisis. Everything con
sidered, it seems to me that action taken now to help stabi
lize the market for long-term U. S. Government securities
would bolster investor confidence at the same time the System
was supplying reserves in acknowledgment of its declared com
mitment to meet the legitimate needs of the commercial banks.
Therefore, it is recommended that the System open market
account make direct purchases of Treasury bills during the
next week or ten days amounting to $100 million, to the end
of relieving the pressure on the commercial banks to liquidate
U. S. Government securities and in the process to help stabi
lize their market. Such action would also avoid depending
excessively on the estimated expansion of float for supplying
the reserves that will be needed to prevent the prospective
increase on August 15 in bank Tax and Loan Account deposits
from causing undue tightness. It is my opinion that we should
be wary of adopting any policy at this time that would pass
from desirable restraint into a policy of credit restriction.
Mr. Vardaman stated that, in principle, his remarks would be
repetitive of those by Messrs. Hayes and Johns except that he did not

8/7/56 -17
interpret their remarks to mean what Mr. Mills apparently had inter
preted them to mean. He would not interpret those remarks to advocate
credit contraction or to advocate undue credit restriction as compared
with a policy of normal or what we believe to be sound credit restraint.
Mr. Vardaman said there would be danger if there were any possibility
that Federal Reserve credit policy would be interpreted to mean con
traction; this would be extremely bad and he could not go along with
any such policy. His view was that the System should pursue a policy
that could only be interpreted as one of gentle restraint until such
time as further restraint may become necessary. He would not recom
mend an increase in discount rates now, feeling that to the uninitiated
such an increase might be interpreted as a further spread of the price
rise that might be a result of the steel wage settlement. An increase
in the cost of money in the short-term range is not restrictive, Mr,
Vardaman said. Continuance of a quarter of a billion of negative free
reserves possibly could be followed, if necessary as conditions
warranted, by an increase up to $400 million or even $500 million.
As to the Committee's directive, Mr. Vardaman said that rather than
delete the reference to taking account of deflationary conditions, he
had thought that clause (b) of the first paragraph of the Committee's
directive might be changed by adding words which would make that part
read "...while taking into account any deflationary tendencies WHICH
MIGHT DEVELOP in the economy."
Mr. Hayes said that he would like to make it clear that he

8/7/56 .1.8
did not intend and he did not believe the others commenting intended
to imply that the System would not supply sufficient reserves to the
market to take care of a good part of the credit expansion that was
expected and which it was realized was inevitable during the remainder
of this year. He expected an increase in loans and that the System
would have to provide a good part of the reserves for that increase.
Mr. Hayes' point was that, rather than provide such reserves now or
in the near future, the System should "lean back a little" and only
put them out grudgingly.
Chairman Martin stated that he thought this was a desirable
clarification, and he then called upon Mr. Leach.
Mr. Leach reported scattered evidence of increasing strength
in the economy of the Fifth District. During July there was little
change in total loans of reporting member banks in the district or
in member bank borrowings from the Reserve Bank. Member banks have
indicated that loan demand continues strong and that it is expected
to be stronger. One type of business loan demand that is expanding
rapidly comes from dealers in road building machinery. Several of
the larger banks pointed out to him yesterday, Mr. Leach said, that
substantial seasonal increases in loan demand were expected on top
of a base already extremely high. The banks know that they will
have to make seasonal loans from now on during most of the rest of
this year. Bankers say that they are screening loans closely and
are turning down requests for term loans among others. Despite this

8/7/56 -19.
screening, unwanted new loan peaks are expected. Mr. Leach suggested
that the combination of increasing loan demand and of increases in
depreciation in the securities accounts of banks is likely to pro
duce increased problems in loan administration at the Reserve Banks,
especially with respect to those member banks that have been borrow
ing rather steadily. In commenting on policy to be followed, Mr.
Leach recalled that at the preceding meeting he expressed the view
that the Committee should hold a tight rein on credit. Developments
since that time have caused him to think that policy should be some
what tighter after the conclusion of the current Treasury financing.
This would presumably, but not necessarily, mean net borrowed reserves
in the $300 to $400 million area. If inflationary pressures accelerate,
as he thinks they will, Mr. Leach said he would not like to see the
System lag in taking additional restrictive measures. At the moment,
however, he would not recommend an increase in the discount rate of
the Richmond Bank. He would delete that part of clause (b) in the
first paragraph of the Committee's directive which provides that the
agent Bank take into account deflationary tendencies in the economy.
Responding to a comment by Mr. Robertson on the larger expansion in
bank loans this year than last, Mr. Leach said that banks are quite
aware of the increase that has taken place in loans, that they are
concerned about it, and that because of their concern the System
need not tell them that they should be screening loans now.
Mr. Leedy said that signs of inflation were flying in the air
and that he thought they had become increasingly apparent in the past

8/7/56 -20
six weeks. Six weeks ago, at least some members of the Commiittee
felt that, during the period of the Treasury's financing it was
necessary to be cautious in carrying on the Committee's restrictive
policy. Three weeks ago, because of the expected Treasury cash
financing and the steel strike, there was a feeling that the Com
mittee should proceed with considerable caution. Looking ahead, the
System should of course take account of the Treasury's needs. Also,
it must note developments in the Suez area. However, Mr. Leedy's
view was that in the light of information before it the Committee
should attempt to move further in the direction of applying restraint.
He would concur with the view expressed by Mr. Hayes that over the
period of the next two weeks the Committee should attempt to maintain
stability and he would suggest a net borrowed reserve level around
$250 million, the same as the target discussed at the meeting three
weeks ago. After that, barring unforeseen events, he would move in
the direction of tightening reserves. Noting his concern with the
agricultural situation, particularly its importance to the Tenth
District, Mr. Leedy said that the most important need for agriculture
was that it have a healthy economy into which it could move its
products. Since the over-all situation did not now call for taking
account of deflationary tendencies in the economy, Mr. Leedy said
that he, too, would remove from the Committee's directive the clause
to which Mr. Hayes and others had referred. He would postpone action
on the discount rate until after there had been an opportunity to use

8/7/56 -21
open market operations to bring about some increase in restraint.
Mr. Powell, whose train had been delayed in reaching Washington
this morning, entered the meeting during Mr. Leedy's statement.
Mr. Harris stated that retail sales in the Chicago District
were holding steady at high levels; sales at department stores and
appliance stores during July were ahead of the excellent results a
year earlier. Price increases have been announced recently by manu
facturers of a considerable number of items including nearly all con
sumer durables other than automobiles. Consumers are being urged by
some retailers and advisory services to "buy before prices rise."
Employment is somewhat above last year in virtually all Seventh
District cities except those concentrating on automobiles and farm
machinery. One large farm machinery manufacturer has announced plans
for additional layoffs. Three other firms are exploring merger
possibilities. Aside from automobile and farm machinery, the pros
pect is for a further rise in hirings in the next few weeks. The
steel strike has had little effect on employment or output except
in closely related mining and transportation. Steel consuming
industries have reported no significant layoffs, although some lay
offs are expected before steel output is back to capacity and the
supply lines get fully replenished. Conditions in agriculture
continue at the improved level noted at midyear but there is no
evidence yet of a pickup in farmer purchases. Construction con
tract awards were about the same during the first half of this year

8/7/56 -22
as in the corresponding period of 1955, although there was a slump
in June. The residential segment has been the weak part of con
struction with most other types showing increases this year. Residen
tial mortgage money is tighter than last year and rates are up a
quarter to one-half per cent on conventional mortgages. Lenders
express no dissatisfaction with the credit situation on either new or
used houses and have stated that they are getting enough credit to
take care of transactions. Business loan demand is expected to con
tinue at a high level and to provide a larger than seasonal rise
during the rest of this year unless restrained by monetary action.
Seasonal loan expansion will automatically take care of some tighten
ing. As to the Committee's course of action, Mr, Harris said that he
would like to see the net borrowed reserve picture tighten up some
what above the $250 million level. He felt that an increase in dis
count rate would be a rather dramatic change that might have reper
cussions and it did not seem to him that the situation now warranted
such action, although three weeks from now it might be considered.
Mr. Powell said that conditions in the Ninth District are
slipping a little; retail trade is not as buoyant as in earlier
reports this year and is barely holding level with last year's
figures. Industrial employment is very full and unemployment is
very low. Construction contract awards have fallen off, both resi
dential and nonresidential, and it appears that the building boom
is flattening out, although some architects continue to say that they

8/7/56 -23
have more work on their drawing boards than ever before. Automobile
sales have been good and dealers' stocks of 1956 models have been
worked down from burdensome levels to the point where there may be
a shortage of new cars in dealers' inventories by the time 1957
models are introduced. Crop prospects have been hurt by excessive
rain. Mr. Powell said that he could see no reason for not maintain
ing a credit restraint policy, although under certain conditions it
might be necessary to relax controls in a rapid and dramatic form.
He referred to the conditions in the Sues area. As to the discount
rate, Mr. Powell stated that the directors of the Minneapolis Bank
had come to feel that that district should no longer be a "stalking
horse" for the 3 per cent rate, and that unless some other districts
came up to that rate soon they might act to reduce it to the level
that prevailed generally at other Reserve Banks, inasmuch as the
Ninth District did not call for a higher rate than other parts of
the country.
Mr. Mangels referred to his comments on the discount rate at
the two preceding meetings to the effect that while the San Francisco
Bank had maintained the 3 per cent rate, there had been some difference
of opinion among the directors as to whether it should have been re
duced to the level that prevailed at most Reserve Banks. Another
meeting of the directors would be held tomorrow at which time he
expected to recommend maintenance of the 3 per cent rate. Mr. Mangels
said he thought the 3 per cent rate would be continued and that on the

8/7/56 -26
basis of the Twelfth District economy, the Bank had been right in
having this rate. Mr. Mangels described continuing expansion in
Twelfth District business activity, including moderate increases in
retail sales and employment. Total construction is about the same
as a year ago, residential building having declined and other con
struction having increased. The automobile situation has improved
quite materially and June sales in California, on the basis of pre
liminary estimates, have been running about 10 per cent ahead of May,
with reports of isolated instances in which dealers were running out
of stocks of 1956 models and were going to the Midwest to obtain ad
ditional cars prior to introduction of 1957 models. Prices of new
and used cars have improved. Bank loans at Twelfth District banks
have continued to increase and Mr. Mangels presented detailed compari
sons of changes in the Twelfth District in relation to changes in the
United States as a whole. The cash position of Twelfth District banks
is good and borrowings at the Reserve Bank last Friday were only $5
million. At that time, two country banks were borrowing to meet
seasonal agricultural needs and one city bank that has been a con
sistent borrower this year was borrowing. Reporting member banks
indicate total borrowings of about $225 million including Federal
funds and sales of Federal funds and loans to banks of about $304
million. Bankers feel that business is quite good, Mr. Mangels said,
and they are looking forward to a further increase during the fourth
quarter of the year. They are continuing to screen loans quite care
fully but that is a result of policy rather than a lack of lendable

8/7/56 -25
funds. Mr. Mangels expressed the view that the System was at a
point where it could begin to tighten up somewhat and he had in
mind net borrowed reserves somewhere in the $300 million area,
over or under, preferably on the over side. He would favor a
change in the directive to omit reference to deflationary factors.
Mr. Mangels referred to the comments made by Mr. Johns at
two recent meetings regarding the possibility of a reduction in
reserve requirements and stated that, following the last meeting,
he requested his Bank's Research Department to check information
as to what the result would be if reserve requirements were reduced
by, say, 1 per cent and float were reduced as an offset by an in
crease in the maximum deferred availability schedule to three days.
Mr. Mangels commented on various sets of figures that would result
from reductions in reserve requirements and an increase in the time
schedule. It was his thought that a study of float along these
lines might be of interest to the Committee or to the Presidents'
Conference.
Mr. Irons said that conditions in the Dallas District are
strong and that such changes as have occurred recently have been
largely seasonal in nature. Employment is high and the labor market
is tight. The steel strike has not continued long enough to cause
problems in the Dallas District, Construction, particularly non
residential, is running at a very high level. The petroleum industry

8/7/56 -26.
also is operating at a very high level and the outlook is strong.
Agriculture is feeling the continued drought with some parts of the
Dallas District suffering from extreme dryness. Generally, however,
conditions are very strong and attitudes are quite optimistic. Mr.
Irons said that bank loans have tended to level off at peak levels
and that he believed there was a little less pressure on banks than
two or three months ago. Borrowings from the Reserve Bank have been
somewhat lower and range in the $18 to $20 million area, in contrast
with $40 to $50 million a few months ago. Only four or five country
banks are borrowing and those borrowings are strictly for seasonal
needs. Country banks generally have excess free reserves.
As to policy, Mr. Irons said that on the basis of conditions
in the Dallas District and the national picture as he saw it, he would
concur in the suggestion for eliminating from clause (b) of the Com
mittee's directive the statement that it should now take into account
deflationary tendencies. He felt that policy should be toward firmer
conditions than have existed recently in the money market. Recent
operations seem to have tended on the side of ease at times, and he
would lean to a firmer policy. This would still be consistent with
supplying seasonal requirements, Mr. Irons said, although he would
not be averse to seeing an increase in the volume of discounts. As
far as the discount rate is concerned, Mr. Irons said that his Bank
would not have a meeting of directors during August but he felt that
the System should be preparing to move toward the 3 per cent rate

8/7/56 -27
now existing at two Banks. This would not be a startling or shock
treatment but was rather expected at this time, he said, and with
money market conditions as they are, there would be surprise if the
System did not move in that direction. Summing up, Mr. Irons said
he would not favor a sharp or dramatic move, but he hoped that policy
would tend on the side of firmness and he would favor an increase in
the discount rate within the next month and would not consider this
to be a drastic action.
Mr. Erickson said that conditions in the Boston District still
remained very strong. Nonagricultural employment in June was the
second best in the postwar period. Construction contract awards ap
parently are running better than in the rest of the country, a 15 per
cent increase for the first 22 days of July over last year having
followed a 41 per cent increase in June over June 1955. Even residen
tial building had shown an increase. Deposits at mutual savings banks
on June 30 were over 7 per cent higher than a year ago. Loan demand
is still quite strong, although reporting member banks are not quite
up to their peaks. The discount window of the Boston Bank is not
being used to quite the extent that it was earlier this year. Senti
ment throughout the district is very strong, Mr. Erickson said, and
the inflationary forces seem to be gathering. He felt the Committee
should lean against that tendency more than it has. It should delete
from its directive to the New York Bank the instruction to take ac
count of deflationary forces. He would not recommend an increase in

8/7/56 -28
the discount rate during the next three weeks but would consider
very seriously such an increase in September. Net borrowed re
serves should remain near the present level until the Treasury
financing is out of the way and should then be increased. He
would not set any figure but would tend in that direction, depending
on the market.
Mr. Balderston said the situation seemed to be one calling
for a continuation of the existing degree of tightness for the next
three weeks. However, he hoped that the interval would be used for
consideration throughout the System of a later increase in the dis
count rate so that the System might control the availability of
credit through a rise in its price as well as by restraint on its
volume. There are two reasons for maintaining the present level
of tightness for the moment, he said, one being the desire to main
tain an even keel until the current Treasury financing is completed,
the other being to wait until developments in the Middle East are a
little clearer. If the passage of tankers through the Suez Canal is
interrupted, the amount of oil available to Britain and Western
Europe might be reduced by 50 per cent and result in lessening the
oil available in the United States.
If loan demand continues and if the demand for capital is
maintained, there will be a tendency toward increased prices. Mr.
Balderston said that it seemed to him that the steel strike settle
ment posed afresh the problem of the wage-price spiral and of the

8/7/56 -29
dilemma of unemployment versus inflation. If the rise in steel
prices could be looked upon as a temporary offset to increased
costs, it would not be so serious. However, he anticipated that
it would tend to be permanent, both for steel itself and for fabri
cated steel products. Mr. Balderston said that he would concur in
Mr. Hayes' suggestion that the Committee change its current direc
tive by deleting the instruction to take account of deflationary
forces, and he said that he hoped the System would be prepared to
move at an appropriate time, perhaps later this month, with respect
to an increase in the discount rate and toward some further restraint
upon the volume of credit. He felt that the time has come to resist
the inching up of prices that we have seen for a year. Mr. Balderston
also referred to the comment Mr. Johns had made regarding the views
of some of the directors of the St. Louis Bank that monetary authori
ties should not take on more responsibility than they could carry for
controlling the wage-cost spiral. He expressed the view that this
sounded like defeatism.
Mr. Shepardson noted that several comments had been made about
the agricultural situation, and he stated that he wished to emphasise
that in general the agricultural situation is much improved in compari
son with what it was earlier this year. The pig crop is down and
there will be less pork coming onto the market during the latter part
of this year. Fewer cattle are on feed and there will be less heavy
beef on the market later this year. While the drought situation is

8/7/56 -30
critical in some areas, nothing can help that situation much except
some rain. One exception to the latter statement, Mr. Shepardson
said, was the hope that the soil bank would serve as insurance;
some eleven million acres have been signed up thus far under the
program, which will call for Soil Bank payments of some $225 million.
Much of this represents relief to farmers faced with crop failure.
Mr. Shepardson recognized that there were still small uneconomic farm
units that were not doing well and that inevitably could not do well,
but he said on the whole the agricultural situation at the present
time is showing some improvement.
Mr. Johns referred to the comment made by Mr. Balderston as
to his (Mr. Johns) report of the attitude of some directors of the St.
Louis Bank and said that he would like to restate his earlier comment.
The directors to whom he referred contemplated the possibility that,
if the Federal Reserve were to undertake full responsibility for halt
ing the inflationary pressures resulting from the wage-price-cost
squeeze, its actions might bring about the kind of situation that Mr.
Mills had spoken of and might bring economic activity to a grinding
halt. The directors would not wish to do that, but they still held
the view that the System should do what it appropriately could do to
control this situation without bringing about any such catastrophic
result. Just how this would be done was the question. While his
directors would not wish to grind the economy to a halt, Mr. Johns
said that they and banks generally would be surprised if the System

8/7/56 -31
did not exercise greater restraint.
Chairman Martin said that he thought it very appropriate
to bring out the idea that we should not try to do more with mone
tary and credit policy than can be done with that instrument, He
felt that the discussion at this meeting had been useful and that
it pointed up the critical problems the System was facing. The
System should be very careful about projecting the future too
positively, but it should not be afraid to take cognizance of signs
that are perfectly clear. It should keep flexible. It should not
move to a position and say, "here we stand," That flexible approach
is the one the Committee has been trying to pursue.
Chairman Martin went on to say that it seemed to him that all
the signs are tending in the direction that Mr. Young indicated in the
closing statement he made. While he had not read this statement be
fore, he felt that it brought out the elements of the problems that
the Committee had had before it over the past year or so. This could
be looked upon as a testing period, and there would be increased
problems ahead. The Suez problem is one that should not be ignored
by the Committee, but that problem should not lead it from a course
of action which the monetary authority should adopt in terms of the
over-all economy and which it should continually review as develop
ments take place at Suez. The existence of the Sues problem should
not cause the Committee to delay and delay actions which the evidence
suggested should be taken in dealing with the problems before it.

8/7/56 -32
The wage-cost spiral needs no comment, Chairman Martin said.
He felt in fact that we were bordering on a state of over-employment,
the same type of over-employment that had developed in some foreign
countries. For example, he had noted in Chicago last week in a small
area near the railroad station a great many "help wanted" signs. This
"straw" was indicative, for during the summer period normally a let
down in demand for help in an area adjacent to the railroads could
be expected, The Chairman said that, as he had indicated before, he
felt the steel strike had been a disaster and that it had caused the
problems of the System and of the economy to become much more difficult,
notwithstanding the reductions that had taken place in steel inventories.
Actually, imbalance in inventories for the economy as a whole had been
deepened by the steel strike. He felt that some of the comments of
persons in the steel industry had been misleading. Chairman Martin
said that residential building could be expected to decline in the
last half of the year and he hoped it would do so. If residential
building and automobile production do not decline during the second
half of this year, he did not see how other demand could be taken
care of. In his discussions with automobile company executives within
the last few days, he found they were not nearly as pessimistic as
they were a couple of months ago and that, in terms of anticipated
production during the last quarter of the year, they might repeat the
mistake they made a year ago of increasing production schedules to a
point that would create a 1957 situation that was very difficult to

8/7/56 -33
deal with. He hoped this would not be the case and he was not intend
ing to reflect on the managements of the automobile companies, but
the attitude that had been revealed had frightened him. In addition
to that, plans for new plant and equipment plus the psychology of
inflation should not be turned aside.
Chairman Martin said that he did not know how much the System
could do to deal with these forces but that it should be doing what
ever it could. It probably would be roundly criticized for such action,
which would come at an unfortunate time in many respects. However.
plant and equipment expenditures should not be financed out of bank
credit and the Committee should not ignore that fact. It was dealing
with an imbalance in supply of goods that could lead to a world debacle
of the same type that was experienced in 1929. The time to be talking
about that problem is now and not after the debacle has come, At that
time, we would have to be talking about rescuing the economy from the
disaster. Chairman Martin said that he believed that there was every
expectation that the economy was facing a roaring fourth quarter which
would include a record Christmas shopping season as well as the forces
we have been talking about. He did not think that a somewhat tighter
credit policy would keep the fourth quarter of this year from being
an extremely good one.
Turning to the question of policy to be followed, Chairman
Martin said that the consensus seemed to be fairly clear. It appeared
that no one wished to disturb the Treasury's financing and that the

8/7/56 -34
Committee should keep as even a keel as it could until that was
completed, recognizing that it was difficult to maintain an even
keel. The projections furnished the Committee included an allowance
for normal growth, Chairman Martin noted, and he gathered that it was
the intention of all present this morning that the System take care
of normal growth and reasonable credit needs of the economy. How
ever, it did not wish to have credit flow to people who should have
gone to the long-term capital market for funds but who did not go
there because they felt that the Federal Reserve would not have a
tighter money policy during the fall of this year when the election
was coming up. The System would be compounding the disaster if
markets are misjudged as the automobile industry misjudged the market
early this year. The Chairman said that he agreed with the comment
Mr. Irons had made that an increase in discount rates generally to
the 3 per cent level would not be a dramatic move and that, in fact,
banks would be surprised if that action were not taken. He added
the comment that, in his view, the "stalking horses" to which Mr.
Powell had referred in speaking of the Reserve Banks now having a
3 per cent discount rate have done a real service. Further comment
ing on credit policy, Chairman Martin said that he believed the con
sensus of this meeting to be that, during the period up through pay
ment for the current Treasury offering, the Committee should try to
keep as even a keel as possible and thereafter tend to resolve doubts
on the side of tightness, gradually moving negative free reserves

8/7/56 -35
upward.
In response to a question from Mr. Vardaman, the Chairman
stated that he deliberately left out of his comments any maximum
figure to which negative free reserves might be permitted to go.
Mr. Rouse stated, in response to Chairman Martin's request
for his comments, that the foregoing was his understanding of the
consensus at this meeting with respect to the policy to be pursued
between now and the next meeting of the Committee.
Chairman Martin then turned to the directive and suggested
that the elimination of the part of clause (b) to which Mr. Hayes
had referred would be desirable. While the suggestion Mr. Vardaman
had made could be taken, he felt the preferable procedure would be
simply to delete from the current directive the instruction that
the Agent Bank take into consideration deflationary forces in the
economy. With this change, clause (b) would read, "to restraining
inflationary developments in the interest of sustainable economic
growth,..."
Mr. Vardaman said that he would concur in this procedure,
and Mr. Rouse stated that he had no suggestions for change in the
dollar limitations in the directive.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York until otherwise
directed by the Committee:

8/7/56 -36.
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges
(including replacement of maturing securities, and allow
ing maturities to run off without replacement) for the
System open market account in the open market or, in the
case of maturing securities, by direct exchange with the
Treasury, as may be necessary in the light of current and
prospective economic conditions and the general credit
situation of the country, with a view (a) to relating the
supply of funds in the market to the needs of commerce
and business, (b) to restraining inflationary developments
in the interest of sustainable economic growth, and (c) to
the practical administration of the account; provided that
the aggregate amount of securities held in the System ac
count (including commitments for the purchase or sale of
securities for the account) at the close of this date, other
than special short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the
Treasury, shall not be increased or decreased by more than $1
billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one
or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such certificates held at
any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in
the aggregate $500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System account
for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury securities matur
ing within one year as may be necessary from time to time for
the accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total amount
of such securities so sold shall not exceed in the aggregate
$500 million face amount, and such sales shall be made as nearly
as may be practicable at the prices currently quoted in the open
market.
Chairman Martin referred to the proposal that Mr. Sproul had made
in his memorandum of May 3, 1956 that the Committee authorize the Account
Management to make offsetting purchases and sales of Treasury bills for
the purpose of altering the maturity distribution of the System open
market account when, in the Manager's judgment, such purchases and sales

8/7/56 -37
would not distort the functioning of the market and would improve
the capacity of the account to perform effectively in supplying or
absorbing reserves. A memorandum from Mr. Robertson relating to
this proposal had been distributed to the members of the Committee
under date of May 21, 1956 and an additional memorandum prepared at
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York had been distributed under date
of June 4, 1956. Chairman Martin went on to say that he did not
think that any of the members of the Committee felt that this was a
matter of earth-shaking importance but that even in terms of the
present limited proposal for swaps in Treasury bills, there was some
merit to using this means sparingly. He then called upon Mr.
Robertson who had indicated doubts about the desirability of the
proposal.
Mr. Robertson said that he would reiterate the statement of
Chairman Martin that the proposal was not of great importance one way
or the other. In addition to the material presented in the various
memoranda, he stated that he would be glad to have Mr. Hayes' views
regarding the proposal and that if he (Mr. Hayes) had not had an
opportunity to study it, it did not seem of pressing importance that
it be discussed at this meeting. In addition, Mr. Robertson said
that he would suggest that before acting on the proposal, the New
York Bank ascertain the views of dealers as to the extent of swaps
and their attitude toward having the System account engage in such
transactions.

8/7/56 -38
Mr. Hayes said that he had had an opportunity to study
the memoranda referred to and had discussed them with Messrs.
Treiber and Rouse. While he and Messrs, Treiber and Rouse did
not feel that the matter was of vital importance, he was ready
to discuss the proposal and act upon it this morning. Mr. Hayes
went on to say that he felt Mr. Robertson's suggestion as to having
the views of dealers was desirable, that it was his understanding
that Mr. Rouse had made some effort to find out their attitude,
and that he thought the matter might be disposed of at this time
as well as later. Mr. Hayes then called upon Mr. Treiber for
comment.
Mr. Treiber said that the proposal before the Committee
was that the management of the System account be authorized to
make swaps in Treasury bills when such purchases and sales (1)
would improve the capacity of the account to perform effectively
in supplying or absorbing reserves and (2)w ould not distort the
functioning of the market. System holdings of Treasury bills are
relatively small, Mr. Treiber said, and when the System has few or
no bills of a particular issue, difficulties may be presented.
First, when the System has occasion to sell bills to absorb reserves
it might not have the issues for which there is demand in the market,
and there may be less demand in the market for the issues it does
hold. The second difficulty involves run-offs. Allowing Treasury

8/7/56 -39
bills to run off is generally simpler and less disturbing to the
market than selling an equal quantity of Treasury bills in the
market. Mr. Treiber noted that it is customary for the System
to let Treasury bills run off in January and for that reason it
is desirable to hold some bills maturing in January. He felt that
it would be desirable for the System account to get into a position
where it would have bills that it could permit to run off at that
time, or where it would have bills that could be rolled over into
January bills. He also stated that the proposal contemplated that
swaps would be made only occasionally and would usually be under
taken in response to the initiative of the market. They would, as
stated before, be made only when that would not disturb the function
ing of the market.
In response to a question from Mr. Shepardson as to what he
meant by the statement that swaps would be made in response to the
initiative of the market, Mr. Treiber said that usually dealers will
have orders for various issues of bills and if they are unable to
fill those orders out of their own supply, they initiate discussions
with other dealers in the market or with institutional investors
such as insurance companies to find out whether they can work out a
trade to get the securities needed to fill the order. Such inquiries
come to the attention of the trading desk frequently, Mr. Treiber
said, and that was the point he had in mind in stating that the
trades would be made at the initiative of the dealers.

8/7/56 -40
Mr. Rouse noted that this was one basis for the statement
that it was believed that dealers would not object to the making
of swaps by the System account. However, he added the comment that
he felt if the authority were given, the account management should
feel free to make such swaps within the limits of the proposal in
the memorandum, whether a dealer initiated the transaction or not.
Mr. Rouse also said that he would be very happy to check with dealers
along the lines suggested and that he thought it might be desirable
to make such a check.
Mr. Robertson suggested that in discussing the proposal with
dealers it might be desirable also to find out their attitude toward
the Reserve Bank initiating such swaps rather than participating in
them only when initiated by a dealer.
Chairman Martin stated that the suggestion for checking these
points with dealers might be followed. However, he wished to make
clear his personal position. In principle, he said that he felt that
swaps for the System account were wrong. He did not believe in being
hide-bound, however. Nevertheless, even if the proposal was limited
to making swaps with interest bearing money, which was what Treasury
bills are, the question was only a matter of degree. Every time the
System account tended to depart from what he called the "free market"
principle, it was taking a step in the wrong direction and it was
likely to find that others would be pressing it to move a step further.

8/7/56 -41
Chairman Martin said that he never felt hesitant about stating the
free-market principle but that he would not wish to take a narrow
view of this proposal and that, subject to checking the attitude of
dealers along the lines suggested, he would be disposed to go along
with the limited authorization suggested even though he felt it to
be a step in the wrong direction.
The discussion of this topic concluded with the understanding
that the New York Bank would attempt to obtain the views of dealers
as suggested, after which the matter would be placed on the agenda
for further discussion.
Chairman Martin suggested that it might be desirable to hold
the next meeting of the Committee on Tuesday, August 21, two weeks
hence, with the thought that the following meeting would be on Tuesday,
September 11. There was some discussion of possible dates for meetings,
at the conclusion of which it was agreed that the next meeting of the
Committee would be held on Tuesday, August 23, 1956. During the discus
sion, it was also suggested and understood that tentative dates for
subsequent meetings would be set for Tuesday, September 11, and
Tuesday, September 25, 1956.
Mr. Robertson said that this was an appropriate time for the
members of the Board of Governors to express their appreciation to the
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks for their cooperation during
Operation Alert 1956 in the period July 20-25, 1956, inclusive. He
noted that comments and suggestions had been submitted by the Presidents,

8/7/56 -42
that they were now being reviewed, and that it was contemplated
that there would be a discussion of this subject at the next meet
ing of the Presidents' Conference, tentatively suggested by Mr.
Leedy during the week that would include the meeting of the Open
Market Committee on September 25, 1956.
Mr. Johns noted that Mr. Mangels had referred to a check
he had had made by his Bank's Research Division as to the effect
of a reduction in reserve requirements and an increase in the
deferred availability schedule of the Reserve Bank. He went on
to say that Mr. Rouse had also suggested at the meeting of the Com
mittee on July 17, 1956, that the System give more consideration to
the influences of float on credit and on the conduct of open market
operations. Mr. Johns stated that, while various studies of the
subject of float had been made by the System in the past, they had
always been directed primarily in terms of operating problems in
handling checks for collection. It was his thought that it would
be desirable for the Federal Open Market Committee to make a study
of the subject because of the effect of fluctuations in float on
open market operations.
After some discussion as to whether such a study should be
by a committee reporting to the Federal Open Market Committee or
whether it would be preferable to have it made by a committee report
ing to the Conference of Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, it

8/7/56 -43
was agreed unanimously that Chairman Martin in consultation with Mr.
Leedy, as Chairman of the Presidents' Conference, be authorized to
appoint a committee along the lines suggested by Mr. Johns.
Secretary's note: Following the meeting,
the Secretary was informed by Chairman
Martin that, after consultation with Mr.
Leedy, he had appointed Messrs. Robertson,
Johns, and Erickson as members of a Com
mittee on Float, with Mr. Robertson to
serve as chairman of the committee and
with the understanding that the results
of the study to be made by the committee
would be reported to the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary