A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offfices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, January 24, 1956, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Earhart
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Irons
Mr. Leach
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Messrs. Erickson, Johns, Powell, and Young,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Williams, Bryan, and Leedy, Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, At
lanta, and Kansas City, respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Daane, Hostetler, Rice, Roelse,
Wheeler, and R. A. Young, Associate
Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Assistant Director, Division of Re
search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Marsh, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York

1/24/56 -2
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
January 10, 1956, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York covering open market operations during the period January 10
through January 18, 1956, and at this meeting there was distributed a
supplementary report covering commitments executed January 19 through
January 23, 1956, inclusive. Copies of both reports have been placed
in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
In commenting on the supplementary report, Mr. Rouse stated
that in the auction for Treasury bills yesterday the average rate was
just under 2-1/4 per cent, compared with an average of just under 2-1/2
per cent in the preceding week. Among the influences in the market lead
ing to the decline in the bill rate was the investment of proceeds of
funds received from the sale of some $600 million of stock in the Ford
Motor Company and the sale of some $400 million of revenue bonds of the
Illinois State Toll Highway Commission. Mr. Rouse stated that he would
anticipate that by the end of next week the special conditions which had
been influencing the bill rate recently might have been completed and
the relationship of that rate to the situation in the money market might
have become more normal.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the transactions

1/24/56 -3
for the System account during the period
January 10 through January 23, 1956, in
clusive, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Members of the Board's staff entered the room for the purpose
of assisting in the presentation of a review of the economic and credit
situation, illustrated by chart slides. The script of the review was
mailed to the members of the Committee following the meeting, and a copy
has been placed in the Committee files.
The review brought out that during 1955 the problems facing mone
tary and fiscal authority the world over were those of restraining infla
tionary forces rather than stimulating growth of demand. The current
year has begun with activity and employment sharply above a year ago and
in many countries close to capacity limits. In the United States, one of
the big factors distinguishing the economic position in January 1956 from
that in January 1955 is a 98 per cent capacity level for steel operations
rather than an 80 per cent level. When operations in a number of impor
tant industries have already risen to near-capacity levels, further in
creases in output can be achieved only slowly. Relatively small increases
in demand then may bring heavy upward pressure on prices. A rise of 4
per cent in industrial prices during the year came largely after the
spring months, when activity reached very advanced levels. Some ob
servers, noting current reduced levels of farm prices and uncertainties
in housing and automobile markets, believe that upward pressures on
industrial prices otherwise inherent in the present situation will be
eased by reductions in demand in these and other lines. They would

1/24/56 -4
expect such easing as a result of credit restraints now in effect or
for other reasons. Other observers go further, saying that the economy,
after a year and a half of expansion, is nearing a cyclical peak and
that a reaction may be in prospect before long. A third possible view
is that no important downward adjustments from present levels will
occur or that such adjustments as do occur will not be adequate to off
set potential increases in spending and investment throughout the world.
In that event, inflationary pressures would continue or even become
stronger.
While there begin to be evidences of slackening in some of the
areas that have shown particularly rapid rates of increase during the
past year and a half, evidences of strength in other areas are still too
strong to call for relaxation of credit restraints at this time. On the
other hand, there is clearly no need for further tightening. The impact
of the latest increase in discount rates upon the credit situation has
so far been largely cushioned by the many special factors operating in
the money market since the end of November. Present projections, which
allow for moderate credit growth, indicate that net borrowed reserves
may be substantially above $400 million in February and March unless
prevented by System purchases of securities. The restrictive effect
of a continuation of about $400 million of net borrowed reserves and a
Treasury bill rate of around 2-1/2 per cent upon the allocation of exist
ing credit resources might prove to be excessive, although current market
behavior indicates otherwise. The situation is one that calls for care
ful watching and sensitive adjustment to the prevailing attitude of

1/24/56
expectations as indicated by behavior of all markets.
At Chairman Martin's request, Mr. Sproul then made a statement
on the economic situation and credit policy substantially as follows:
1. To paraphrase remarks recently attributed to the
Secretary of State, the art of central banking is to approach
the brink of inflation without falling in or being pushed in.
2. It is our job to try to see to it that, so far as the
money supply and the availability of credit are concerned, the
economy is in a position to work, to produce, and to consume,
at near capacity levels.
3. Unfortunately, the brink of inflation is not always
clearly discernible, because the boundaries of near capacity,
full capacity, and over capacity are indistinct, and possible
at near capacity, probably at full capacity and certainly at
over capacity, too much money and too easy credit will lead
to increases in prices, but not to increased real income.
4. We are in a position now in which the economy in the
aggregate and with allowance for seasonal variations, seems
to be working near capacity, but could move over the brink or
back from the brink. Some of the strongest stimulants of the
past year - e.g., automobile production, residential building,
and foreign demand - may stay relatively high but are unlikely
to be pushing upward. Other stimulants - e.g., private capital
expenditures, state and local expenditures, and wage increases
seem likely to continue the upward push and some increase in
inventory accumulation might be a contributing factor. The
major continuing soft spot is the agricultural situation. The
resultant of all such forces, in terms of consumer expenditures,
which are the biggest factor in the whole economic complex, is
not precisely determinable. Aggregate incomes are likely to be
higher during coming months, which would suggest some increase
in consumer spending, but incomes may not be so readily inflated
with large doses of consumer credit on progressively easier
terms, or of mortgage credit, and savings may be larger.
5. At the moment we might be said to be feeling our way
along at about the right place with reference to the brink,
with some seasonal contraction in credit taking place. This
suggests a steady hand on the monetary controls, which neither
tightens nor relaxes its grip. This would mean no change in
discount rates, and it would mean open market operations guided
by bank borrowing, net borrowed reserves, interest rates, the
general tone and feel of the market and market expectations
and anticipations, which would seek to maintain, for the
present, about the degree of pressure which we have now reached.
On the basis of present projections this could mean putting
some funds into the market during the next two weeks, but that
should be determined from day to day, in the light of all the
available facts and indications of tendencies or trends.

1/24/56 -6
Mr. Johns stated that two weeks ago he had said with some
timidity that he would not be disappointed if the Committee failed
to regain quite the same degree of restraint that existed last Novem
ber. He was not aware of any reasons which would lead him to change
that opinion at this time. He wished to make it clear that he was
not talking about a change in direction of policy and was not indicat
ing that there should be much change in the degree of restraint under
present policy. He would not change the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Bryan said that activity in the Atlanta District continued
at an extremely high level. There were soft spots as in agriculture,
but they were not as serious as might have been expected. Employment
and productivity were still expanding, although the lead of the Atlanta
District against national activity had declined somewhat. On the
national picture, Mr. Bryan recalled that two weeks ago he expressed
the view that perhaps "the bloom was off the boom." However, he now
found very little evidence of any general let-down or slackening of
consequence, although there might be some reduction from the extremes
of optimism that prevailed last summer and fall. As to policy, Mr.
Bryan said that his view would differ a little from that expressed by
Mr. Johns in the sense that, while he would not want to see any such
dramatic action as an increase in the discount rate at the moment or
a change in reserve requirements, the System should be very careful
not to permit an impression of "ease" to be created by permitting the
short-term rate to back away from the discount rate. He would maintain

1/24/56 -7
the short-term rate structure in close proximity to the discount rate.
We have gotten over the shock, if any, of the latest increase in the
discount rate and at present the effective cutting edge of monetary
policy does not lie in the field of psychology but in the field of
rates. Accordingly, Mr. Bryan said that he would advocate a policy
for the next few weeks of making certain that the Committee kept the
discount rate effective by open market operations designed not to
permit the bill rate to go much under, and not much above, the dis
count rate.
Mr. Williams said that there had been no substantial changes
in the economic situation in the Philadelphia District since the meet
ing two weeks ago. He commented on various degrees of optimism in
different parts of the district and on the expectation that the
Philadelphia Reserve Bank soon would approach some member banks on
their use of the discount window. Mr. Williams said that he felt the
Committee should not allow a feeling of ease to develop, but neither
should it move in the other direction at the present time
Mr. Fulton described conditions in the Cleveland District as
still being in a period of boom. No one anticipated any great down
turn although there was talk of caution. Under these conditions, he
suggested no decrease in the discount rate nor should there be a de
crease in the amount of net borrowed reserves. Mr. Fulton said that
he felt it desirable to move back toward the level of restraint that
existed last November. If any relaxation became noticeable, that

1/24/56 -8
could be interpreted as an indication that the Federal Reserve System
saw a down turn in activity, and such a reaction could have a profound
effect in the thinking of businessmen, the stock market, and other
aspects of the economy. Mr. Fulton said that he did not feel relaxation
was in order at this time.
Mr. Shepardson said the economic situation impressed him as
being fairly well balanced with some downward indications being offset
by upward factors. Along with that, the psychological factors and the
political aspects of this period made it more important than ever that
the Committee hold a line that would not give way to inflationary
pressures. He would prefer to see net borrowed reserves maintained at
a level that would bring the short-term rate back closer to the dis
count rate, and he would certainly not favor an easing in the situation.
Mr. Robertson said that the views thus far expressed fairly well
coincided with his thinking. A short time ago, when we had a very easy
reserve situation, the levels of interest rates and yields were firm,
but as reserve positions have tightened more recently the interest rate
level has declined. This decline might be construed as a move toward
ease on the part of the Federal Open Market Committee. Mr. Robertson
said that he felt that in the immediate future the Committee should
attempt to offset some of the special factors in the market, such a
the vast nonbank funds which had been having an influence on rates, in
order to avoid if possible unfortunate construction. He would no, go
too far in that direction but would make it very clear that the Com
mittee's policy is still one of firm restraint. He would not change

1/24/56 -9
the discount rate at this time and would not in any other way indicate
any relaxation,
Mr. Mills said that his reasoning followed the channel that
had been opened up in the discussion thus far. The Committee should
maintain a firm hand on reserve positions of banks and on the money
market in order to prevent any hint of relaxation. Mr. Mills recalled
that at the meeting two weeks ago the Chairman brought out the fact
that the System's operations were under a much closer scrutiny from
the investment and business fraternity than usual, and that there was
a temptation on the part of analysts to read into any actions of the
Committee possibly more than the Committee intended. This was a warning,
for if the Committee were now to relax it might be charged with being
moved by political influences, or it might have its actions read as
confirming some of the doubts about the economic future that are being
expressed from time to time. How the Committee can maintain the neces
sary degree of firmness may be a problem. Net borrowed reserves running
from $200 to $400 millions might be an appropriate target on which to
tie policy.
The Federal funds rate, which is running at 2-1/2 per cent,
suggests a greater degree of pressure and firmness in the market than
has been indicated from the recent movement in Treasury bill rates.
That being the case, care must be exercised not to be misled by the
extraneous influences that have brought Treasury bill rates out of
line. Mr. Mills said that he would disagree with Mr. Robertson that

1/24/56 -10.
the Committee should move in the direction of offsetting the reduction
in Treasury bill rates. The market seems to be analyzing and inter
preting the figures in accordance with their significance, and the
Committee should rely on market analysts to reach the conclusion that
the direction of System policy is firmness at the present time. It
should be made clear that the Committee's actions can be taken as a
guide to its policy, so that when the Treasury comes to the market
some weeks hence it can make its announcement against a background of
a clearly defined System policy. It would be extremely difficult to
indicate what System policy should be toward withdrawing or supplying
reserves over the next few weeks, Mr. Mills said, and the Manager of
the Account presumably would have to be in a position to use his judg
ment to meet promptly any situation that might develop either toward
undue ease or tightness in reserve positions.
Mr. Vardaman concurred in the views expressed by Mr. Sproul as
to the present economic situation, and he said that he approved of Mr.
Mills' injection of the political angle into the discussion of what the
Committee's operations should be this year. He would regret any evi
dence of a loosening or weakening of the Committee's position of firm
ness. On the other hand, he felt it imperative that the Committee
"stand by the wheel" with a sharp eye to whatever might develop in the
next 60 days, adding that, at the slightest indication of a psychological
fear being built up on the part of the public regarding the future, the
Committee should not hesitate to take whatever action might be called

1/24/56 -11
for at that time. It should be prepared to loosen the reins if it
appeared from developments that such a move was necessary.
Mr. Leach said that the economy of the Fifth District con
tinued strong. Consumption of cigarettes increased 3 per cent in
1955 over 1954 and man hours in the industry are nearly at the highest
level since 1953. First quarter production in textiles has been com
pletely sold out. Commitments are fairly high in the second quarter.
Furniture manufacturers are very optimistic and expect to continue
production at high levels. For the country as a whole, Mr. Leach
could see little change in the economic factors since the meeting two
weeks ago other than that the cutback in automobile production, which
all of us had expected, has actually begun. Over-all indicators still
seem to point to a strong economy in 1956. On the other hand, Mr. Leach
said that he sensed a change in the attitudes of some businessmen. Less
optimism is expressed than was the case last November. This tendency to
be somewhat cautious seems to characterize January. In January last
year, he noted there were general doubts as to the ability of the economy
to sustain recovery. The question now is whether the uncertainty con
cerning the outlook is temporary or whether it will actually carry over
into the real economic processes in terms of business and consumer spend
ing. Mr. Leach emphasized that doubts about the outlook still generally
apply to the third quarter of the year. Since the Committee's primary
concern is with the immediate developments, he thought it would be a
mistake to move toward a policy of ease because of the psychological
developments. In fact, a move in this direction by the Committee would

1/24/56 -12
probably accentuate reactions. On the other hand, he saw no justifica
tion for intensifying the present policy of restraint. In brief, he
would not relax restraint and would not want it to appear that the
Committee was relaxing at this time.
Mr. C. S. Young reviewed conditions in the Chicago District,
stating that the optimistic statements of a month ago were still being
repeated by business leaders in the area. They indicated a little worry
following their earlier optimistic statements and some, as in the auto
mobile industry, had toned down their comments but they still felt quite
optimistic. Mr. Young felt the Committee should not relax now. As a
day to day proposition it should not move very far either in the direc
tion of relaxation or greater restraint. A move toward relaxation would
give notice to the investment community that business is not as good as
we have been thinking. Mr. Young also said that he would not increase
the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Leedy said there seemed to have been no change yet in the
general economic picture that would justify a change in the Committee's
program from that approved two weeks ago. It should continue the effort
to apply about the degree of pressure it had been aiming at on bank re
serves. He felt the management of the account had done a very good job
under difficult circumstances. Mr. Leedy assumed that with the passage
of the special conditions which had resulted in a reduction in the Treas
ury bill rate, there would be a reflection of the Committee's general
policy in a movement of the bill rate closer to the discount rate. He

1/24/56 -13
would feel the Committee should continue doing about what it has been
doing recently.
Mr. Powell said that agriculture in the Ninth District was
doing quite well this winter. On a recent visit to Montana he found
cattlemen reasonably satisfied with conditions, and it looked as though
the water supply for the western part of the Ninth District would be
adequate this spring, which would practically assure fairly good crops
during the coming year. Retail trade had been rather unsatisfactory
in December and figures which had become available since the meeting
two weeks ago confirmed the belief which he then expressed that there
had been considerable accumulation of stocks. Turning to the national
picture, Mr. Powell thought that the building boom may have passed its
peak and he felt quite sure that the automobile industry has passed its
peak for some time to come. There might be a conjunction of a number
of weak spots in the economy this year that would cause considerable
difficulty. For the moment, however, he did not see a need for antici
pating a down turn in business and he would favor a continuation of
about the present level of restraint.
Mr. Earhart said there had been some moderation in the very high
degree of optimism that had developed last fall, but there was nothing
tangible enough to cause a change in Committee policy from that agreed
upon two weeks ago. He hoped open market operations could be conducted
so that the public would feel the Committee had made no change in its
policy for the present. He would suggest no change in the discount rate
at this time.

1/24/56 -14
Mr. Irons favored continuation of the general policy agreed
upon two weeks ago, which he felt had been very effective in keeping
pressure on the market but avoiding any tendency toward ease or further
restriction.
Mr. Erickson said that in the First District the plusses were
wider than the minuses. Experience in automobile sales recently has
not been good, registrations of new cars in Massachusetts the last two
weeks of December having been 40 per cent and 80 per cent below those
of a year ago even though weather conditions this winter have not been
bad. On the other hand, construction contracts are well ahead of a
year ago. Mr. Erickson agreed with most of the comments on Committee
policy and would keep the same degree of restraint for the present
with no change in discount rate. He noted that one of the factors
which caused difficulty in making Committee policy effective was the
variation in float, and he suggested that additional study of this
factor might be desirable.
Mr. Szymczak said that there seemed to be agreement that there
had been no sufficient change in the situation to call for a change in
open market policy at this time. The Committee should continue the
degree of restraint it has been following, he said, but should watch
the economic indicators carefully, particularly developments in the
automobile and construction industries, so as to be in position to act
in whatever direction might be called for.
Mr. Balderston then made a statement substantially as follows:
Despite the difficulties of communicating with precision
ideas relating to policy, I will attempt to indicate my beliefs

.15-
1/24/56
as to what the policy objective should be and why. My present
position is slightly different from that of two weeks ago when
I felt that the bill rate target should be the discount rate,
plus or minus. Now I would prefer as a target the discount
rate minus.
This suggests a modification of the objectives of our
policy from that of restraining inflation, to that which Mr.
Sproul discussed with great clarity. I would now prefer an
objective that stressed the maintenance of stable equilibrium
just beneath capacity. I do not mean we should actually shift
our policy at present to any obvious relaxation of the rigors
of restraint. I do mean, however, that our future problem is
likely to be one of perpetuating a high level of production
and employment just beneath capacity--just far enough beneath
it to minimize upward price pressure. This shift of policy
objective might well be reflected in today's directive to the
New York Bank.
My reason for urging this shift of objective is that the
momentum which the economy carried over into the new year seems
to be lessening. Or if not, the rate of acceleration seems to
be decelerating. Despite the continued strength of metal prices
here and abroad; despite a strong continued demand for com
mercial and industrial loans; and despite a tendency to accuma
late inventories, one notes a tendency toward "topping off" in
the reduction of housing starts and the increased difficulty of
selling automobiles and consumer durables. One also notes
other factors that may have a bearing on our problems some
months hence. Prices of shares in the London market have been
softening for some months. In the New York market, we also
have a softening of stock prices recently. In the capital
market, the schedule of offerings is small. I am concerned
that the high rate of expansion that we anticipate this year
in corporate construction may be followed by a dearth of such
expansion and growth, which we will need if capacity is to
keep pace with future population.
Therefore, I favor an inconspicuous shift of policy ob
jective designed to maintain the current high level of em
ployment and production without so pressing on capacity as
to push industrial prices higher. I would like to see a
shift kept carefully within this Committee. This last obser
vation seems to me especially important at the moment because
the Committee should be free to take whatever action seems to
be needed to counteract the gyrations in business psychology
that will follow the President's announcement, whatever it
may be. The economy may suffer very turbulent times in the
weeks and months following the President's announcement of
whether he will or will not be a candidate. We may have
ebullience and speculative fever or we may have a psychologi
cal let down. I would, therefore, like to see us keep prepared

1/24/56 -1-616-
to act decisively in either direction and at the right time.
Chairman Martin next made a statement substantially as follows:
From my point of view, this is not quite as easy as the
last few meetings. For some time, I have been able to say
that I agreed with the consensus, and there was no problem of
agreeing on what our policy would be. I do not mean that I
disagree very much now, but I would like to make some general
observations on what my thinking is.
First, the Committee should be extremely careful in deter
mining policy not to let it be weighted by apprehensions as to
what the political implications of our decisions may be, and
not to get into a frame of mind in which we say that we should
not move one way or the other because it might be interpreted
by the public in terms of politics. We should be objective
about economic developments and about determining our policy
for the good of the economy.
Also, I have the strong feeling that none of us can gauge
the economy very accurately. When we deal in fine degrees, we
are falling into the error that Mr. Sproul has pointed out many
times of giving a little credence to the idea that monetary
policy can do more than it can, and that we can turn on the
faucet or turn off the faucet and can achieve a precise objec
tive.
I don't think you can rely too much on analogies but some
times I think they illustrate an idea. My sixth sense has made
me believe that in recent weeks the machine has been going for
ward, but it has reached a plateau and it is wobbling and the
road before us has some rough spots. If we can use the analogy
of using the brakes on a machine, it may help to illustrate
what I have in mind. When you are driving a machine and when
you reach a plateau and you are wobbling a little bit, the
degree of pressure that you put on the brakes has quite a
little influence on whether the wobbling continues or not. I
don't for one moment intend to imply that I favor relaxation
of credit restraint at this time, nor do I quarrel too actively
with the majority sentiment of the group. I merely call atten
tion to what I personally think we should be watching for.
If I were doing it over again, I would say that perhaps we
followed a policy of active ease a little too long and we let
ourselves get into a position of a strait jacket, of letting
the "even keel" become the status quo, rather than of having
the flexibility we desire in monetary policy. I do not think
Mr. Sproul intended that in his use of "even keel." In the
period we face there are many psychological factors, and we

1/24/56 -17-
will have to operate on the basis of what we feel and of the
projections that will be before us, without really knowing
what loan demand will be.
To take part of the statement that Mr. Johns made, I
would favor two weeks later than he did (he suggested it at
our meeting two weeks ago) that, within the imprecise pro
jections we have to work with, I would be trending in the
direction of zero free reserves--not in a target sense, be
cause of the imprecise tools we have to work with, but I
would be trending in that direction. If this turns out to
be a plateau and not a valley, we will still be in a strong
position to raise the discount rate or to take whatever ac
tion we believe is needed.
I want to reiterate that flexible monetary and credit
policy require that we not get into the position where people
can say, "The Federal Reserve just held blindly to one par
ticular course and then all of a sudden turned around." We
did not do that in 1953 when we altered our course, and we
do not know whether we want to do that today. I may tend to
minimize the forces that are at work in the economy, all of
us may tend to minimize them, but nevertheless they can be
quite real and the effects can come quickly when they do come.
We as a Committee ought to be in the position of putting
our foot on the brake pedal but not pressing on the brakes. I
think that is what all of us have had in mind in one way or
another in what we have said this morning. It is a matter of
emphasis. This is one of those extremely difficult periods
where I personally would be in favor of an "even keel" if we
could get an even keel, but I do not believe that we can get
an even keel under current conditions. I do not believe that
Mr. Rouse, if he were the ablest manager in the world--and I am
not implying he is not the ablest manager in the world-I don't
believe that the forces we are dealing with here make it pos
sible to say that $300 or $400 million of negative free re
serves is precisely what is needed, or that the tone of the
money market calls for any precise amount of reserves. We may
say that we should maintain the pressure we now have in the
market but I do not believe we or the public knows what the
degree of pressure is that we are maintaining.
The point I am driving at is that I feel we ought to con
sider looking at the directive we now have had for almost six
months, and perhaps we should make a modest adjustment in that
directive to permit more flexibility, if we wish. In this
general picture, I would be inclined to have the management of
the Account trend in the direction of not pressing on the brakes
but of not releasing the brakes.
I want to reiterate my comment on the political side of this.
We are going to have that to deal with all this spring. I know

1/24/56 -18
that I find myself inclined to say that we ought to make
it plain that we are not being influenced by political
considerations and that we are following a course which
is clearly not a political course. But that is just
digging the System's grave so far as effective monetary
policy is concerned. I am not talking about a political
grave, I am talking about our objectives and fulfilling
the functions the System is supposed to have in view in
a flexible monetary and credit policy.
I have talked this over with Mr. Riefler and, in con
nection with the wording of the directive, he has suggested
some language which would change clause (b) so as to make
it plain that we are following flexible monetary policy.
It seems to me that a little difference in emphasis is called
for at this time. We should remember that this policy di
rective is a public record and if we feel that a little shift
in emphasis is called for, it is desirable that we show that
in the public record.
There followed a discussion of Chairman Martin's suggestion for
a change in the wording of clause (b) of the directive to be issued to
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. In the course of this discussion,
Mr. Johns said that when he spoke earlier in the meeting he did not re
fer to the language of the directive, assuming that there would be an
opportunity to discuss that question when the directive was presented
for approval. However, at a meeting with some of the staff of the St.
Louis Bank yesterday, there had been considerable discussion of the word
ing of the directive at which time he had taken the position that the
time had come for the Committee to eliminate sole emphasis on "restraint"
in the wording of the directive and to substitute something more like the
language of the directive issued at the meeting last June. He personally
was strongly in favor of some such change, and wording along the lines
suggested by Chairman Martin and implied in Mr. Balderston's comments
would seem suitable.
Mr. Sproul said that he, like Mr. Johns, had assumed that a

1/24/56 -19
discussion of the directive would come up later in this meeting al
though he felt it logically fitted in with this discussion of policy.
He thought there was a danger when the Committee met every three weeks
that changes in the economic situation between meetings might be almost
imperceptible and that therefore it might seem that no change was called
for in the wording of the directive. However, he sensed that the Com
mittee does not feel that no change has occurred in the situation in
recent weeks. There has been a change in the economic situation, Mr.
Sproul said: certainly the rate of growth has decreased and there are
ruts in the road which were not there before. He did not feel that
the Committee could apply a policy with sole regard to restraining in
flationary forces any longer. It had to take account of the possibility
of a move in the other direction, and in Mr. Sproul's opinion, the Com
mittee should consider whether the time had come for a change in the
directive. The policy actions of the Committee are a public record,
Mr. Sproul said; the Committee is constantly being charged with having
a deflationary bias, and it was his view that since the Committee felt
that a time had arrived for a change in policy or policy emphasis, that
change should be reflected in the directive which would be part of the
published record in order that the public might know the Committee's
views had changed.
At Mr. Balderston's suggestion, Mr. Sproul repeated some of
the comments he had made earlier in the meeting. He felt that the
concept of making credit available to permit the economy to work, to

1/24/56 -20
produce, and to consume at near capacity levels suggested a change in
the directive at this time. While determination of the exact wording
was difficult, he said that one of the points to be considered was that
the wording should be not only a reflection of what the Committee's
thinking and judgment was; it also should be in language to enable
the public to understand what the Committee had in mind when it changed
the directive.
Mr. Mills raised the question whether it would be preferable to
make a change in the directive at this time or to defer doing so until
the next meeting, by which time the Committee might be firmly convinced
that the time had approached when a change should be made. He was fear
ful that a change at this time, particularly with language which he found
difficult to understand, would be regarded in the future as an escape
clause rather than as a decision based on a firm conclusion as to what
direction policy should take.
Mr. Bryan expressed somewhat the same view as that just indicated
by Mr. Mills, adding, however, that he had no strong conviction that the
directive should not be changed at this time.
During the discussion, Mr. Robertson said that he was not as sure
as the others had indicated that the Committee should not be watching in
flationary aspects. He would be very much surprised, he said, if they
were not still present during the next three months. At the same time,
he did not deny the possibility of some deflationary movement and he
would have no objection to changing the directive along the lines sug
gested by several of the members of the Committee.

1/24/56 -21
After further discussion and consideration of several sug
gestions of possible wording for a modification of clause (b) of
the first paragraph of the directive to be issued to the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York, the Committee agreed unanimously that clause
(b) should be changed by adding after the word "growth" the phrase
"while taking into account any deflationary tendencies in the economy"
so that this clause would read "(b) to restraining inflationary
developments in the interest of sustainable economic growth, while
taking into account any deflationary tendencies in the economy,"
In response to Chairman Martin's question, Mr. Rouse stated
that he had no suggestion for change in the limitation contained in
the existing directive:
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Committee voted unanimously
to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York until otherwise directed by the Com
mittee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (includ
ing replacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities
to run off without replacement) for the System open market
account in the open market or, in the case of maturing securi
ties, by direct exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary
in the light of current and prospective economic conditions and
the general credit situation of the country, with a view (a) to
relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs of com
merce and business, (b) to restraining inflationary developments
in the interest of sustainable economic growth while taking into
account any deflationary tendencies in the economy, and (c) to
the practical administration of the account; provided that the
aggregate amount of securities held in the System account (in
cluding commitments for the purchase or sale of securities for
the account) at the close of this date, other than special short
term certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for
the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be in
creased or decreased by more than $1 billion;

1/24/56 -22-
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the ac
count of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discre
tion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue participa
tions to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of
special short-term certificates of indebtedness as may be
necessary from time to time for the temporary accommodation
of the Treasury; provided that the total amount of such
certificates held at any one time by the Federal Reserve
Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate $500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System
account for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury
securities maturing within one year as may be necessary
from time to time for the accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such securities so sold
shall not exceed in the aggregate $500 million face amount,
and such sales shall be made as nearly as may be practicable
at the prices currently quoted in the open market.
Chairman Martin inquired whether there were any suggestions for
change in the repurchase authority, and no such suggestions for change
were indicated.
Thereupon, the following authoriza
tion was approved by unanimous vote
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is hereby author
ized to enter into repurchase agreements with nonbank dealers
in United States Government securities subject to the follow
ing conditions:
1. Such agreements
(a) In no event shall be at a rate below which
ever is the lower of (1) the discount rate
of the Federal Reserve Bank on eligible com
mercial paper, or (2) the average issuing
rate on the most recent issue of three-month
Treasury bills;
(b) Shall be for periods of not to exceed 15
calendar days;
(c) Shall cover only Government securities matur
ing within 15 months; and
(d) Shall be used as a means of providing the
money market with sufficient Federal Reserve
funds to avoid undue strain on a day-to-day
basis.
2. Reports of such transactions shall be included in the
weekly report of open market operations which is sent
to the members of the Federal Open Market Committee.

1/24/56 -23
3. In the event Government securities covered by any
such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer
pursuant to the agreement or a renewal thereof, the
securities thus acquired by the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York shall be sold in the market or trans
ferred to the System open market account.
Chairman Martin stated that he had contemplated having a discus
sion at this meeting of the Committee's policy that during a period of
Treasury financing it would not authorize the purchase of "when-issued"
securities, and whether the deviation from that policy authorized in
connection with the Treasury financing at the meeting November 30, 1955,
was simply an exception to it. He stated that he thought it important
that the Committee have a discussion of this question and reach an under
standing prior to the next Treasury financing as to whether this con
tinued to be the Committee's policy. However, in view of the lateness
of the hour he raised the question whether it would be preferable to
carry over discussion of this subject until the next meeting of the Com
mittee. It was understood that discussion of this topic would be de
ferred until the next meeting.
Chairman Martin referred to his appearance before the Senate
Committee on Banking and Currency on Friday, January 20, 1956, in con
nection with his renomination as a member of the Board of Governors,
stating that at that time Senator Douglas requested the vote on an
action of the Federal Open Market Committee last December authorizing
the purchase of when-issued securities in connection with the Treasury
financing. He went on to say that he had told Senator Douglas how he
voted and that he had also revealed that the Committee's action on

1/24/56 -24
this matter was decided by a split vote 9 to 3, but that he felt he
should not reveal how the individual members voted without clearing
with the Committee, even though a statement of the action and the
individual votes would be made public later in the Annual Report of
the Board of Governors covering the year 1955. Chairman Martin in
quired whether any of the individual memoers of the Committee or the
Committee as a whole would object to his furnishing the Chairman of
the Senate Committee on Banking and Currency with the information
which Senator Douglas had requested prior to the date this informa
tion was made public in the Board's Annual Report.
Upon motion by Mr. Earhart, duly
seconded, Chairman Martin was author
ized by unanimous vote to furnish the
Chairman of the Senate Banking and
Currency Committee with the names of
the individual members of the Committee
voting for and against the action in
question.
Secretary's note: Pursuant to the fore
going authorization, Chairman Martin sent
a letter to the Honorable J. William
Fulbright, Chairman, Committee on Banking
and Currency, United States Senate, under
date of January 21, 1956, reading as
follows:
"In the course of the questioning when I was before your
Committee last Friday, Senator Douglas requested the vote on
an action of the Federal Open Market Committee last December
and I stated that the vote was 9 to 3. Senator Douglas asked
me to state who voted in the negative and I demurred that I
thought it would be preferable to await the annual report
since it would be out in a couple of months and would contain
a full discussion of the matter.
"I had in mind the fact that Congress, as you know, has
established that procedure as the regular method for reporting

1/24/56 -25
"to the Congress the actions and policies of the Federal
Open Market Committee with the votes and reasons therefor.
However, I said I was perfectly willing to say that I
voted for the action but that I hesitated to give the names
of my absent associates before I had had an opportunity to
consult with them. I have now done so and since no objec
tions have been raised, I wish to report that those voting
against the action were Governors Mills, Robertson, and
Vardaman. Those voting for the action were, besides my
self, Messrs. Sproul, Balderston, Earhart, Fulton, Irons,
Leach, Shepardson, and Szymczak.
"I trust that this is the information Senator Douglas
wishes to have."
At Chairman Martin's request, Mr. Thurston commented upon in
quiries being made regarding the dates of meetings of the Federal Open
Market Committee, which subject had been discussed briefly at the meet
ing on January 10. Mr. Thurston said that he felt no special signifi
cance should be attached to a meeting date and that it would be prefer
able to respond to inquiries on this question by stating that Committee
meetings were held regularly and frequently. He added, in response to
an inquiry from Mr. Robertson, that he would not hesitate to state that
the next meeting of the Committee was tentatively scheduled for or
would be held on a specified date unless the Chairman of the Committee
or some members of the Committee decided to depart from that day.
It was understood that the procedure suggested by Mr. Thurston
would be followed in the event of inquiries regarding the dates of meet
ings of the Committee.
Chairman Martin then brought up the problem of press reports
which presumed to give information regarding discussions and actions
taken at meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. He asked that

1/24/56 -26
Mr. Thurston also comment on this problem.
Mr. Thurston referred to the report in the January 14, 1956
issue of Business Week which purported to give the substance of dis
cussion at the meeting of the Committee held on January 10. He stated
that he understood that a reporter for Business Week had been making
calls to the Presidents of the various Federal Reserve Banks a day or
so before meetings of the Committee and, while he was not suggesting
the Presidents should not talk with reporters under such circumstances,
it occurred to him that some might unintentionally provide information
which the reporters would use in preparing stories purporting to tell
what went on at the meeting.
Mr. Williams stated that a representative of Business Week
Magazine had called him before the meeting of the Open Market Com
mittee held on January 10 and that he had talked with him regarding
the business situation. However, Mr. Williams felt that the reporter
should not have inferred in his story that what Mr. Williams talked
with him about prior to the meeting was a portion of the discussion
at the meeting. Mr. Williams expressed doubt as to whether it was
desirable to talk with reporters in such circumstances.
Chairman Martin stated that he thought there could not be a
single rule which would apply to inquiries from the press but that he
thought this was a problem which all of those attending Open Market
Committee meetings should bear in mind.
At Chairman Martin's request, Mr. Riefler commented on the
procedure for implementing the report of the Subcommittee on Defense

1/24/56 -27
Planning for the Federal Open Market Committee, approved at the meet
ing on January 10, 1956. Mr. Riefler stated that, to carry out the
last paragraph of the Subcommittee's report, he would suggest that Mr.
Vest be requested to prepare drafts of resolutions to be adopted either
by the Committee or by the Board of Governors to carry out certain of
the recommendations of the Subcommittee; that Messrs. Rouse and Thomas
be requested to prepare guides for open market transactions by the
individual Federal Reserve Banks and for training of personnel as sug
gested in the Subcommittee report, with the understanding that they
would consult with Mr. Leonard, Director of the Board's Division of
Bank Operations, who had been working on defense planning matters for
the Board and the System; both of these requests being with the under
standing that he (Mr. Riefler) as Secretary would work with Messrs.
Vest, Rouse, Thomas, and Leonard in preparing material to be brought
before the Committee.
These suggestions were approved
unanimously.
It was tentatively agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
would be held on Tuesday, February 14, 1956.
Secretary's note: Subsequently, further
checking resulted in setting Wednesday,
February 15,1956, at 10:45 a.m. as the
date and time for the next meeting of the
Committee.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary