A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, June 5, 1956, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. E rickson
Mr. Johns
Mr. M ills
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak (Latter part of meeting)
Mr. V ardaman
Mr. Fulton, Alternate
Mr. L eedy, Alternate
Mr. Treiber, Alternate
Messrs. Bryan and Williams, Alternate Members,
Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Leach, Irons, and Mangels, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Dallas,
and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Abbott, Parsons, Roelse, Willis, and
Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Molony, Special Assistant, Board of Governors
(First part of meeting)
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report covering open market operations during the period
May 23, 1956 through May 30, 1956, and at this meeting a supplementary

6/5/56 -2
report covering commitments executed May 31 through June 4, 1956, in
clusive, was distributed. Copies of both reports have been placed in
the files of the Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period May 23
through June 4, 1956, inclusive, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
At Chairman Martin's request, Mr. Young made a statement at
this point on the economic situation, supplementing the staff memorandum
distributed under date of June 1, 1956. Mr. Young's statement was sub
stantially as follows:
Latest data continue to confirm a sidewise movement for
activity, some observers would say with a good bit of side
to-side roll. Downward adjustments in output of a few con
spicuous lines, in prices of metals and rubber, and in common
stock prices have commanded special press comment, as has also
some evident lowering of business sights as to general eco
nomic prospects for the short-run.
But output in many areas has been maintained and in some
sectors has increased further. Moreover, price mark-ups of
fabricated items continue to be fairly numerous over a month's
period and the recovery of farm product prices has been ex
tended. Over-all, employment and output are about unchanged
with credit demands generally continuing vigorous. Activity
in important industrial countries abroad remains generally
strong, with inflationary symptoms in some countries rather
marked.
As to specifics of the situations
(1) The Board's index of industrial production for May
is being estimated at 141, down one index point from April.
Auto output and output of supplying industries was off further
and production of light trucks was under expectations; farm
machinery output continued at reduced levels; steel was down
because of the closings of strike-affected Alabama mills;
appliance production was cut back as a result of competitive
developments; and textile mill operations were somewhat
lower, mainly on the synthetic side. Elsewhere, production
generally held at earlier levels or rose further.

(2) Automobile sales in May were generally disappoint
ing to the industry, but with sharp cutbacks in production,
dealer stocks began to decline a little. Used car markets
remained strong, with stocks continuing moderately downward
and prices of late model used cars, after allowance for
depreciation, moderately upward.
(3) Household durable sales were at a very high level
in April--about 8 per cent above a year ago levels. At
department stores in May, close to April levels for sales
of these goods were maintained.
(4) Last meeting's report stated that preliminary
figures on retail sales, seasonally adjusted, showed an over
all decline of 2-1/2 per cent in April. The Department of
Commerce will release corrected figures this week reducing
this decline to 1-1/2 per cent. Considering that these
figures are based on samples of varying adequacy and that
seasonal adjustment methods yield only approximations, this
corrected figure can be interpreted as showing little or no
change. In May, department store sales are estimated to
have risen one index point to 123, department store sales
have fluctuated around 122 since late last summer.
(5) Consumer instalment credit in April rose about
$250 million, with most of the rise in other than auto
motive lines. The proportion of new cars sold on credit
was about 69 per cent compared with 57 per cent a year ago.
(6) Book value of manufacturers' inventories was up
half a billion dollars in April, about the average of pre
ceding three months, with much of the rise in expanding
durable goods lines. Distributors' inventories--wholesale
and retail--showed only a modest $100 million rise, with
most of rise in nondurables at wholesale. Altogether avail
able current inventory information is adding up to some de
celeration of accumulation this quarter.
(7) The decline in durable manufacturers' new orders
which had proceeded for four months halted in April, being
succeeded by a small rise to a level about equal to current
shipments.
(8) Total nonfarm employment in May, despite lay-offs
in automobile and related industries, was about at earlier
levels and unemployment was probably unchanged. Recently,
new scattered lay-offs in electrical appliance, rubber,
lumber, and southern textiles have been reported. In May
there were 23 labor markets classified as having a sub
stantial labor surplus, compared with 19 in March and 35
in April.
(9) In late May, wholesale prices averaged 4 per cent
above a year ago and only 2 per cent below the record peak

6/5/56 -4
in early 1951. Prices of farm products have now recovered
to year ago levels. Prices of processed industrial com
modities have continued to advance at a slackened rate, but
this has been offset by pronounced weakness in some basic
materials such as steel scrap, copper, and rubber and less
promounced weakness in others. Markets for many industrial
materials, however, have continued strong.
(10) Consumer prices rose slightly from mid-March to
mid-April and market reports would suggest a further and some
what larger rise to mid-May.
(11) In Western Europe, activity in major countries con
tinues to press against capacity, with inflationary pressures
manifest and apparently reflecting mainly heavy capital invest
ment demand, in France supplemented by swollen military expendi
tures. Activity in Great Britain seems held down by capacity
limits but credit restraints would also appear to be exerting
some progressive restrictive pressure. The past year's gains for
Japan have been striking, with demand pressures very strong and
wholesale prices under considerable upward pressure.
A word in conclusion about the near-term outlook because
two confidential pieces of information have come at hand bear
ing on it. First, very confidential information from the auto
mobile industry indicates an industry target for dealer stocks
at the end of August of 200 to 250,000 units, implying a liquida
tion before new model introductions in September of 600 to
650,000 units now in dealer inventories. This points to a sharp
reduction in auto output in the period ahead, especially during
July and August. If the industry adheres to this goal, as seems
possible, a downward drag upon the Board's index of industrial
production will result, caused by direct and indirect effects
of auto output cutbacks. The index will likely fall about an
index point a month in June and July, leveling out in August as
auto parts manufacture then picks up for new models. Third
quarter earnings of automobile manufacturers and parts suppliers
will be adversely affected by these production developments, of
course, and this has a chance of being reflected in equity values
as the third quarter unfolds.
The other item of information relates to business capital
expenditure plans. It is strictly confidential until released
to the public late this week. The Department of Commerce--SEC
survey of business plant and equipment expenditures will show
a further rise in the annual rate of expenditures of about $2
billion-- about the same pace of rise reported for the past two
quarters. The release will show expenditure plans up for every
industry group. All groups will show expenditures at a
record level except the commercial area, which slid off this
second quarter from the first and will apparently not retrieve

6/5/56 -5
the first quarter level. No figures will be released at this
time pertaining to spending plans for the fourth quarter, but
a further rise in that quarter is suggested by this survey's
results.
We can offset these two items of intelligence with the
following results. Activity will continue to be supported
over the months immediately ahead by the business investment
boom while drastic readjustment is in process in the automo
bile industry. If the auto industry's "new look" takes hold
in the fall, consumer durable goods buying and business in
vestment will combine to provide, other things favorable, a
strong expansive and perhaps inflationary stimulus to economic
activity as a whole.
In response to a question from Mr. Vardaman, Mr. Young said that
there was some indication that change-over to new model automobile pro
duction in late summer or early fall might be accomplished with little
further rise in unemployment in automobile producing centers. Producers,
he said, wished to avoid additional losses of workers to other areas or
activities and may be expected, therefore, to make such adjustments as
are necessary through reductions in hours of work rather than layoffs.
Mr. Young stated, in response to a question from Mr. Williams,
that there had been impressive improvement in the market for used auto-
mobiles and, in view of the efforts of the industry to reduce dealer
inventories of new cars sharply prior to introduction of new models, it
could be anticipated that dealers would be in a position to get good
prices for new model automobiles when they were introduced. This, Mr.
Young felt, indicated a hope on the part of the automobile industry
that it would be able to pass on rises in steel prices and other costs.
Chairman Martin noted that there had been considerable comment
in the press recently about the financial difficulties of Studebaker-

6/5/56 -6
Packard Corporation. At his request, Mr. Mills reviewed discussions
that had taken place recently looking to the possible merger of that
company with Curtiss-Wright Corporation and to the possible request
of Studebaker-Packard Corporation for a loan under section 13b of
the Federal Reserve Act to assist it in the interim. Mr. Treiber also
commented briefly on preliminary work being done in connection with a
possible application for such a loan, which would be filed with the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York if the loan is formally requested.
Mr. Molony withdrew from the meeting at this point.
Chairman Martin next called upon Mr. Thomas, who said that it
now appeared possible that the Treasury cash surplus for fiscal 1956
would exceed $6 billion and for calendar 1956, $9 billion. A cash
balance at the end of the current month of more than $6 billion would
cover the next six months' deficit with only $2 billion of borrowings
in October. Mr. Thomas said that there had been some increase in de
mand deposits during the last two weeks, following a sharp decline in
the preceding three weeks to an unusually low level. Some loan con
traction at weekly reporting member banks took place in the last week
of May and commercial loans have declined for two weeks. In the past
five weeks, there has been little net change in commercial loans, and
real estate and consumer loan expansion has been less than last year.
Investment holdings have not been reduced as much as a year ago.
There has been a better tone in the market for new issues of
securities, with a substantial volume of offerings in May and a large

6/5/56 -7
amount scheduled for June. Interest rates have been fairly steady
after a marked decline in long-term rates early in May. Bank re
serve positions were eased by Federal Reserve operations during the
past two weeks with purchases of nearly $300 million, in addition to
repurchase contracts. Net borrowed reserves have been around $400
million and bank positions have eased in New York and in reserve cities
although tightness has increased at country banks. Looking ahead, net
borrowed reserves may average less than $300 million this week and
next; a very large increase in required reserves may be expected during
the week of June 20 in connection with a sharp increase in deposits,
but this should be fully covered by an increase in Federal Reserve
float. Mr. Thomas said that it did not appear that there would be
any great strain on the market until the end of June or early July,
at which time the System would be called upon to give assistance.
Mr. Thomas went on to say that in accordance with the request
at the meeting two weeks ago the staff had prepared some longer-run
projections of reserve needs. He then presented charts showing member
bank reserves and related items and commented on technical features
of these charts on which projections of reserves were based. The net
results of the projections, Mr. Thomas said, were that if normal
seasonal trends occurred during the remainder of 1956, the System
would need to supply about $1.8 billion of Federal Reserve credit
(other than float) during the remainder of the year. This assumed
continuation of net borrowed reserves at around $400 million. Most

6/5/56 -8
of the additional reserves would be needed after August except for
temporary increases that would be called for late in June and early
in July.
In response to Chairman Martin's request for comments, Mr.
Treiber noted that the projections Mr. Thomas had presented assumed
a straight line increase in the money supply. Another approach might
be taken, he noted, basing the projections of reserve needs on a pro
jection of the business outlook and the demand for credit that would
thus result. Mr. Treiber stated that the New York Bank had worked
out some figures on that basis and had come out with a somewhat
lower estimate of reserve needs although it was not substantially
at variance with the figure Mr. Thomas had given.
Mr. Thomas stated that he had come to the conclusion that
the Committee's interest was primarily in the money supply and the
projection of a supply that would not permit inflation. He felt it
preferable to assume the money supply, rather than to try to estimate
what the money supply would be on the basis of possible demand for
credit.
Chairman Martin stated that the projections could be prepared
on either basis and he thought it desirable to have them prepared on
both approaches. In a sense, however, the approach mentioned by Mr.
Treiber involved a consideration of the factors that the Federal Open
Market Committee must consider at every meeting.
Chairman Martin noted that less than two weeks had elapsed

6/5/56 9
since the preceding meeting of the Committee and that only ten days
would elapse between now and the June 15 tax date. He felt it im
portant to integrate the Committee's operations with the Treasury's
operations, and he stated that yesterday Under Secretary Burgess
brought up for discussion the question of the prospective Treasury
surplus. This subject might be discussed in the course of this meet
ing, Chairman Martin said; he added that he was asking Mr. Rouse to
make arrangements to discuss the matter with Treasury representatives
after the meeting.
Chairman Martin noted that the Committee had not yet approved
the minutes for the meeting held on May 23 and he read from the draft
of those minutes the statement of the policy agreed upon at that meet
ing which, in addition to a modification of clause (b) of paragraph (1)
of the Committee's directive, indicated that between the May 23 meeting
and today's meeting operations should be carried on with a view to
bringing about a downward trend in the volume of net borrowed reserves.
It was his feeling, the Chairman said, that the account management had
handled the situation well during this period and that the results were
working in the direction the Committee had in mind.
Chairman Martin then called upon Mr. Treiber who made a state
ment substantially as follows:
An atmosphere of uncertainty continues. The economy
continues steady in the aggregate, with divergent trends

-10-
in individual areas. The forces of inflation seem reduced.
More questions are being raised as to business expectations,
especially for the third quarter. The stock market has de
clined. Employment is high and important labor negotiations
are now going on. People are questioning whether there will
be enough self-restraint on the part of labor in pressing its
demands, and on the part of management in raising prices, to
avoid another turn in the cost-price spiral.
With almost full employment, consumer spending has con
tinued high, although the demand for durable goods has dimin
ished. The expansion of consumer credit is not adding to the
demand in the rapid way it did last year.
Capital expenditures are high, and are expected to be
higher. Nevertheless, the recent McGraw-Hill survey showing
substantially increased spending for capital purposes has not
stimulated the ebullience which earlier estimates invoked.
While housing starts are still high, there is little sign of
further stimulation. Business construction is at record levels.
The trend of prices has been mixed. Sensitive commodity
prices have drifted downward during May, mainly because of de
clines in certain industrial raw materials, e.g., steel scrap,
copper scrap, and rubber. Prices of industrial finished goods,
on the other hand, have advanced. Farm prices have advanced so
that, on average, they are now back to the levels of a year ago.
There is considerable evidence pointing toward reduced
business activity in the third quarter of 1956, followed by in
creased activity in the fourth quarter.
The capital markets are still seeking to find a trading
base at which they can operate. The number of potential new
offerings is substantial. Yields on new capital issues are
likely to increase somewhat if dealers want to dispose of the
issues promptly.
Demand for bank credit continues high. The demand in
June may equal the high demand in March. On the other hand,
the demand in the second half of 1956 is likely to be con
siderably less intense than in the second half of 1955.
Each new estimate of the Treasury's financial position
shows a greater anticipated Treasury deposit balance at the
end of June. The Board's estimates reported this morning are
greater than those of the New York Bank. On the basis of the
New York estimates, the Treasury will probably have to borrow
for cash in August. It will probably want to borrow at that
time about half of its estimated cash needs for the second
half of 1956; on this basis the August borrowing may amount
to a couple of billion dollars, part of which must be financed
through bank credit.

-11-
The money market has been under less pressure in the
last two weeks. We should continue to make it clear that
needed credit will be available. Net borrowed reserves for
the last two statement weeks have averaged $400 million. The
outright purchase of $161 million of securities for System
Account during those two weeks, plus repurchase agreements by
the New York bank, have been direct evidence of the System's
willingness of make needed credit available. Additional out
right purchases of $131 million in the current statement week
and a continuation of repurchase agreements have been further
evidence of such willingness. Borrowing by member banks from
the Federal Reserve Banks averaged about three quarters of a
billion dollars in the last statement week, compared with
about $1 billion in previous weeks. This is further evidence
of lessening pressure. While credit policy should remain re
strictive, the pressure upon credit availability should con
tinue to be reduced to reflect the current balance between
inflationary and deflationary pressures in the economy. Tight
ness or ease in the market is, of course, reflected in a number
of areas such as interest rates, volume of member bank borrowing,
and the attitudes of men.
There is likely to be a good deal of churning around in
the money market in the middle of June. There will be heavy
tax payments and heavy demands by corporations for bank credit.
The Federal Reserve System might appropriately supply additional
reserves as tangible evidence that the credit authorities do not
intend to allow the demands for credit to generate a squeeze.
Because of the large money market adjustments that must be made,
a fairly liberal supplying of reserves would be helpful without
signaling a policy of ease. Giving effect to the substantial
Federal Reserve transactions already made this statement week,
average net borrowed reserves for the week will probably fall
in the $350 - $400 million range. Projections for the follow
ing weeks of June indicate less net borrowed reserves. Recog
nizing that net borrowed reserves are but one of many factors
indicating the extent of the tightness of the money market, we
should be alert to make additional purchases to prevent net
borrowed reserves from exceeding the $200 - .300 million range.
The officers of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York be
lieve that there should be no change at this time in the Bank's
discount rate.
Mr. Erickson said that conditions in the Boston District remained
favorable except for the weather. Employment in April was ahead of March
of this year and of April of last year. Except for textiles, New England

6/5/56 -12
industries were doing well. Construction awards in New England during
the first two weeks of May were ahead of a year ago by 15 per cent.
Nonresidential contracts were up 25 per cent, and residential building
was up 14 per cent. During the past two weeks there has been more ac
tive use of the discount window, Mr. Erickson said, adding that on one
day 82 banks borrowed from the Boston Reserve Bank, more than at any
time since the banking holiday in 1933. In a survey of automobile
dealers, the first four dealers interviewed blamed the automobile
manufacturers for their present predicament. One of those dealers
criticized Federal Reserve policy but this was because it was costing
him more money. Mr. Erickson said that he felt the discount rate should
remain where it is--the Boston Bank's directors took that action yester
day by renewing the existing 2-3/4 per cent rate. For the next two
weeks, Mr. Erickson suggested that the Committee supply reserves to
the market even if net borrowed reserves dropped below $300 million.
Mr. Irons said that conditions in the Dallas District continued
strong. He could see no evidence of real weakness or of any tendency
for the adjustment going on in the automobile industry to cumulate. He
described the situation as a strong side-wise movement. Less active use
has been made of the discount window at the Dallas Bank during the past
two weeks, Mr. Irons said, and borrowings have dropped from the $45-50
million range to $25-30 million. These borrowings continue to be by
relatively few banks, Mr. Irons said: out of 590 country banks,
probably 4 or 5 were using the discount window and those borrowings

6/5/56 -13
were largely for seasonal needs associated with agriculture. The
bulk of borrowing is coming from 4 or 5 or 6 of the larger banks in
the larger cities, but that also has lessened within the past two
weeks. Mr. Irons said that in his judgment the situation was still
much as described in the economic review. He would not recommend a
change in the discount rate at this time. The Committee should pro
vide reserves needed for seasonal and related factors, he said, but
he would not be inclined to have the situation become easier than
it has been during the past two weeks. The Committee should continue
to have a real element of pressure on the reserve position of banks
rather than a sharp movement toward ease. He would not wish to set
any specific figure of negative borrowed reserves to be attained, but
his comments might suggest negative free reserves more in the $350
400 million range than in the $250-300 million area.
Mr. Mangels said that the last two weeks have given no evidence
of change in the Twelfth District's situation. Department store sales
are holding up well, employment has been increasing, and automobile
sales in April in California were only 13 per cent lower than a year
earlier. Preliminary figures of automobile sales early in May indi
cated a decrease from a year ago not much greater than that in April.
The general situation in the Twelfth District is still relatively good
except in the northwest where lumbering is having something of a problem.
Increases in bank loans at Twelfth District reporting member banks during

6/5/56 -14
the past few weeks have accounted for about a third of the national
increase; the increase in real estate loans in the Twelfth District
made up half of the national total.
Mr. Mangels referred to a business outlook meeting held at
the San Francisco Bank last Friday and attended by representatives
of finance and of the utility, steel, oil, lumber, and building in
dustries. A steel company representative indicated that the West
Coast inventory of steel was probably no greater now than a year ago
and that a larger inventory might be healthy. This representative
felt that the industry would operate at 85 per cent capacity in the
third quarter and would be back to 91 per cent in the fourth quarter.
Representatives of the petroleum and utilities industries were looking
ahead to substantially increased needs for capacity in the next few
years. The lumber industry anticipates further price declines and
there is some concern that substitute materials may affect the demand
for lumber for residential and other construction. A pessimistic note
was expressed by the former president of the National Home Builders
who estimated that housing in California this year would be 30 to 40
per cent below new construction in 1955. For the country as a whole,
he thought housing starts would total not more than one million units
this year. Sales of new houses are lagging, not as a result of a lack
of mortgage money but because the effective demand is for homes selling
in the $9,000-$10,000 price class, whereas the building industry can not

6/5/56 -15
now build houses to sell below $12,000-$12,500. In other words, the
industry for various reasons has priced itself out of its current
market. Gross farm income in California in 1955 was above 1954, Mr.
Mangels said. Some increase in farm debt has taken place, but net
worth of farmers has increased. The view was expressed that the Fed
eral Reserve System would need to supply about $1-1/2 billion addi
tional reserves this year, and some expressed the hope that this would
be in the form of a reduction in reserve requirements. Mr. Mangels
presented figures indicating that banks on the West Coast are not too
tightly pressed. Three bank presidents who visited him recently felt
that the discount rate should not be reduced and others have indicated
satisfaction with the present rate. Mr. Mangels felt that the Com
mittee's operations in the past two weeks had helped the general situa
tion, including psychology. He suggested that the Committee continue
about what it has been doing, furnishing reserves on a moderate basis
and perhaps reducing net borrowed reserves further but not too sub
stantially. Mr. Mangels noted that he still did not expect to recom
mend a change in the discount rate when the directors of the San
Francisco Bank meet on June 13.
Mr. Leedy said that he had no significant changes to report
regarding conditions in the Tenth District, and that he agreed with
the views expressed thus far regarding the national economic situation.
He felt the management of the System account had given an excellent
account of itself since the last meeting. In view of the uncertainties

6/5/56 -16
in the picture and the tax date coming up shortly and because of the
situation in the automobile industry, he felt that between now and
the next meeting the Committee should make certain that needed re
serves are supplied to the market. He would not go so far as to indi
cate a condition of ease, but reserves might be supplied a little on
the liberal side. He would suggest no change in discount rates at
this time.
Mr. Leach said that since the last meeting the Fifth District
had shown small economic gains and losses with little net change. Loan
demand continues strong and there is evidence that the feeling of tight
ness has spread to the smaller banks. He said that he had gotten this
impression both from visits to banks and from the experience at the
discount window of the Richmond Bank. Over Memorial Day holiday, 55
member banks were borrowing from the Richmond Bank, the largest number
in the postwar period. Of the 114 banks that have borrowed this year,
2 had never borrowed before and 8 had not borrowed since 1934. During
the next three weeks, Mr. Leach said that he felt the System's actions
should continue to dispel any doubts as to our readiness to meet
seasonal reserve needs including tax date requirements. There should
be further outright purchases of Treasury bills and a lower level of
net borrowed reserves--perhaps around $200 million. Special pains
should be taken to see that net borrowed reserves do not get higher
than the general level the Committee has in mind. This would represent

6/5/56 -17
an extension of the shift in emphasis adopted at the May 23 meeting
of the Committee, but it would not require a change in the directive.
Mr. Leach said that he did not expect to recommend to the directors
of the Richmond Bank any change in the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Vardaman said that he had just returned from an auto
mobile trip through the Midwest, the South, and the southeastern
States on which he found almost universal support for current System
policy and no criticism of the soundness of what the Committee was now
doing. He said that he, too, had noted that tightness was spreading
to smaller banks, and he expressed the opinion that an unfortunate
maldistribution of credit facilities continues in some areas. This
is not a Federal Reserve problem, Mr. Vardaman said, but he hoped
that something could be done to bring about a more equitable distribu
tion of loanable funds throughout the economy. Mr. Vardaman said that
he hoped the System could assure the public including the banks that
it would supply the needed funds during the next few weeks or months.
The discount window should be kept open and the banks should be welcomed
rather than frowned on for borrowing. He hoped that the rediscount rate
would remain where it is and he especially approved the present situa
tion with two banks having a 3 per cent discount rate while the others
had a 2-3/ per cent rate. Mr. Vardaman said that he thought this was
one of the most healthy factors in recent policy moves. He felt that
the System had accomplished to a large extent what it set out to ac
complish: it had awakened the economy to the dangers of inflation.

6/5/56 -18
Now the System could afford to coast along and not make conditions
any tighter.
Mr. Mills called attention to the business situation at home
and abroad and to the availability of credit, stating that these two
factors argued for the injection of additional reserves and for taking
advantage of natural forces that would reduce the level of negative
free reserves to around $200 million. There were indications that
business expectations and actual business performances were wavering,
he said, and to the extent that that is true the Committee should guard
against being misguided by the past momentum of the economy when actual
conditions might be developing that would make future prospects less
bright. He noted that Messrs. Erickson and Leach had brought out the
fact that country banks in their districts were resorting to greater
use of the discount windows and that excess reserves at country banks
were drying up. Mr. Mills said that the reserves supplied during the
past two weeks had relieved the situation and improved the tone of the
Government securities market but that it would take time for those re
serves, and such new reserves as are supplied, to spread out to country
banks. He felt that the Committee should not be disturbed even though
further additions to reserves at this time might temporarily produce
a greater sense of ease than might otherwise be welcome, due to the
fact that until they have become more widely distributed, the initial
impact of a supply of new reserves falls on the money market. Accord
ingly, he would argue for a policy of supplying additional reserves

6/5/56 -19
either through direct purchases of Treasury bills or through natural
factors that would bring negative free reserves down to around $200
million.
Mr. Shepardson said that he felt much the same as Mr. Mills
had just indicated. Committee activities up to the present time have
been getting the results the Committee has had in mind, he said, and
there has been a healthy change in the atmosphere. We have reached
the point where perhaps some easing of the pressure is indicated. The
level of negative free reserves should be lowered possibly to the $200
250 million level. Mr. Shepardson said he was not sure about any particu
lar figure but the level should come down from where it is. He thought
the discount rate was serving a good purpose where it is and would not
favor a change at this time.
Mr. Fulton said that the Cleveland District's economy was
affected materially by the automotive situation and the weather had
been an unfavorable psychological factor, but there were many factors
of strength still present. He would not like to see net borrowed re
serves so reduced as to indicate that the System had surrendered to
some extent to inflation; the current steel wage negotiations were
most important in that the settlement would be a bellwether for other
industries. Net borrowed reserves around the $300 million level would
be helpful at the present time, Mr. Fulton said, and would indicate
the willingness of the System to meet all appropriate demands for

6/5/56 -20
credit, but would not give an indication that the System had
completely changed policy or that it intended to supply reserves
in such quantities as to let wages react to that stimulus.
Mr. Williams commented on business developments in the
Philadelphia area to the effect that no important changes in the
general situation had taken place since the preceding meeting. He
cited a special report of automobile sales in the district, stating
that all but 4 of 48 counties for which data were available showed
an increase in sales during April as compared with a year ago.
Nothing in the Philadelphia District business picture would warrant
a change in policy at this time, Mr. Williams said, although real
questions may arise in July and August. For the present, he favored
maintaining existing discount rates, continuing the Committee's
existing directive, and giving whatever assistance was necessary
through supplying reserves in the open market. He thought free re
serves should be held around the negative $200 million level.
Mr. Bryan said that in the Sixth District, there appeared
to be a little softening in economic activity but not much, and that
such softening as could be observed was attributable almost entirely
to textile shut downs and to the strikebound Birmingham steel situation.
Nationally, he felt the situation confusing. The problem, he said, was
to judge whether the massive readjustments taking place were of the
"rolling adjustment" type that precede an economy getting into balance

6/5/56 -21
for another upsurge, or whether they indicated some sort of cyclical
down turn. He did not think the evidence conclusive one way or the
other at present and any judgment must be tentative. His view was
that we must for the time being confine ourselves to the conclusion
that the economy is moving sidewise and that the previous massive up
surge has been at least mmentarily checked. When the economy is
moving sidewise in this way, credit policy should not become more re
strictive. The System should meet the seasonal demand for funds. At
the same time the System should do nothing dramatic toward softening
policy, such as reducing discount rates or reducing reserve requirements
until evidence of an actual or impending downward trend in the economy
is clearer. Mr. Bryan said he had a further question in his mind
whether the System should supply reserves sufficient not merely to
meet the seasonal needs but also to restore some growth factor in the
total reserve supply. His present inclination was that the Committee
should go somewhat further than merely supplying reserves for seasonal
and tax date requirements: it would be justified for a temporary
period in supplying reserves in a quantity that would restore some
growth. If this resulted in a move in the Treasury bill rate to a
point where it was out of touch with the discount rate, he would be
disposed to reduce the discount rate. Mr. Bryan added the comment
that he had not been greatly concerned about the volume of borrowings
at the Reserve Banks, that these had "put the grease on the wheels
that needed the grease at the time they needed it."

6/5/56 -22
Mr. Szymczak entered the meeting during Mr. Bryan's state
ment.
Mr. Johns said that department store sales in the Eighth
District were running stronger than in the nation as a whole but
other than that he had nothing to report that differed from the
staff review. He recalled that two weeks ago he had complained
mildly that the reserve position of banks had been somewhat tighter
since the preceding meeting than the Committee had wanted it to be.
He now wished to say that he had been very much pleased by the
performance of the desk during the past two weeks. Mr. Johns said
that there appeared to be a little uncertainty regarding the economy
at the present time although he was unable to place his finger
exactly on signs of weakness. An opinion had been expressed to him
within the past few hours by an informed and careful observer that
the System's operations during the past two weeks had reassured
bankers as to the availability of reserves and credit but that such
assurance had not yet been divined by the business community other
than banks. This observer suggested the desirability of the System
communicating such assurance to the business community and indicated
he would welcome a reduction in discount rate or perhaps a reduction
in margin requirements. Mr. Johns said that he was not sure that he
agreed with this observer but that he hoped the Committee would exer
cise care between now and its next meeting not to permit the reserve
situation to tighten. He would prefer that negative borrowed

6/5/56 -23
reserves drift slowly downward rather than that they rise. For the
moment he did not contemplate recommending a reduction in the dis
count rate of the St. Louis Bank, although as Mr. Bryan had suggested
he would watch short-term interest rates carefully, Treasury bill
rates particularly, and if they declined much he would begin thinking
about recommending a reduction in the discount rate. Once past the
June tax date, Mr. Johns said, if the bill rate continued to drift
downward he would begin to think quickly about reducing the discount
rate.
Mr. Szymczak said that he thought the policy the Committee had
been pursuing during the past two weeks had been about right. The
dramatic thing industry seemed to expect was a reduction in the dis
count rate, he said, but he did not think the System was ready to take that
action. He did feel, however, that the Committee should supply re
serves to the market to meet seasonal needs and that it should watch
the situation carefully. If the bill rate declined to a level out of
relation to the discount rate, he would be disposed to act on the dis
count rate.
Mr. Balderston said that developments since the previous meet
ing confirmed the soundness of the Committee's action in changing the
directive two weeks ago to make the supply of credit more available.
He noted that the bill rate had declined but is still in an appro
priate relation to the discount rate and that the discount total had
dropped below $1 billion for the first time in many weeks. While

6/5/56 -24
net borrowed reserve figures could not be used with precision, Mr.
Balderston said that he felt these figures should be brought down
at least to $250 million, with a target range of zero to $200 mil
lion. He commented on evidence of readjustments taking place in
economic activity and of deterioration in business confidence, which
led to his belief that the Committee's operations for the near-term
should be designed to offset fears and uncertainties that might re
sult this summer from necessary readjustments in the auto, steel,
and other industries. In the longer-run, Mr. Balderston said, the
need to encourage expansion of productive capacity and continuing
improvements in plant efficiency made it desirable for the System
to give attention to increasing the money supply to the extent needed
to provide for jobs and a constantly rising standard of living. Such
increase should take place when it can be accomplished without the
risk of inducing inflationary price advances.
Chairman Martin stated that the views expressed at this meeting
were much closer together than those at the meeting two weeks ago. His
view, he stated, was much the same as that expressed by Mr. Mills this
morning. The Chairman said that he felt the Committee had made sub
stantial progress in what may be a valley and what easily could become
a triple top movement. There had been a valley in February, he said,
and we probably are going to have a little valley this summer. He was
not the slightest alarmed about anything in the economy today--he

6/5/56 -25
wished he were more alarmed perhaps. The Chairman said that he
agreed with Mr. Bryan that prudence is desirable but that he be
lieved developments had taken a natural course. If the Committee
applied itself, recognizing that money and credit is only one element
in this situation no matter how much its importance may be put out of
focus by commentators or others, the Committee could handle the situa
tion surprisingly well.
Chairman Martin said that his feeling had not changed since
the meeting two weeks ago and that he felt we should be moving toward
zero free reserves. He recognized the qualifications that should be
put on any figures of free reserves and he wished that the Committee
had never gotten into using these figures. However, they had come in
to use, and at this time he would favor negative free reserves in the
$250-million-zero range, rather than a higher figure. All aspects of
the market must be taken into consideration, however, not only the
figures of free reserves. The Committee must not be misled by talk
of "holding the line" or by misinterpretations that might appear in
the press or in letters as to actions the Committee might take. Chair
man Martin emphasized that this is a moving picture and that there have
been substantial changes in the situation since discount rates were in
creased eight weeks ago. There has been a real advantage in the split
rate, with two banks at 3 per cent and the rest at 2-3/4 he said.
This advantage may have given the System an opportunity to have one

6/5/56 -26
foot on third base and the other on home plate. However, in any
change of the rate, if there were to be a change, it would be
preferable if action came first from the banks now having the 3 per
cent rate rather than from those having the 2-3/4 per cent rate. He
noted that the Board would have a responsibility to try to coordinate
a change in rates, and he expressed the hope that we would not get
into a position where one bank was holding at the 3 per cent level
while other banks were moving to a 2-1/2 per cent level. He made
this comment, he said, because of the possible implications of the
comments on the discount rates in the discussion this morning.
Chairman Martin reiterated that the views expressed at this
meeting by Mr. Mills were very close to those he (Chairman Martin)
held. There is a momentum in the economy. If the situation today
were to be measured against that in 1954, the economy now is roaring.
However, two years have elapsed since 1954, and the Committee should
not ignore the ebb and flow of the economy. There are indications
at present of some decline in economic activity. We may have summer
doldrums. The Chairman said he hoped the System could adjust mone
tary policy so that it would not be too far out in front in either
direction. The Committee should not feel bad about rolling a little
with the picture during the next three weeks. If operations moved
in the direction of negative free reserves of $250 million or less,
he did not think this would be construed as an overt sign of ease
in view of the tax period coming up and the general economic background.

6/5/56 -27
Rather, the Committee would be in sound position for whatever later
action might develop on discount rates. It is too early for such a
move, but when discount rates are changed the movement ought to be
orderly.
Chairman Martin said that unless a different view was ex
pressed, he would interpret the consensus of this meeting to be that
no change should be made in the directive to be issued to the New York
Bank. As to the level of free reserves, net borrowed reserves, or
whatever you want to call them, Chairman Martin said that no purpose
would be served by voting on whether they should be in the $200-250
million range. He suggested that emphasis be placed on a trend down
ward from the present position. This, he thought, would be doing
about what the majority of the Committee favored, although he noted
that Mr. Irons had indicated he would favor a somewhat higher level
of borrowed reserves than others indicated. To this, Mr. Irons re
sponded that there was no magic figure.
Chairman Martin then asked Mr. Rouse to comment on the situa
tion.
Mr. Rouse said that he agreed with the consensus of the Com
mittee that there should be a continuation of the decline represented
by the negative borrowed reserve figures. The volume of payments to
be effected during the next three weeks would require that there be
additional reserves available.

6/5/56 -28
Mr. Rouse then commented on probable Treasury expenditures
and estimates of Treasury cash position and of the Treasury balance
during the next several weeks. He said he planned to meet that after
noon with Treasury representatives to discuss the use of the antici
pated Treasury surplus, adding that he would be glad to have any sug
gestions that those present cared to offer.
In response to a question from Chairman Martin as to whether
he was reasonably clear on the policy to be followed during the next
three weeks, Mr. Rouse stated that he was. However, he referred to
the comments made during this meeting on the bill rate and the dis
count rate to the effect that if the bill rate moved down perhaps
the discount rate should be reduced. Mr. Rouse said that he did not
believe this conclusion followed. The bill rate is not the guiding
rate in this respect, he said, but rather the Federal funds rate.
He was not concerned about the bill rate getting out of hand im
mediately, since corporation selling of Treasury bills in connection
with the June tax date would exert upward pressure on bill rates for
the next two weeks. If, however, the System account purchased
several hundred million of Treasury bills toward the end of June to
offset reserve losses at that time, there might then be a marked de
cline in the bill rate. This would be a result of the open market
policy being followed, Mr. Rouse noted, and he said he did not think
that the results of action taken in carrying out the Committee's
policy should be looked upon as something to force the Reserve Banks
to lower their discount rates.

-29-
Chairman Martin commented that this was a very pertinent
point. He inquired of Mr. Rouse whether he had any changes to sug
gest in the directive to be issued to the New York Bank, and Mr.
Rouse responded that he had none.
Chairman Martin then stated that in renewing the directive
it would be understood that operations would be carried on as indi
cated earlier in the discussion, that is, with a downward trend in
negative free reserves.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York until other
wise directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (in
cluding replacement of maturing securities, and allowing
maturities to run off without replacement) for the System
open market account in the open market or, in the case of
maturing securities, by direct exchange with the Treasury,
as may be necessary in the light of current and prospective
economic conditions and the general credit situation of the
country, with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in
the market to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to
restraining inflationary developments in the interest of
sustainable economic growth while taking into account any
deflationary tendencies in the economy, and (c) to the
practical administration of the account; provided that the
aggregate amount of securities held in the System account
(including commitments for the purchase or sale of securi
ties for the account) at the close of this date, other than
special short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the
Treasury, shall not be increased or decreased by more than
$1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the ac
count of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discre
tion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue participa
tions to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such anounts of

6/5/56 -30
special short-term certificates of indebtedness as may
be necessary from time to time for the temporary accom
modation of the Treasury; provided that the total amount
of such certificates held at any one time by the Federal
Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate $500
million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System
account for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury
securities maturing within one year as may be necessary
from time to time for the accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such securities so sold
shall not exceed in the aggregate $500 million face amount,
and such sales shall be made as nearly as may be practicable
at the prices currently quoted in the open market.
Chairman Martin suggested that the proposal to authorize swaps
in Treasury bills, listed as Topic 3.c. on the agenda for this meeting,
be carried over to the next meeting, which he suggested be held on
June 26. He also suggested that the question whether to make available
to the Treasury the memorandum prepared at the New York Bank under date
of September 29, 1955, "Notes on Debt Management,, be carried over to
the next meeting with the understanding that there would be a full
discussion of both of these matters at that meeting. There was agree
ment with these suggestions of Chairman Martin, including his sugges
tion that the next meeting of the Committee be held on Tuesday, June 26,
1956.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary