A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, April 17, 1956, at 10:45 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Johns
Mr. Mills
Mr. Powell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Fulton, Alternate
Messrs. Bryan, Leedy, and Williams, Alternate
Members, Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Leach, Irons, and Mangels,, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Dallas,
and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Abbott, Parsons, Roelse, Willis, and
Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Gaines,, Manager,. Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
byu nanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
oft he Federal Open Market Committee held on
March 27, 1956, were approved.

4/17/56 -2
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report covering open market operations during the
period March 27, 1956 through April 11, 1956, and at this meeting a
supplementary report covering commitments executed April 12-16, in
clusive, was distributed. Copies of both reports have been placed in
the files of the Committee.
Mr. Rouse called attention to a paragraph on the second page
of the supplementary report in which it was noted that at present
market rates of interest, it is advantageous to the Treasury to invest
money available in the trust funds and investment accounts in out
standing Treasury bonds, and thus, so far as the market effect is con
cerned, to "retire" the securities purchased. Mr. Rouse noted that a
Treasury surplus may be anticipated this year and suggested that deci
sions of the Treasury as to the particular securities that might be
withdrawn from the market through retirement of outstanding debt and
the methods through which such retirements would be effected would
exert direct effects upon credit conditions. This suggested the de
sirability of having the Federal Open Market Committee and its staff
study the possible implications for credit policy of alternative debt
management procedures.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period March 27
through April 16, 1956, inclusive, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.

4/17/56
A staff memorandum on recent economic and financial develop
ments was distributed to members of the Committee under date of
April 13, 1956. At Chairman Martin's request, Mr. Young made a state
ment at this meeting on the economic situation substantially as fol
lows:
Economic activity continues to move sidewise on the
high plateau maintained since late last fall. While the
over-all picture is mixed, signs are present that pressures
growing out of advancing private investment are beginning to
tilt activity upward. Recently, evidence of private invest
ment pressures has been most conspicuous in credit and
capital market developments, but evidence continues to be
marked in such data as construction contract awards, unfilled
equipment orders, output levels for industries producing
primary materials, and industrial prices. Over the past few
weeks, auto and housing markets have stabilized, while other
consumer markets, after allowance for usual seasonal and un
usual weather factors, have been on the firm-to-rising side.
Demand for labor has remained active, with wage rates showing
further rise. Business and investor psychology continues
very optimistic.
Abroad in industrial countries, activity maintains the
appearance of general strength. Data for Great Britain sug
gest progress, at least modest progress, towards restoration
of balance in the British economy.
Key developments in specific areas merit brief summary:
(1) Industrial production for March is being estimated
at 142, down a point from the level of preceding months. The
decline reflects mainly reduced auto output. Other consumer
durables output was off some but this was compensated by ris
ing equipment production. Late data indicate that demand is
being maintained in major industrial lines so that April pro
duction is expected to hold at least to the March level.
(2) Auto production is now running about a fourth of last
fall's rate, and is below dealer sales and export rates.
Dealers' stocks declined moderately in March and are expected
to show a larger decline this month. The used car market
both in sales and prices has been showing better than seasonal
strength. Sales of other durable goods in March regained
their high fall plateau, after a slipback in February. Con
sumer sales at nondurable stores were also up in March. De
partment store sales, however, showed little change from
February.

4/17/56 -4-
(3) Construction activity over-all showed a slightly
better than seasonal performance in March, reflecting higher
expenditures for business construction with stability for
housing construction. While housing starts were at 1.1 mil
lion unit rate in March, residential contract awards were at
an all time high, excepting only May of 1951 when special
awards for housing at atomic energy installations made for a
swollen total. The mortgage market through March showed an
easing trend.
(4) Employment and unemployment data have continued to
reflect mainly seasonal changes. Average hours of work have
declined further, but average hourly earnings, after three
months of stability, have risen to a new high, offsetting the
further decline in hours of work and raising weekly earnings
again close to the peak reached late last year.
(5) The annual rate of inventory accumulation for the
first quarter of 1956 is estimated at $4 billion compared with
$5 billion in the fourth quarter of last year. These rates
are adjusted, of course, for inventory valuation change. It
is significant that finished goods were a sizable proportion
of the inventory increment this past quarter. With inventory
to sales ratios now closer to longer-turn averages, inventory
trends will bear close watching in the period ahead. A special
fact of interest is that the steel industry is currently
estimating that from 8 to 9 per cent of shipments is moving
into inventory.
(6) With high levels of activity resulting in demand
pressure on basic industrial materials and products, average
industrial prices have continued to creep upward. At mid-April,
the average was 5 per cent above the average for the first half
of last year. With some recovery in agricultural prices since
early this year, the average of all wholesale prices is up 3
per cent over the first half of last year. Markets for metals
and many other materials continue strong, but markets for
textiles and textile fibres have been quite mixed, with syn
thetics showing marked weakness, woolens strength, and cottons
in between. By mid-April, farm prices had risen 6 per cent
from December, but were still 5 per cent under the average
for the first half of 1955.
(7) ith activity in industrial countries abroad at very
advanced levels, pressures on resources in these countries re
main strong. The picture generally in industrial countries
is one of continuing business investment boom. While both ex
ternal and internal developments for Great Britain appear en
couraging, cost and demand pressures are still on the infla
tionary side. Developments in Canada have been paralleling
those in the United States fairly closely. United States im
ports seem to maintain their up-trend, as do also United States
nonagricultural exports.

4/17/56
A summary of a statement next made by Mr. Thomas with respect
to the credit situation follows:
In the past three weeks, credit markets have been
adjusting to the impact of corporate tax payments and the
Treasury refunding operation which came together in March,
to heavy loan demand in capital markets and at banks, and
now to the rise in discount rates. Some contraction followed
record expansion in bank credit during the first three weeks
of March. Preliminary estimates for the week ending April 11
based on figures for nine districts indicate a decrease of
nearly $1 billion in holdings of U. S. Governments during
the past three weeks, following an increase of $400 million
in the previous three weeks. All types of issues of Govern
ments have been liquidated by reporting member banks during
the most recent three-week period. The net decrease of over
a half billion dollars over the six-week period is about the
same as the decrease over the comparable six-week period last
year. Business loans showed little change in the three weeks,
following a sharp rise, and are still about $1.4 billion
greater than at the end of February. This compares with an
increase of only $300 million in the corresponding six weeks
of last year. Loans on securities decreased in the past three
weeks by nearly the amount of the preceding increase, reflect
ing liquidation of borrowings related to the Treasury financ
ing and other capital market developments.
Demand deposits adjusted declined by half a billion dur
ing the most recent three-week period, slightly more than in
the corresponding period last year, but over the six-week
period the decrease was negligible whereas a substantial de
cline is usual for this period. For the year to date money
supply changes have been close to those expected seasonally.
Treasury deposits declined about $1.5 billion in the last
three-week period, approximately the amount of the increase
in the preceding three weeks. In summary, the recent credit
contraction, although noteworthy, has not offset the preced
ing record expansion and reports indicate continued strong
credit demands and pressures on the market.
Large tax receipts built the Treasury cash balance to
nearly $6 billion at the end of March - an important factor
in the credit squeeze. While there has been considerable de
crease since the latter part of March, the Treasury balance
has averaged much larger for the year to date than a year ago,
and is expected to stay fairly high through June. As Mr.
Rouse indicated, in addition to retiring $4.5 billion of tax

4/17/56
certificates in June, the Treasury might use some of its
cash surplus to retire special issues for Government trust
and agency accounts and replace them with other securities
bought in the market, which is the same as retiring long
term debt. The cash surplus for this fiscal year is now
estimated close to $5 billion, and it may be $6 billion for
this calendar year.
Large corporate capital spending has been reflected in
the securities markets. Offerings of corporate securities
have been heavy and, although prospects are for lighter of
ferings in tne near future, the April total will be above
that of last year. The four-month total is above either of
the last two years. Volume of State and local issues for the
year to date is below 1955 but the calendar for the future is
still large. A tendency to postpone some of these issues re
flects difficulties in floating them, and some have been sold
at lower prices than initial offerings. Common stock prices
have declined somewhat in the past week from the highs reached
early in April but generally continue fairly firm. On the
whole, stock market credit has been stable for some time.
There has been a very marked adjustment in the interest
rate structure in the past three weeks with the sharpest rises
that have taken place since 1953. Medium-term Governments
are selling on a yield basis of around 3-1/4 per cent or more,
which is above the level reached in 1953. Prices of long-term
bonds have not declined as much as intermediates and their
yields are still below the 1953 highs. Corporate and municipal
bond yields are now the highest since the fall of 1953 but
still are not up to the high of the spring of that year. Treas
ury bill rates, which were kept down somewhat in February and
March by special seasonal demands, have risen sharply the past
three weeks. They rose above 2-1/2 per cent even before the
discount rate increase and are now close to 2-3/4 per cent.
This week's auction average was 2.77, the highest since 1933.
The short end of the money market is no longer sharply out of
line with the rest of the yield pattern, as was the case in
February.
Bank reserve needs have been dominated recently by changes
in required reserves that reflect wide variations in Government
deposits. Required reserves increased sharply in the first
three weeks of March, decreased in the next three weeks, and
are showing little change this week. The current level is
about $300 million larger than projected early in March and
currency demand was $100 million larger. These reserve needs
were met earlier by a larger than expected increase in float,
by System open market purchases, and by increased member bank

4/17/56
borrowing at the Reserve Banks. Subsequently, float decreased
and the System reduced its portfolio. Net borrowed reserves
have been close to the $450 million level, with borrowings
of member banks generally above $1 billion and so far this
week about $1-1/3 billion. Announcement late on April 12 of
the discount rate rise was preceded by heavy anticipatory bor
rowing and banks met their needs for this entire week. This
accounts for the ease in the Federal funds market yesterday.
As will be seen from the table of projected reserve changes,
the pattern would call for only moderate net changes in reserve
needs during the next six weeks, but in June seasonal demands
will increase pressures substantially. Wide week-to-week
variations may be expected and the projections indicate that
net borrowed reserves will vary from as low as $130 million
to as high as $540 million. The average level appears to be
lower than would be appropriate for a restrictive credit policy
and might call for further sales from the System portfolio.
Needs for further System action will have to be judged
by reactions of lenders and borrowers to current restrictive
policies. Reflecting possible alternative developments, we
may ask: (1) Will credit expansion be curtailed to the point
needed to maintain balance without critical results and without
further restrictive action? (2) Will banks want to increase
further their borrowings from the Reserve Banks to meet further
undue credit expansion? (3) Will pressures of credit demands
remain so strong as to cause further rises in interest rates
and weak security markets that will eventually bring about a
money market crisis and a serious downturn in the economy?
Which course of events will be following should be indicated
by the pressures on capital markets and commodity markets,
and should be reflected in interest rates and prices.
In response to an inquiry from Mr. Vardaman, Mr. Young said
that reports indicated considerable "gray market" activity in steel
at the warehousing level recently, and that during the first quarter
of this year such gray market activity appeared to have been fairly
widespread throughout the United States.
Mr. Sproul referred to the statement by Mr. Thomas regarding
the capital markets and to Mr. Young's review of estimates of pros
pective private capital expenditures. He inquired whether there may

4/17/56 -8
have been some over-emphasis on proposed capital expenditures in terms
of their future effects on the economy; that is, whether their ef
fects may already have been largely felt.
Mr. Thomas stated that this was a possibility and that if
it developed that the actual rate of expenditures was not as large
as might be anticipated by the present pressure for borrowing in the
capital markets, this would be a desirable development. On the other
hand, if corporations spend at the rate at which they have been at
tempting to obtain funds in the capital markets the effect would
be to create great pressure on the resources of the country.
Mr. Young stated that while the figures of prospective capital
expenditures did not extend over a sufficiently long period to provide
data for a thorough analysis of their behavior, the tendency had
been for corporations in periods of expansion to under-estimate the
amounts they actually would spend in future periods, particularly in.
the second half of the year.
During further discussion of this subject and comparisons with
the 1937-38 period, Mr. Williams reported a comment by two utility
directors of the Philadelphia Bank that further disturbances in the
long-term bond market would lead to increased demand by the utility
industry on banks for short-term funds. Expansion plans by utilities
are made for periods of several years ahead and are not subject to much
postponement.

4/17/56
Mr. Leedy stated that he had the impression that a considerable
part of the anticipated capital investment programs reflected plans
based on long-term growth factors, particularly growth in population
extending to, say, 1965, and that in these cases the failure of
anticipated growth to develop as rapidly as forecast would not be
of too great importance over short periods of time.
In opening the discussion of credit policy, Chairman Martin
said that since the System's action increasing the discount rate
effective April 13, 1956, he had received a number of comments sug
gesting that the System might precipitate another situation such as
that which existed in the spring of 1953 when there was apprehension
about a sudden concerted closing of the discount window. The Chair
man suggested that we bear in mind that we don't want continuous
borrowing, but also we don't want to make money "unavailable." The
Chairman also suggested that in reviewing the Committee's directive,
the discount rate, and the discount window, it take into account all
factors that might bear on the situation.
Mr. Sproul then made a statement substantially as follows:
1. With the production index showing a slight decline
for March, employment showing no more than seasonal improve
ment, the average work week declining, and inventories in
creasing, we have a potentially unstable situation, in which
what now appears to be overoptimism on the part of the
business community might perhaps quickly change to a more
sober appraisal of the future. For the present, however, it
is significant that consumer incomes are staying nigh, and
retail sales are holding up, which is the fundamental basis
for nigh production and employment.

4/17/56 -10
2. In these circumstances, and in the light of the
strong demand for credit and capital and the likelihood of
upward pressures on prices from the cost side, I think we
are right in maintaining pressure on bank reserve positions
and probing into the structure of interest rates by increas
ing the cost of reserve funds.
3. I would emphasize that it should be a probing opera
tion, however, not a major operation since we do not know for
certain what is wrong with the patient nor how drastic the
reaction might be if we vigorously tried to redress the ex
isting balance of forces.
4. This suggests to me that we watch the reaction to
our recent increase in discount rates, and try to maintain
about the position of reserve availability which we had at
tained earlier this month, but that we should not press our
policy too harshly nor too far while we are still operating
more on feel than on facts.
Mr. Johns said that he was in substantial agreement with
Mr. Sproul's statement. He noted that three weeks ago he had sug
gested that the construction outlook and employment in the St. Louis
District might be lagging somewhat behind the national picture. It
now appeared that this was not the case as to construction, and at
this time conditions in the Eighth District do not appear to differ
significantly from the national picture described by Mr. Young. Mr.
Johns said that for the time being he would not wish to increase
the pressure in the market but would try to observe the effects of
the recent change in discount rates; he would hold the line until the
future became a little clearer.
Mr. Bryan reported discussions at recent meetings of the
executive committee and the board of directors of the Atlanta Bank
with regard to the increase in the discount rate. He said that the
directors were unanimous in believing the System was compelled to act

4/17/56 -11
in a restraining way. They felt that the increase in the rate would
have a needed sobering effect. As to policy for the next few weeks,
Mr. Bryan said that his position was indicated by the suggestions
made by Messrs. Sproul and Johns, that is, that the Committee pursue
a watchful waiting attitude while observing developments. He would
like to have the discount rate effective; he would not allow the bill
rate in any spasmodic movement to go much above the discount rate,
but he would not allow it to back away from the 2-3/4 rate by any
large amount.
Mr. Williams said that recent comments of directors of the
Philadelphia Bank indicated considerable accumulation of steel in
ventories, as Mr. Young reported. This was in anticipation of price
increases and sustained demand for consumer durable goods. He re
ported that an oil company executive had said that the growing dis
cussion of increases in the prices of crude oil was not meeting a
favorable response on the East Coast, in part because of the pos
sible effect on imports. If domestic crude prices are increased,
there will be a temptation to increase imports and this ultimately
might result in demands for restrictive control over imports. Mr.
Williams reiterated his earlier comment that utilities companies
might be seeking alternative sources of funds for capital expansion,
which might cause difficulty through adding to loan demands at banks.
The response to the increase in the discount rate was that it was to
be expected, Mr. Williams said, and there was some question as to how

4/17/56 -12
effective it would be in restraining credit expansion. He reported
conversations with major sources of borrowing at the Reserve Bank
which he felt indicated that the concern banks were showing regarding
credit expansion was genuine. Mr. Williams also reported a statement
by the President of the Pennsylvania Bankers Association recently
suggesting that bankers should look to their responsibilities for
seeing that the situation did not get out of hand, and appealing to
them to exercise self-discipline. Mr. Williams said he assumed there
was no need for any change of policy at this time in the light of
developments of the last three weeks.
Mr. Fulton said that the Cleveland District continued to re
flect a high rate of activity. The steel inventory situation might
differ from that suggested by other comments, in that the only ac
cumulations reported were in the industries allied with the automobile
industry. Other customers were cutting up about all the steel they
could get. Expenditures for capital improvements are going forward,
Mr. Fulton said, and the increase in cost of money was not expected
to deter carrying out these plans. The only deterrent which he noted
currently was inability to get steel for construction. Projections
made by manufacturers as to the need for the products they make were
paramount in their minds at present. Summing up, Mr. Fulton felt that
at present there was an abundant economy and this situation would
continue as far as could be seen. He said that he thought no relaxation

4/17/56 -13
should creep into Federal Reserve policy at this time and that at
least the existing degree of firmness should be continued.
Mr. Shepardson said that he felt the Committee was in a posi
tion where it needed to hold steady for a period.
Mr. Robertson stated that he saw nothing in the picture that
would warrant a decline in pressure or an increase, and he thought
it too early to determine what the reactions would be to last week's
discount rate increase. Consequently, this was one of the times when
the Committee's agent should have real latitude in carrying on opera
tions depending on what the reaction to the increase in the discount
rate turned out to be. If real stringencies were to develop, the
management should be in a position to ease the situation. On the
other hand, if the rate increase had no effect on the market, Mr.
Robertson said that he would wish to hold steady until the next meet
ing of the Committee.
Mr. Mills said that his sentiments followed the thoughts thus
far expressed, especially the desirability of waiting for a period to
observe the effects of and reactions to the change in the discount
rate. We knew from experience that there was always a delayed reaction
to any shift in System policy, Mr. Mills said, and a waiting period
might be particularly important at the present time in order to allow
the market for U. S. Government securities to adjust.
Mr. Vardaman said that his feelings were similar to those ex
pressed except that, having acted on the discount rate with considerable

4/17/56 -14
force, the personnel of the System should now adopt the "golden
standard" of silence, and that the Board and Bank personnel both
should forego at least for awhile any further discussion of restric
tions in the field of money and credit. Otherwise, he said a fear
psychosis might be developed, which could result in a buyers' strike.
On a broad geographical basis, he found a real fear not as to the
cost of money but as to its availability. There was a fear that the
discount window was not going to be open. It seemed to him extremely
important, Mr. Vardaman said, that this fear be eliminated as soon
as possible. Mr. Vardaman also expressed the view that there was an
inequitable distribution of loanable funds across the country which
was causing complaints, particularly in agricultural areas. This
would adjust itself if the System would now "sit tight" and observe
the situation closely for the next few weeks. Mr. Vardaman also said
that he had been unable to find evidence as to where the gray market
in steel was putting inventories unless it be in the housing industry.
Mr. Leach made a statement substantially as follows:
Two key factors in the current situation directly related
to our recent changes in the discount rate are the prevalence
of upward price pressures and the strength of loan demands.
At our Directors' meeting last week one of the Directors
who is with an electric tool manufacturing concern commented
that he had experienced about a 5 per cent increase across
the board in the price of materials entering into his prod
ucts and that he was anticipating another 5 per cent in
crease in coming weeks. As a result, he had notified his
sales people that a 10 per cent increase in prices of his
products was in prospect two months from now. This seems
to be typical of what is happening to prices.

4/17/56 -15-
A week's visit to eighteen banks in the Carolinas and
interviews with other bankers gave me the impression that
the strong demand for loans is getting stronger, particularly
at the larger banks. Many bankers are worrying about their
liquidity positions. They are largely out of short-term se
curities, and bonds which are not pledged to secure deposits
can be sold only at substantial losses. We have received in
quiries in regard to borrowing on eligible paper and are
bringing our forms and procedures up to date. One of the
largest banks in our district with $400 million deposits is
planning to send us this week a bundle of eligible paper to
be used in case of need. This bank expects to borrow inter
mittently for three months in varying amounts ranging up to
$25 million.
A number of bankers in whom I have confidence tell me they
are screening loans closely. Several have eliminated or re
duced lines to finance companies. I heard a South Carolina
banker turn down an application for a $75,000 loan to a good
business customer to be secured by listed stocks. The banker
had learned that the purpose of the loan was to repay a loan
to his customer's brother which had been called by his New
York bank. The South Carolina banker told his customer he
would lend him any reasonable amount if needed for his own
business but he would not let a security loan be transferred
from New York to his bank. His lending capacity would be
saved, he said, for the expanding business needs in South
Carolina.
Loan expansion is occurring in practically all areas.
Much of it comes from business enterprises which are expand
ing plant or buying new machines. The larger corporations can
issue securities or place loans directly with insurance
companies, but insurance companies want loans that will run
for at least ten years and have little or no interest in
loans that can be paid out in monthly installments over one to
three years. Consequently, such prospective borrowers turn
to their banks.
In my opinion we should maintain but not increase pressure
in the immediate future.
Mr. Leedy said that the matter of borrowing on eligible paper
to which Mr. Leach had referred had already been experienced in the
Kansas City District in one case with a country member bank. He was
more disturbed by an inquiry the other day from a non-member bank about

4/17/56 -16
borrowing on direct obligations of the U. S. Government. This in
quiry caused him to feel that perhaps the Bank should take a second
look to see whether the rate was at a level that would discourage
such borrowings by a non-member bank. As to the Committee's policy,
Mr. Leedy said that he did not differ from the suggestions made thus
far. The management of the account had done a remarkable job since
the preceding meeting in applying pressure, he said, and for the
period ahead, he would surmise that even more skill might be required
in managing the System account. Mr. Leedy said that there was a
question how far the Committee could go in maintaining the pressure
that seemed to be called for in the light of its present policy with
out creating disturbances in the short end of the market beyond what
the Committee desired. He also felt that the fact that the stock
market had taken the increase in the discount rate in stride was dis
turbing; this confirmed the feeling that the existing optimism is
justified. If this feeling prevails generally in the business com
munity, Mr. Leedy said, there is not likely to be any cessation in the
demand for credit and a problem is thus presented for the Committee.
However, in the period intervening between now and the next meeting,
he would attempt to apply pressure about as has been done during the
past few weeks.
Mr. Powell summarized conditions in the Ninth District as bet
ter than a year ago right across the board. The fact that current
farm income was holding above a year ago reflected the large crops

4/17/56 -17
harvested last fall. All indications were that business was doing
very well and much better in some cases than previously had been ex
pected. In one respect the Ninth District differed from the rest
of the country in its banking statistics and that was the higher
borrowings from the Federal Reserve Banks as a percentage of required
reserves. Mr. Powell said that the substantial increase in the dis
count rate made at the Minneapolis Bank from 2-1/2 to 3 per cent was
necessary to avoid getting the borrowing situation farther out of line
without closing the discount window. Restraint still seemed to be in
order so far as the Ninth District was concerned, he said, and as long
as it also seemed desirable for the national picture, that seemed to
be the policy for the Committee to pursue during the next three weeks.
However, Mr. Powell would be cautious about increasing pressure during
this period.
Mr. Mangels said that he subscribed to the views expressed
as to the policy that should be followed for the next three weeks. The
over-all economy of the Twelfth District is much the same as that
described for the country as a whole, Mr. Mangels said. Loans by banks
have been increasing during the past few weeks and are substantially
above those of a year ago. Mr. Mangels commented on an analysis of
loans of 29 of the large banks of the district, stating that the
average of their loans to deposits was 51.9 per cent and that this
ranged from a high of 60.3 per cent for one very large bank to a low of

4/17/56 -18
18.8 per cent for a bank in Salt Lake City. Real estate loans averaged
48 per cent of time deposits of the banks, ranging from a high of
64 per cent at one bank to a low of 14 per cent at another bank which
is not inclined to make real estate loans. Mr. Mangels stated that
visits which he and Governor Balderston made to banks in cities of
the Pacific Northwest during the past two weeks gave the impression
that the banks expect loan demand to increase in the future and, even
though they will screen these applications, the volume of loans will
rise. He reported that sales of new automobiles during March in
creased somewhat less than seasonally. Sales of used cars have been
quite strong, and stocks of used cars have declined to a point where
dealers are expressing some concern. New car inventories have de
creased somewhat recently, partly because of the pick-up in sales,
partly because manufacturers have reduced output, and partly because
dealers have been more willing to refuse to take as many new cars
from manufacturers as previously had been the case. Construction
activity is holding up well in the Twelfth District, partly reflecting
added construction being undertaken for automobile assembly, aircraft,
and other plants. Mr. Mangels also commented on an application for
an industrial loan for $2-1/2 million received by the San Francisco
Bank recently, which, while containing provisions which would normally
make it acceptable, was declined by the directors of the Bank in the
light of current System credit policy and of the fact that the applicant
had a commitment from an insurance company for a somewhat smaller loan.

4/17/56 -19
Mr. Mangels also referred to the action of the Board in ap
proving an increase in the discount rate at the San Francisco Bank
from 2-1/2 to 3 per cent, effective April 13, and to the announcement
of the Board's approval which was received in San Francisco shortly
after noon on April 12. A number of bankers indicated their approval
of the increase in the rate to the 3 per cent level. One result of
this announcement prior to the close of banking hours was that seven
banks borrowed a total of $130 million at the San Francisco Bank
that day. Four of those borrowings were from four to six days. It
is the policy of the Bank to limit the period of borrowings under such
conditions to the end of the current reserve computation period,
even though some banks might seek credit for a longer period of time.
Mr. Mangels felt that in view of the recent increase in the discount
rate it would be desirable for the System to observe developments
for a few weeks before taking further action.
Mr. Irons said there had been no significant changes in the
economic situation in the Dallas District since he reported three
weeks ago and that activity continued at a very high level in most
areas, although lack of rainfall is an unfavorable factor for agri
culture. Loan demand continues very strong in cities of the Dallas
District, Mr. Irons said, and those banks are feeling the pressure of
tightness. Most country banks are carrying excess reserves and are
not heavily loaned up. Only three country banks have borrowed from the

4/17/56 -20
Dallas Bank for a long time and those borrowings have been essen
tially seasonal in character. A number of large city banks have
sent eligible paper to the Reserve Bank for processing so as to have
it "on tap" in case of need. These banks can not see a decline in
loan demand in prospect. The response to the increase in the dis
count rates last week was favorable, Mr. Irons said, although there
seemed to be some question whether it would stop the pressure on
banks for loan expansion. Mr. Irons stated that he felt this was a
time when the System should observe the situation carefully. The
management of the System open market account should be given great
leeway in order to meet whatever situation may arise.
Mr. Erickson said that business in New England is about as
outlined in the economic review for the country as a whole. Construc
tion awards are still running well ahead of last year, particularly
in the case of residential contracts. The textile industry has not
shared in the high level of activity to the extent that the boot and
shoe, paper, and a number of other industries have. Mr. Erickson said
that there was no anticipatory borrowing at the Boston Bank in connec
tion with the announcement of the discount rate increase last week.
He expressed concurrence with tne view that for the present the Com
mittee should observe the situation carefully without changing its
existing policy or operations.
Mr. Szymczak stated that he felt the Committee should continue
about the existing situation and that it should be careful not to add

4/17/56 -21
to pressures on the reserve situation during the next three weeks.
Mr. Balderston said he had no recommendation to make but that
he wished to raise a question stemming from the high loan-deposit
ratio reported by many banks and from the existence of a "hard core"
of continuous borrowers at the discount window. He felt that net
borrowed reserve figures of $400 to $500 million might prove to be
deceptive if the twelve Reserve Banks should simultaneously bring
pressure upon continuous borrowers to correct that situation. Mr,
Balderston suggested that the volume of so-called continuous borrow
ing might amount to as much as $600 million, and if action were taken
to induce large banks to clear up their individual situations this
might precipitate the indiscriminate sale of intermediate Government
securities and thus bring about an unwanted over-tightening in the
situation even though net borrowed reserve figures remained unchanged.
The critical question was, he said, in how many of the twelve districts
are the so-called continuous borrowers likely to be taking action to
correct their situations during the next three weeks.
Mr. Williams suggested that the problem might not be one of
reducing the amount of continuous borrowing but rather of avoiding an
increase in it in the light of prospective demands ahead, and Chairman
Martin commented that this was a good point in terms of pressures that
might exist.
Chairman Martin then stated that on the basis of the discussion
this morning it seemed clear that there was agreement that no change

4/17/56 -22-
should be made in the Committee's policy at this time, and that this
would mean that no change was called for in the wording of the direc
tive to be issued to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. He in
quired of Mr. Rouse as to whether this was his understanding, and Mr.
Rouse indicated that it was, and that no change in the limitations in
the directive was called for.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Committee voted unanimously
to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York until otherwise directed by the Com
mittee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (in
cluding replacement of maturing securities, and allowing
maturities to run off without replacement) for the System
open market account in the open market or, in the case of
maturing securities, by direct exchange with the Treasury,
as may be necessary in the light of current and prospective
economic conditions and the general credit situation of the
country, with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in
the market to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to
restraining inflationary developments in the interest of
sustainable economic growth, and (c) to the practical admin
istration of the account; provided that the aggregate amount
of securities held in the System account (including commit
ments for the purchase or sale of securities for the account)
at the close of this date, other than special short-term
certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for
the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be
increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the ac
count of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with dis
cretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue par
ticipations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such
amounts of special short-term certificates of indebtedness
as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total amount
of such certificates held at any one time by the Federal Re
serve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate $500 million;

4/17/56 -23
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System ac
count for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury securi
ties maturing within one year as may be necessary from time
to time for the accommodation of the Treasury; provided that
the total amount of such securities so sold shall not exceed
in the aggregate $500 million face amount, and such sales
shall be made as nearly as may be practicable at the prices
currently quoted in the open market.
Chairman Martin suggested that the next meeting of the Com
mittee be set for Wednesday, May 9, 1956, and there was agreement
with this suggestion.
Chairman Martin next brought up the question of the authority
for repurchase agreements. He noted a suggestion that, instead of
considering the authority for the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
to enter into repurchase agreements with nonbank dealers in Government
securities at each meeting of the Committee it might be sufficient
to raise this question at less frequent intervals, and he inquired
whether any of the members of the Committee would object to that
procedure.
Mr. Vardaman stated that he could see no reason for bringing
the question up at each meeting of the Committee, and Chairman Martin
suggested that it would seem sufficient to bring it up at the annual
meeting of the Committee to be held next March unless some occasion
arose for discussing it again prior to that time.
There being no indication of dis
agreement with Chairman Martin's sug
gestion, the authority for repurchase
agreements was renewed in the following
form with the understanding that it

4/17/56 -24-
would continue in effect until the annual
organization meeting of the Committee to
be held in March 1957, unless a condition
developed prior to that time which would
make it desirable for the Committee to
consider it earlier:
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is hereby authorized
to enter into repurchase agreements with nonbank dealers in
United States Government securities subject to the following
conditions:
1. Such agreements
(a) In no event shall be at a rate below which
ever is the lower of (1) the discount rate
of the Federal Reserve Bank on eligible
commercial paper, or (2) the average issuing
rate on the most recent issue of three-month
Treasury bills;
(b) Shall be for periods of not to exceed 15
calendar days;
(c) Shall cover only Government securities matur
ing within 15 months; and
(d) Shall be used as a means of providing the
money market with sufficient Federal Reserve
funds to avoid undue strain on a day-to-day
basis.
2. Reports of such transactions shall be included in
the weekly report of open market operations which
is sent to the members of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
3. In the event Government securities covered by any
such agreement are not repurchased by the dealer
pursuant to the agreement or a renewal thereof,
the securities thus acquired by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York shall be sold in the market or
transferred to the System open market account.
Chairman Martin noted that the Committee was scheduled to
meet tomorrow, Wednesday, April 18, 1956, for the purpose of discussing
questions raised regarding certain continuing operating policies of
the Committee, referred to in a memorandum distributed by Mr. Sproul
under date of March 21, 1956. He suggested that the members of the

4/17/56 -25
Committee and the Reserve Bank Presidents not currently serving as
members of the Committee meet in executive session at 9:30 a.m. on
April 18, 1956, for the purpose of discussing this subject, and there
was agreement with this suggestion.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary's note: In connection with the discussion
of certain continuing operating policies to be held on
April 18, 1956, Chairman Martin distributed under date
of April 17, 1956, a memorandum intended to make clear his
personal position on the basic points raised in Mr.
Sproul's memorandum of March 21, 1956, concerning this
subject. Subsequent to the executive session on April 18,
the Chairman reported to the Secretary that the subject
had been discussed and that the discussion had not re
sulted in a decision to change the existing statements
Secretaryo.f policy.