A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, July 17, 1956, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Johns
Mr. Mills
Mr. Powell
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Treiber
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Fulton, Alternate
Mr. Williams, Alternate
Messrs. Bryan and Leedy, Alternate Members,
Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Leach, Irons, and Mangels, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Dallas,
and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. E. C. Harris, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Abbott, Parsons, Roelse, and Young,
Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the

7/17/56 -2.
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on June 26, 1956, were ap
proved.
Chairman Martin stated that advice had been received of the
election of Mr. Treiber as a member of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee for the month of July 1956, succeeding Mr. Sproul whose resigna
tion became effective June 30, 1956, and that Mr. Treiber had taken
the oath of office for this position.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report covering open market operations during the
period June 26 through July 11, 1956, and at this meeting a supple
mentary report covering commitments executed July 12 through July 16,
1956, inclusive, was distributed. Copies of both reports have been
placed in the files of the Committee.
Mr. Rouse referred to the current Treasury refunding (an offer
ing of 12-1/2 month 2-3/4 per cent notes in exchange for $12,388 million
2 per cent notes due August 15, 1956 and $550 million 1-1/2 per cent
notes due October 1, 1956), stating that it now appeared likely that
there would be a fair amount of attrition because of the desire of
many holders of maturing securities to receive cash rather than the
new issues. Mr. Rouse also referred to a sale of three million bales
of cotton by Commodity Credit Corporation for which payment was to be
received on August 1 and to the fact that this sale would be financed
partly through bankers' acceptances and partly through bank loans. He
stated that while this operation would not affect the reserve position

7/17/56 -3
of banks, since the CCC would have to make payment on a similar
dollar amount of guaranteed crop loans on August 1, it might have
an effect on the rate structure since the total financing cost for
bankers' acceptances would approximate 4 per cent or about the same
as the rate that would be charged by banks on loans to prime borrowers
on this collateral. Mr. Rouse did not feel that the banks were likely
to raise their prime rate, but he thought there was some chance that
the acceptance rate would be increased. Mr. Rouse also stated, in
response to a question, that he thought there was no likelihood that
the banks would reduce the 1-1/2 per cent commission fee on acceptances.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period June 26
through July 16, 1956, inclusive, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Chairman Martin called upon Mr. Young who made a statement on
the economic situation substantially as follows:
Economic activity recently has been showing broad
strength, with most recent data confirming an upward tilt
to the over-all trend. Broad strength also appears a
characteristic of economic conditions abroad. Wholesale
prices domestically have been relatively stable for two
months now, but average consumer prices have shown more
upslant than for some time. Abroad in industrial countries,
trends of average prices continue upward. Credit demands
throughout the economy remain very active and business and
financial sentiment feature an optimistic tone. Thus far,
the impact of the steel strike appears to have been limited
to the steel industry and closely related activities.
The most recently reported facts merit brief review:
1. The big statistical news is a revision of the GNP
estimates. These show that the decline in activity from 1953
to 1954 was somewhat more moderate than shown by previous
estimates and that the recovery from mid-1954 to the third
quarter was larger than earlier estimates indicated. The
quarter-to-quarter changes since the third quarter are about

7/17/56 -4-
the same for the two estimates. The revised first quarter
GNP estimate comes to $403 billion, which compares with
$399 billion under the old estimate. The revised second
quarter estimate reaches $107 billion, compared with a pre
liminary $402 billion on the old basis.
2. In the rise of GNP from the first to the second
quarter this year, most components were up. The important
exceptions were consumer durables, mainly automobiles, and
residential construction.
3. Personal income on the new basis probably averaged
$32 billion in the second quarter, up $4 billion from the
first quarter. Major income shares, except farming, all
rose further; farm income showed little change but was below
last year by about 7 per cent,
4. Industrial production in June is tentatively esti
mated at 141. This is down from May but still within the
range of the past ten months.
5. The decline in output at factories and mines from
May to June reflects a combination of lower steel production
and a slight reduction in textile, rubber, and leather products
output. Reduced output in these lines was offset in part by
some rise in output of producers' equipment and building
materials.
6. Retail trade in June remained at the record May high.
For the whole second quarter, retail sales probably averaged
close to the volume of the fourth quarter of last year despite
reduced levels of auto sales, and above the first quarter
average. Sales at nondurable goods stores were especially
strong. June sales at department stores were slightly above
May levels and, so far in July, sales at department stores
look up a little from June.
7. Business sales in May generally showed a definite
upswing after six months of modest up and down movement.
At the end of May the book value of business inventories
was up $7 billion, or 9 per cent above a year ago, partly
reflecting a higher price level. Inventory sales ratios
have been quite stable in recent months, after rising in
late 1955 and early 1956, and, except for automobiles, are
still below the average for the period since 1951. Auto
mobile inventories at dealers declined over 200,000 units
over May and June.
8. The dollar volume of residential construction
activity has been receding, and the latest figures show a
further very modest decline. At the same time, housing
starts hold at an annual rate of about 1.1 million units.
Most recent reports on housing vacancies confirm that a

-5-
relatively low vacancy rate continues. Also, field reports
from builders continue to indicate a conservative inventory
of unsold houses. Advances in rents for May were the largest
reported for any month since 1953; moreover, advances were
reported for more cities than in any month since that time.
Mortgage lending in the second quarter was down from high
first quarter rate of last year but about at the fall rate
of 1954.
9. Business construction activity featured mixed trends
in June with commercial construction down and industrial con
struction up strongly. Total construction held close to the
record May rate.
10. Nonfarm employment in June was at a new peak of 51.4
million persons, up 1.4 million from a year ago. Manufactur
ing employment has declined somewhat since the end of last year
(with production workers down and salaried workers up), but
there were more than compensating gains in employment in finance,
service, construction, and State and local government.
11. Unemployment at mid-June stood at 2.9 million, up
300,000 from May, but the increase was largely seasonal. Un
employment claims were somewhat higher than last year in auto
producing states, but generally lower in other areas. The
number of long-term unemployed, those seeking work 15 weeks or
longer, was at last fall levels.
12. Average hourly earnings in manufacturing have continued
to rise this year, and in June at factories were 2-1/2 per cent
above beginning of year earnings, and 6 per cent over a year ago.
Average weekly earnings, while up from a year ago, have shown
little gain this year because of a drop in average hours of work.
13. Average wholesale prices declined slightly from mid
May to mid-June, have risen slightly since then, and are 3-1/2
per cent higher than a year ago. The significant price develop
ment of the past two months is that there have been fewer ad
vances and more mark downs of industrial prices than in earlier
months of the year. Prices of basic commodities, except copper,
which had been showing weakness, have strengthened over the past
month. Farm prices early in June were up 10 per cent from
December and about at year ago levels. Since early June, farm
price changes have been about offsetting, with the average
steady.
14. Consumer prices rose in May-the largest one-month
rise in two years. Higher prices for foods, services such as
rents, and used cars, contributed to the rise. A further rise
in consumer prices is expected to be shown by the June index.
Consumer prices at mid-June will probably average a little more
than 1 per cent above a year ago; prices paid by farmers for

7/17/56 -6-
family living expenses have recently been reported to be
2 per cent higher.
15. The Dun and Bradstreet survey of business expec
tations taken before the steel strike showed widespread
confidence in business prospects for coming months but with
some widening divergence in views. Optimists increased in
frequency, the first increase in a year, but so did the
pessimists; thus, the no-change proportion declined. The
most striking shift in sentiment related to inventory
positions; the proportion expecting higher inventories de
clined and the proportion expecting lower inventories in
creased.
As for the steel strike itself, a few comments may be
useful:
(1) A strike terminated shortly will not greatly affect
prospects.
(2) If the strike lasts a month industrial production,
because of primary and secondary output effects, will be re
duced 5 to 6 index points. Towards the close of the month,
shortage effects will begin to be marked in railroad equip
ment, heavy construction, and public works. An extension of
the strike into August would lower industrial production a
little further and have aggravated effects on the activities
mentioned.
(3) Incomes of about 600,000 steel workers have been
affected directly and of a good many thousand secondary
workers indirectly. Some strikers are receiving vacation
pay for the time being and nonstriking workers in the steel
industry and workers in secondary industries affected are
eligible for unemployment compensation. Thus, some cushion
to the income contraction effects is operative. But the
income effects will cumulate as the period of strike is
extended.
(4) A strike extending into August could well cause
GNP to decline a little for the third quarter.
(5) One of the important impacts of the strike will be
its downward effect on the rate of business inventory invest
ment. The longer the strike runs, the greater will be the
downward effect on stocks and the subsequent upward effect
or demand to replenish them.
(6) Steel price advances averaging about $9 a ton have
been announced by mills continuing in operation. If this
price rise is the one determined upon by the industry after
strike settlement, it will have the effect of raising the
average of all commodity prices at wholesale by .5 per cent.
This will be the direct price effect. Other price raising

7/17/56 -7
effects will occur as steel users, where demand conditions
permit, pass along higher steel prices in higher prices
for fabricated steel items.
Mr. Thomas said that indications of strength in the economy
both here and abroad were revealed by the analysis of business de
velopments and that these indications of strength were supported by
recent credit developments in the United States. There has been a
large volume of new corporate securities issues, the total for the
first seven months of this year approximating $6 billion against
$4.8 billion last year and a smaller amount in 1954. Pressures in
the corporate securities market have been indicated by a continuation
of yields at relatively high levels during May and June. State and
local issues of new securities also were larger during the first half
of this year than last although less than in 1954. There has been a
large accumulation of unsold securities issues in dealers' inventories.
The stock market continues strong with rising prices approaching pre
vious highs and with some increase in trading activity.
Treasury expenditures were somewhat larger and receipts
slightly less than previous estimates but a cash surplus of over $5
billion still was shown for the fiscal year ending in June 1956.
During the first half of July, both receipts and expenditures have
been higher than estimates. New Treasury borrowing of $2 - $2-1/2
billion probably will be needed during August.
Loans at city banks declined in the three weeks ending July 11,
after having risen sharply in the first three weeks of June and bank

7/17/56 -8
holdings of Government securities continued to decline. Total bank
credit during the past six weeks, however, showed a net increase
compared with a decrease last year; loans increased less than last
year, but holdings of Government securities decreased much less than
in the corresponding weeks of last year, reflecting bank purchases
of securities during the tax period this year. The money supply in
creased in June more than seasonally, and during the first half of
1956 the annual rate of increase was about 1-1/4 per cent. In the
first half of July deposits at city banks declined. Turnover of
money has increased substantially in the past year, probably 5 or 6
per cent. Businesses evidently have used available funds more actively
than in the earlier period and have drawn down on both their cash and
their holdings of Government securities in addition to increasing their
borrowings since the beginning of this year.
Bank reserves have fluctuated widely in recent weeks, reflect
ing to a considerable extent unusually erratic variations in float and
in Treasury balances at the Federal Reserve Banks. Mr. Thomas referred
to projections of bank reserves contained in a staff memorandum on The
Outlook for Treasury Cash Requirements dated July 13, 1956, copies of
which were distributed at this meeting. Net borrowed reserves have
averaged well below $200 million in each of the past four weeks, he
said, and are expected to be around $250 million this statement week
and $200 million next week. In order to maintain net borrowed reserves
around the $200 million level and to provide for a 3 per cent per annum

7/17/56 -9
growth in deposits, as well as to take care of seasonal changes in
deposits and currency, Mr. Thomas said that the System probably would
need to purchase $200 to $300 million of securities per month from
July through November and about $600 million in December to take care
of year-end needs. Should the Committee feel that a more restrictive
credit policy was called for, purchases would, of course, be smaller.
Chairman Martin next called upon Mr. Treiber who comented
on the economic situation and credit policy along the following lines:
The steel strike, of course, darkens the horizon and
poses many unknowns. Except for the strike, business activ
ity appears to be expanding and the outlook appears strong.
Consumer demand has strengthened; automobile inventories
have been reduced; other retail inventories have attained a
better balance; business capital outlays are very high; total
employment has attained a record peak; and residential con
struction apparently is stabilizing at a high level.
Prices in general are firm, with retail prices advancing.
We may expect an increase in steel prices. Whatever the wage
settlement in the steel industry, it is likely to be emulated
in other industries. There is likely to be a cost-price push
with a gradual increase in the price of manufactured goods.
The demand for bank credit will probably continue high,
although it is likely to be reduced temporarily as a result
of inventory liquidation. The fourth quarter is expected to
bring a renewed demand. There appears to be a heavy demand
for new capital in the corporate and municipal markets. We
should not relax credit restraint any further.
In the last three weeks, member banks' borrowing from
the Federal Reserve Banks has averaged about 3/4 of a billion
dollars while net borrowed reserves have averaged about $150
million. The money market has been easier than expected,
easier than planned. A substantial amount of reserves was
released to offset an expected contraction in float, but
float did not contract as expected. Offsetting action re
sulted in large sales of Treasury bills by the System follow
ing shortly upon large purchases.
In May we were plagued with the opposite problem. Then
the actual statistics had a way of turning out more severe

7/17/56 -10
than the projections had indicated. This range of experi
ence over two months emphasizes the fact that precision of
figures is difficult or impossible and that caution is
called for, both within and outside the System, in the
interpretation of figures.
We are now in the midst of a Treasury refunding opera
tion and we may expect the Treasury to undertake cash financ
ing shortly. We should contribute to the maintenance of an
even keel in the market. Subject to the usual caveats about
"net borrowed reserves", we should move to the extent that
may be practicable, in the light of the Treasury's financing
operations, toward a higher range of net borrowed reserves
than we have had in the last three weeks. A range of $200
$400 million would seem appropriate, resolving doubts toward
the higher part of the range. The officers of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York believe that there should be no
change at this time in the Bank's discount rate.
Mr. Irons said that he was in substantial agreement with the
comments made by Messrs. Young and Treiber regarding the economic situa
tion. Conditions in the Dallas area are very strong, he said, with
retail trade holding at approximately record levels and industrial pro
duction at a very high rate. The steel strike thus far has had no ap
parent effect in the Dallas area, Mr. Irons said, although some of the
smaller oil producers are reported to be finding increased difficulty
in obtaining steel pipe. If the strike runs well into August, it
could be expected to have increased effects. Employment is high and
the labor market is relatively tight. The drought in the Dallas Dis
trict has broadened and worsened during the past six weeks, particularly
during the last three weeks. The automobile situation has improved
noticeably with dealers' stocks of new cars having declined consider
ably, dealers in Dallas reporting supplies of new cars ranging from
12 days to 30 days, with virtually none over 30 days. Demand for

7/17/56 -11.
bank loans has moderated, Mr. Irons said, there having been little
tax borrowing during June and loans of reporting member banks having
been relatively stable for several weeks. Banks point out that while
loan demand is still strong it is not nearly as active as it was some
three months ago. There has been less borrowing at the Dallas Re
serve Bank, discounts having run around $20 million in recent weeks
compared with a $40-$45m illion level a short time back. Mr. Irons
said that he thought the credit situation during the past few weeks
may have gotten easier than the Committee intended and that he hoped
the Committee would firm up the situation, with due regard for the
Treasury' financing problems. It would be desirable to take ad
vantage of any opportunity to firm up the money market and to avoid
any indications of further ease. He would not favor a change in the
discount rate or any other action of that sort which would move toward
ease
Mr. Mangels said that the Twelfth District picture continued
to be one of expansion. Nonagricultural employment is up in all
States of the district according to the latest figures. While there
continues to be some softness in lumber and plywood manufacturing,
the situation is improving. Demand for credit seems to be moderating
somewhat, Mr. Mangels said, and one bank has reported that deposits
have increased substantially recently in accounts ranging from
$250,000 down. Some banks have reported considerable easing in the
money situation and there is an indication of competition reappearing

7/17/56 -12
among banks in developing borrowing customers. A definite slowing
of real estate development also has been reported, not because of
a lack of mortgage funds but because of a lack of buyers for houses.
The automobile situation is well in hand according to reports and
the prospects are that dealers will have cleared out 1956 models
before the 1957 cars start coming into the market. Mr. Mangels said
that a report from one bank was in contrast to the foregoing, that
bank having indicated that money is still tight and that it is having
to screen loans carefully. This bank had also indicated that it
might have to start borrowing from the Reserve Bank in order to
meet its situation during the near term future. Only five banks
have borrowed from the San Francisco Bank during July, Mr. Mangels
said, and on July 13 only two banks were borrowing, for a total of
$$ million. One of these has been a relatively persistent borrower
for some time, and the other came into the Reserve Bank recently
for a relatively small sum because of seasonal agricultural needs.
This bank indicated favorable crop conditions in its area. Mr.
Mangels stated that at a meeting last week directors of the San
Francisco Bank voted to retain the existing 3 per cent discount
rate but that the decision was not unanimous, some voting to reduce
the rate to 2-3/ per cent. He did not know what to anticipate in
August, of course, but felt there was a definite possibility that
the directors would vote to reduce the rate at that time on the
grounds that member banks in the Twelfth District should not be

7/17/56 -13
penalized by a higher rate than applied generally throughout the
country.
Mr. Powell said that the Minneapolis District continued to
show a two-way trend with the larger cities reporting very active
business and the western agricultural sections of the district show
ing less satisfactory conditions. Residential construction has not
fallen below the total for last year during the first six months of
1956; employment is at a high level; bank debits are up substantially;
and department store sales are high. Unemployment is very low. The
western part of the Minneapolis District reflects the fact that the
spring wheat crop is expected to be the smallest in many years. The
eastern part of the district, however, is showing a more favorable
outlook both for crop production and for dairy products. Bank de
posits have declined. Demand for loans has been extraordinarily
heavy and banks have disposed of practically all of their short-term
investments in order to meet this loan demand. Any further loan ex
pansion would probably find them increasing borrowings at the Reserve
Bank. Mr. Powell noted that at the present time the city banks in
the Minneapolis District are borrowing relatively heavily but that
very few other banks in that district are using the Reserve Bank
discount facilities. However, at a meeting of directors last week
the view was expressed that the present 3 per cent discount rate of
the Minneapolis Bank was working a hardship on borrowing banks in
that district and on banks which would have to borrow in the near

7/17/56 -14
future to meet seasonal agricultural needs. Mr. Powell stated that
while the existing 3 per cent rate was reaffirmed, it was by a di
vided vote and that he would not be surprised if the directors at
their next meeting voted to reduce the rate to the level generally
applicable at the Reserve Banks. Mr. Powell felt that there was no
reason for having excessive ease in the money market now and that
until the steel strike was ended it would be desirable to continue
about the existing degree of pressure in the market. This would
call for somewhere in the neighborhood of $200 million of negative
free reserves. However, he felt it would be necessary for the Com
mittee to watch the situation very closely since at this time it
could not be determined whether action would be required to increase
restraint or to ease conditions during the fall months.
Mr. Harris said that business activity in the Seventh Fed
eral Reserve District was mixed, automobile and farm implement centers
showing weakness, with activity in most other district cities moving
along at a high brisk pace. With respect to the automobile industry,
he stated that unemployment in Detroit and Flint remains high and
that while some increase may be expected during the fall months it
is felt that some workers with as much as five years' seniority may
not be called back to work during the current year. There will be
a tendency for automobile producers to extend the average work week
rather than to add more personnel. A prolonged steel strike would
have a substantial effect on the Midwest, Mr. Harris said, and an

7/17/56 -15
extended work stoppage might reduce employment below the levels now
anticipated for the fourth quarter of this year. Commercial and
industrial loans at Seventh District banks have declined over the
past three weeks, following the sharp increase in borrowings for
tax purposes during the two weeks ending June 20. The recent drop
includes not only repayment of loans made to meet the June 15 tax
payments but also a drop in credit needs in metals and metal product
firms generally resulting from a reduction in inventories. In con
trast to the outlook in the automobile industry, Mr. Harris felt that
farm income should continue to increase in coming months. Farmers'
cash receipts and net income in the corn belt part of the Chicago
District are expected to be above 1955 levels during the next few
months, as is income in the dairy area. There is no evidence thus
far, however, that district farmers are increasing their purchases
of either producers, or consumers' durable goods. Mr. Harris also
commented on steel prices on the basis of quotations offered in con
nection with the building program for the Chicago Bank, stating in
substance that the prices quoted were higher than those for other
large buildings put up in Chicago in recent years, with an indication
that an escalator clause would be inserted in any contract for steel
in order to meet increased prices growing out of the current steel
strike.
Mr. Harris stated that he would not like to see a change in
the discount rate at the present time but would like to see operations

7/17/56 -16
of the Committee continue about as they have been in recent weeks,
with no increase in pressure unless some development made it clear
that that was necessary. His view would be that net borrowed re
serves of around $200 million, rather than a higher figure, would
be about right,
Mr. Leedy indicated that no significant changes had occurred
in economic conditions in the Tenth District recently. Considering
policy for the next three weeks, he felt that two considerations
would largely determine the Committee's action: one, the uncertain
ties growing out of the steel strike, the other the cash financing
that the Treasury apparently will soon offer, perhaps about the time
of the next meeting of the Committee. Mr. Leedy said that consider
ing these factors, he felt policy for the next few weeks should con
tinue about the situation that the Committee has attempted to main
tain during the last few weeks. He would not go as far as Mr. Treiber
had indicated in permitting net borrowed reserves to have an upper
range of as much as $400 million but he would not wish to see any
indication of easing. He felt that net borrowed reserves had been
lower during the past few weeks than would have been desirable.
If it were not for the steel strike and the financing needs of the
Treasury, Mr. Leedy suggested that the Committee might well be
thinking of further tightening of the reserve position of banks.
In fact, at the end of another three weeks the Committee might need
to give consideration to adding somewhat to the pressure.

7/17/56 -17
Mr. Leach said that the furniture industry in the Fifth
District recently has reported some weakening in its prospects
including some pressure for price declines. New orders in the
textile industry also have continued small. Despite conditions
in these two important Fifth District industries, Mr. Leach said
that underlying factors were quite strong as indicated by an in
crease in employment and the prospects of a high level of trade.
The steel strike has been reflected in a decline in loadings of
coal, with the captive mines closing down. Mr. Leach said that
he thought the Committee should continue to try to maintain a con
sistently tight rein on credit conditions, bearing in mind the needs
of the Treasury. He would have in mind net borrowed reserves around
the $250 million level, and he would not recommend any change in
discount rate of the Richmond Bank at this time.
Mr. Vardaman said that on the basis of the comments thus far
made this morning and of his own observations, he felt it would be
most unfortunate to show any inclination toward tightness at the
present time. He agreed that it might become necessary to tighten
up six weeks hence, but there was also a possibility that the System
might have to loosen credit in that period. He did not see how the
Committee could justify letting net borrowed reserves go to the $400
million level mentioned as an upper range by Mr. Treiber, and he
would hope that the Committee would continue its operations with a
view to keeping net borrowed reserves from exceeding $200 million.

7/7/56 -18
If there were to be any deviation from this figure he would prefer
that it be below rather than above, since this was not the time for
any tightening action. Mr. Vardaman said that he could see no harm
resulting from a uniform discount rate at this time along the lines
indicated by Messrs. Mangels and Powell, and it might be healthy to
have such a development.
Mr. Mills said he proposed to reassess the tactical results
of System operations since the last meeting of the Committee as to
whether they in reality at any time produced a sense of ease or the
actual degree of ease that had been referred to. The movement of
negative free reserves during the intervening period since the last
meeting has been down, he said, but despite that fact there are very
clear indications that the greater availability of reserves, at least
as reflected in negative free reserves, has not produced a degree of
ease that has been disadvantageous to the objectives of the Committee's
policy of restraint-a policy of restraint that within relative limits
should be continued. We have seen the rate on Federal funds hold con
tinuously at 2-3/4 per cent, Mr. Mills said, which would suggest that
there is a degree of restraint and a degree of tightness in the money
market that is not reflected in the over-all reserve supply situation.
At the same time, during the last reserve week (and a repetition
would be seen in the current reserve week) the level of discounts at
the Reserve Banks averaged $800 million or above, which would also

7/17/56 -19
suggest that, at a time when reserves were more available, banks had
simultaneously to resort more strongly to the discount window. This
indicates an element of tightness in the money market that has not
otherwise been revealed. It is very possible that the need for dis
counting has come from an uneven distribution of reserves on the one
hand and, on the other hand, from a need for additional reserves by
some banks experiencing seasonal demands for loans. In illustration,
Mr. Mills pointed out that although reserve city banks for several
days past had held a margin of excess reserves which presumably moved
into the market as Federal funds, reserve conditions remained rela
tively tight due to a less ample supply of excess reserves at country
banks and scant reserves at central reserve city banks.
The flow of new corporate and municipal securities at rising
interest rates was cited as another indication of market tightness.
The fact that such new securities had only been moved at higher in
terest rates and that they had not gone into commercial bank port
folios in any considerable volume was taken not only as a confirma
tion of the Committee's policy objectives but also as evidence that
the market had not been oversupplied with reserves. It was Mr. Mills'
opinion that the Committee may be putting too much emphasis on the
factor of negative free reserves and too little emphasis on the
factor of Federal Reserve Bank discounts, and he felt that the latter
factor currently deserved closer attention than the Committee may be
inclined to apply to it.

7/17/56 -20
Concern has been expressed about the ultimate inflationary
effects of the steel strike, Mr. Mills noted, and he stated his
feeling that the Committee could not look too far ahead and attempt
predictions, A certain effect of the strike and the curtailment of
supplies would be to stretch out the capital expansion programs and
this should take off some of the upward pressure on prices. Another
result might be that businessmen, instead of coming out of the strike
period with a sense of overoptimism, would recapitulate their think
ing and adopt a more sober and cautious attitude toward the future.
Mr. Mills said that using negative free reserves as the
common denominator of the Committee's policy objectives, a $200
million level would not seem to be out of line for the period im
mediately ahead. Judging from the past three weeks, it was diffi
cult to see that there would be any harmful results if they fell
below that level. There seemed to be no reason to change the dis
count rate at the present time and the Committee should move
cautiously from day to day and avoid the inclination to take action
in anticipation of situations that cannot be foreseen accurately
too far in advance.
Mr. Shepardson noted that agricultural acreage under cultiva
tion for the country as a whole is down a little from a year ago.
Reports from different areas are extremely varied, with some showing
good crop prospects but others showing severe drought conditions which

7/17/56 -21.
have particularly affected cattle in some sections. While the number
of fed cattle is likely to be going down, with reasonable improvement
in finished cattle prices, the number of grass-fat cattle that will
move to market is likely to increase considerably and this would mean
lower prices. The sale of cotton that Mr. Rouse mentioned is already
causing some concern as to its possible effect on foreign trade rela
tions and domestic cotton prices. Mr. Shepardson noted that the level
of consumer prices has shown some increase recently, and he also com
mented to the effect that one outcome of the steel strike that appeared
to be almost a certainty would be an increase in wage rates and in
prices. He felt that the Committee should be concerned with these
developments and that it should be prepared to act in whatever way
seemed to be called for. In other words, he would hold a tight rein
on credit at the present time and maintain a "snug" position, neither
increasing pressure nor letting it up, but making it clear that the
Committee was prepared to move in whatever direction appeared to be
necessary.
Subsequently, Mr. Shepardson referred to Mr. Powell's report
that there was some comment among country banks in the Minnesota
District that a 2-3/4 per cent discount rate would be more appropriate
than a 3 per cent rate in meeting their seasonal needs during the crop
moving period. Mr. Shepardson said that he had discussed with represen
tatives of the United States Department of Agriculture the question
whether farmers were objecting to the existing credit restraint program,

-22.
7/17/56
and he had been informed that that Department had no complaints
of undue credit tightness in agricultural areas at the present
time.
Mr. Fulton noted that 40 per cent of the country's steel
production is accounted for in the Cleveland District, and that
this factor made the district very cognizant of the strike. Thus
far, there had been little general effect. Retail sales have held
steady and delinquencies on personal instalment loans have not in
creased thus far in strike areas. The strike is on a very friendly
basis, Mr. Fulton said, but comments he had received indicated there
would not be an early settlement. Substantial quantities of steel
inventories are being worked off, although structural shapes for
use in the construction industry are in short supply. This will
cause postponement of construction operations into the winter months
with increased costs and other adverse effects. He noted also that
28 ore boats are tied up in Lake Erie harbors and he stated reasons
why there would be a scarcity of ore in the spring of next year.
Mr. Fulton felt that the Committee should be prepared to take
cognizance of a surge of borrowing with the end of the steel strike.
He would not like to see greater ease than what has already occurred,
and he felt some concern about the degree of ease that had come into
the market because of float during the past couple of weeks. Nega
tive free reserves in the $200-$250 million range would seem appro
priate until the Committee could see the extent to which the resurgence

7/17/56 -23
of business and borrowing would take place and how developments
in the steel and automobile industries would affect business
generally. Mr. Fulton said that he would maintain the present
level of discount rates.
Mr. Williams reported a comment by Chairman Meinel of the
Philadelphia Bank that the effects of the steel strike on the steel
industry are likely to continue for some time after the strike is
settled because of the unbalanced situation caused by the strike.
He also reported the results of a current survey of industrial
economists in the Philadelphia District, most of whom indicated that
their companies anticipated a high level of demand for their products
during the remainder of 1956. They also indicated in general that
plant expansion plans were going ahead on schedule, although one of
the economists thought that industry might wind up with some over
capacity, particularly on the part of firms that added to capacity
without developing new products. Department store sales in the
Philadelphia area continue strong, Mr. Williams said, and are up
9 per cent from last year during the latest four weeks and 5 per
cent for the first half of this year. Inventories are not high
relative to sales. Business is good in resort areas. The Philadelphia
Reserve Bank continues to have something of a problem on discounts,
particularly by city banks. Country banks seem to be in better shape
as far as discount needs are concerned, having readjusted their posi
tions some time ago. At the city banks, the problem would be how to

7/17/56 -24
handle the situation if the usual seasonal and year-end rise demand
for credit takes place from the existing high level. The System's
problem, Mr. Williams said, is one of staying with the strike situa
tion and being prepared for constructive action at the time the strike
ends. In his judgment, net borrowed reserves in a range between $200
$250 million would be appropriate.
Mr. Bryan said there had been no dramatic development in the
Sixth District economy since the preceding meeting. Some of the banks
that had been borrowing considerably at the Reserve Bank have ceased
to borrow lately. The textile industry is definitely unhappy, and
Mr. Bryan commented particularly on the competition that industry is
experiencing from goods manufactured in Japan. The Mediterranean fruit
fly has appeared in Florida this year and threatens to do considerable
damage over a much wider area. Mr. Bryan said that he was confused by
the economic situation. He was impressed by the steel strike and felt
that whatever settlement took place the strike would have inflationary
effects in the end, both from the direct cost standpoint and as a
pattern for settlement of other wage demands. He was also impressed
by the fact that the consumer price index has already moved upwards,
in the wrong direction. This could result in great damage to the
economy and destroy a good deal of confidence on the part of the
consumer. Mr. Bryan said that he was more and more impressed with
the magnitude of the capital formation problem the country is facing
in the next decade. The net of his thinking was that while arguments

7/17/56 -25
could be made to the effect that economic activity may slow down,
he was more inclined to think it would "bolt." As to credit policy,
his position was that he would keep a tight rein on credit. He
would not reduce the discount rate at the present time and, in
conducting open market operations, he would be somewhat reluctant,
supplying reserves on the lesser side rather than on the more
generous side.
Mr. Johns said that no change in the discount rate of the
St. Louis Bank was contemplated at the present time. He would be
reluctant to appear to lean in the direction of greater pressure,
however, and he did not know what had been accomplished in the last
three weeks in the direction of achieving the stability for which
Chairman Martin had argued at the preceding meeting. Mr. Johns said
that it seemed to him that there had not been a very theatrical
exhibition of stability, and while he was not criticizing anybody
for what had been done he did not know what should be done about
the situation from here on. He would not increase the pressure; he
certainly would not appear to relax the pressure.
At the risk of seeming to harp on the question and recognizing
that it was a matter over which neither the Reserve Banks nor the Fed
eral Open Market Committee had legal jurisdiction, Mr. Johns said that
he had felt at the preceding meeting of the Committee that there was
some indication of interest in the possibility of adjusting reserve

7/17/56 -26
requirements downward this autumn. He now sensed that this possibility
had been written off as something that could not be done and that it
was believed that whatever adjustments were to be made would be carried
out in the open market and at the discount window. Mr. Johns said that
if reserve requirements are now too high and if the Committee anticipated
the need to supply $1.8 billion of reserves during the remainder of this
year, and in view of the prospect that the Treasury would be coming to
the market for additional cash, it seemed to him that there should be
some way of reducing reserve requirements and doing it in a manner that
would meet the situation. He could find very little evidence of any
desire to take this course and he expressed regret.
Mr. Balderston said that between now and the Committee's next
meeting, the same target that was adopted three weeks ago would seem
to be appropriate--that is, net borrowed reserves of around a quarter
of a billion dollars. The length of the steel strike would doubtless
affect the height of the business rebound after the strike is termi
nated. This fact, together with the inflationary impact of the wage
and price increases that will be triggered by the strike settlement,
will probably create inflationary tendencies that will need to be
dealt with vigorously. For the moment, however, a continuation of
the present open market policy and of existing discount rates would
seem to be indicated. The System's present posture with the dual
discount rate will permit it to move either toward greater firmness
or, if need be, toward greater ease without confusing the public.

7/17/56 -27
Mr. Balderston said that he shared the concern expressed by Messrs.
Shepardson, Fulton, Williams, and Bryan that this fall may bring
problems that will call for quick and effective action. Open market
operations can be used flexibly, as has been evident during the past
month, even though the kind of stability that the Committee antici
pated had not resulted. The desk was able in that period to meet
an unexpected turn of events with fair success and without confusing
the general public, Mr. Balderston said. However, if the System were
to back and fill on discount rates just in advance of a period that
may call for use of a rate increase the results might be unfortunate.
For that reason, Mr. Balderston said that he thought the Committee
should continue its present policy for the next three weeks and be
ready for any eventuality.
Chairman Martin said that there seemed to be an undertone
in the comments this morning that might eventually develop into a
conflict of views but that he gathered that, as of the present moment,
the existing directive of the Committee continued to be appropriate
to present conditions and that a level of around a quarter of a
billion dollars of net borrowed reserves would be as appropriate a
figure as could be arrived at to indicate the operations during the
next three weeks. The Chairman then referred to the System actions
taken increasing discount rates at the Federal Reserve Banks effec
tive April 13, 1956, and to the credit policy followed since that
time. On the whole, he felt that the policy had worked reasonably

7/17/56 -28
well and that subsequent events had more or less vindicated the
position taken in mid-April. Recent events, apart from the steel
strike, have been in the direction of strength in the economy,
Chairman Martin said, adding that after the April action the posture
of the System was one of defense. At this time, he felt that it
would be desirable for the Committee to put itself in the position
of being able to "turn the wheel" a little one way or the other but
of keeping a tight hold on the wheel. During the past year the price
level had appeared to remain fairly stable but that was because farm
product prices had been down while other prices had been rising.
Chairman Martin said he was not in favor of relaxing or of tightening
the supply of bank reserves at this time but that within the frame
work of the present directive the Committee should keep itself in a
position to go in either direction in its operations without feeling
a jerk.
Chairman Martin said that the Committee should not minimize
the importance of the steel strike. His feeling was that a strike
such as this was always a disaster and that it was most unfortunate
that there were those individuals who were minimizing its importance
or saying that it was a good thing. He agreed with the comment of
Chairman Meinel of the Philadelphia Bank, reported by Mr. Williams,
that the effects of the strike would be felt for some time after a
settlement, adding the statement that this would create more dif
ficulties for the Federal Reserve System. Money and credit policy

7/17/56 -29
is only one item and a minor item in dealing with cost-price effects
of the strike, the Chairman said, and it would be very difficult to
conduct operations in this period against the judgments that would
take place. The Committee would have to be very careful about the
general public's reaction to the credit policy followed during that
period.
Chairman Martin then referred to Mr. Johns' comment on reserve
requirements. He was sympathetic to a reduction in reserve require
ments, he said, but a move of that sort must be considered against
the possible effects of the cost-price mechanism that may be expected
during the next few months. He would not recommend action on reserve
requirements at the present time. One of the factors to be considered
was the lack of familiarity on the part of the public with the use of
that instrument as contrasted with its familiarity with the use of
open market operations.
With respect to the discount rate, Chairman Martin said that
he sympathized with the problems confronting Messrs. Mangels and
Powell and their directors. The System should take encouragement
from the conscientious and careful consideration and efforts that
were being shown on the part of the Reserve Banks and their boards
of directors regarding this and other credit matters. It was not
possible for anyone in a period like this to be sure what position
was right. However, Chairman Martin said that he felt personally,
as he had indicated at the preceding meeting, that during a period

7/17/56 -30
of Treasury financing it would be most unfortunate to have any
change in the discount rates. This was a problem before the two
Banks now having the higher rates. One approach was to suggest
that they should "not sell out at the bottom of the market., It
was a problem how to convey this idea to the boards of directors
and to bring about an understanding of the possibility that the
System might wish to move up to a 3 per cent rate across the board
before long. Chairman Martin emphasized that he did not know whether
this action would be called for, but it was one possibility that
should be out in front of the entire System. The System moved slowly,
he said, and it had a balancing problem. He felt that the different
parts of the System had been coordinating their activities reasonably
well and that the discussions at the open market meetings had been
serving very well as a clearing house for the System. He hoped this
could be continued. While he was not attempting to prejudge the
situation that might develop, he thought the System should not be
beguiled into believing that the cost-price rise was something that
could be ignored. It is something that anyone in business must face
and the System must face it before the rise has actually taken place.
Chairman Martin then referred to Mr. Treiber's remarks and
to his suggestion that, subject to the usual caveats about net
borrowed reserves, the System should move to the extent that might
be practicable in the light of the Treasury's financing operations
toward a higher range of net borrowed reserves than had existed in

7/17/56 -31
the last three weeks, and to Mr. Treiber's specific suggestion that
a range of $200-$400 million net borrowed reserves would seem appro
priate. While he had sympathy with the thinking back of this sugges
tion, Chairman Martin said that during the period of the Treasury's
financing his view was that a figure of net borrowed reserves around
the $250 million level would be appropriate, recognizing that the
management of the account would have difficulty in trying to move
within any narrow range. The Chairman commented that he did not
like to see a range in free reserves from negative $391 million to
positive $14 million if that could be avoided, although he was not
making this comment as a criticism of the handling of operations
during the past three weeks. In summing up, Chairman Martin said
that he interpreted the desire of the Committee at this time to be
that it should neither tighten nor relax, but that it should keep
its present position of having as tight a rein as could be held
within the limits of the Committee's existing directive.
There was no indication of disagreement with this suggestion,
and Chairman Martin then called upon Mr. Rouse for his comments as
to whether negative free reserves in the approximate range of $250
$200 million presented any problems for operations of the account.
Mr. Rouse said that he would like to revert to Chairman
Martin's comment toward the end of the meeting held three weeks ago
on the use of net borrowed reserve figures. What we really are
after, Mr. Rouse said, is a degree of feeling in the market rather

7/17/56 -32
than any particular figure. We have had and are having at the
moment the tightest situation in New York that has existed in
a long time. New York banks are in debt to the extent of around
$500 million, about $250 million to the Reserve Bank and about
$250 million to other banks. That situation has gotten worse
through this recent period of ease and the banks are now in the
process of getting themselves out of debt. The same situation
is true in the other central reserve city. If the banks get out
of debt, the figures of net borrowed reserves could well remain
the same as they have been, but the degree of pressure might really
be much less even with the same net borrowed reserve figure. This
was one of the things that Mr. Rouse thought Mr. Treiber had in
mind in suggesting a possible range of $200-$400 million for net
borrowed reserves. Mr. Rouse said that he also thought this was
one of the things that Chairman Martin had in mind when he commented
at the last meeting to the effect that he would not be concerned
if the figure of net borrowed reserves ran up toward $00 million.
Mr. Rouse said that he also wished to call attention to the
matter of float and the difficulty it was causing in using projec
tions of net borrowed reserves. He did not know whether anything
could be done about this by the Reserve Banks either as a group or
singly, but he hoped that the System would give more consideration
to the problem since the wide and irregular variations in float were
adding to the difficulties of the situation.

7/17/56 -33
Mr. Mills said that it seems that the Committee's decisions
are built so largely around market considerations that it is in
danger of losing sight of its responsibilities for making credit
adequately available. He noted that Mr. Rouse had called attention
to the efforts of central reserve city banks to liquidate their dis
counts at the Federal Reserve Banks. The published statements of
these banks, Mr. Mills said, indicate that a further reduction in
their investments in U. S. Government securities will be necessary
if they are to reduce or liquidate their discounts at the Federal
Reserve Banks and at the same time hold their loan and investment
positions. Such action would have to be taken at the same time
that these banks and, in fact, banks in the reserve city and country
bank areas will begin to experience an increasing demand for seasonal
loans. With such a central reserve city bank picture, it is doubtful
whether the liquidation of U. S. Government securities to retire
Federal Reserve Bank discounts could bring more than a fleeting
sense of ease, which would itself disappear as soon as the mounting
demand for loans must be met. An absolute return to tight market
conditions would then occur. In short, Mr. Mills felt that without
new reserves the only practical means by which these banks could
meet their seasonal loan demands would be by liquidating U. S. Govern
ment securities or discounting at the Federal Reserve Banks.
Chairman Martin said that Mr. Rouse had pointed up very
clearly the discussions the Committee had had several times about

7/17/6 -34
placing undue reliance on the figures of net borrowed reserves.
When we talk about a range of $200-$250 million of net borrowed
reserves, the Chairman said, we really are talking about that as
an indication of a "quality" of tightness and not as an actual
figure. It is in that framework that these figures are discussed.
The Committee had to have some kind of a guide in trying to judge
or indicate the operations that would carry out its policy, Chairman
Martin said, and as he had indicated several times, he sometimes
wished that the Committee had another way of gauging operations than
by use of free reserves.
Chairman Martin went on to say that the comment Mr. Rouse
had made about float was pertinent and that it would be desirable
for all of us to consider how to deal with the problem.
The Chairman then referred to the comment by Mr. Mills,
stating that none of us wished to fail to exercise our responsibilities
for supplying credit to the market where and when it is needed. How
ever, we must not lose sight of the cost-price factor and of what
credit can do to that factor. The Committee must continue to balance
on the razor's edge. He inquired of Mr. Rouse whether he had other
comments regarding the directive to be issued by the Committee, with
in the framework of the discussion that had taken place at this meet
ing, and Mr. Rouse responded in the negative.
Chairman Martin then suggested that the Committee approve a
renewal of the existing directive to the Federal Reserve Bank of New

7/17/56 -35-
York, with the understanding that the general framework of the discus
sion at this meeting would be taken as a guide for the Manager of the
System Open Market Account in carrying on operations between now and
the next meeting.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York until otherwise
directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges
(including replacement of maturing securities, and allow
ing maturities to run off without replacement) for the
System open market account in the open market or, in the
case of maturing securities, by direct exchange with the
Treasury, as may be necessary in the light of current
and prospective economic conditions and the general credit
situation of the country, with a view (a) to relating the
supply of funds in the market to the needs of commerce
and business, (b) to restraining inflationary developments
in the interest of sustainable economic growth while taking
into account any deflationary tendencies in the economy,
and (c) to the practical administration of the account;
provided that the aggregate amount of securities held in
the System account (including commitments for the purchase
or sale of securities for the account) at the close of this
date, other than special short-term certificates of indebted
ness purchased from time to time for the temporary accommoda
tion of the Treasury, shall not be increased or decreased
by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to
one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special
short-term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treas
ury; provided that the total amount of such certificates held
at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed
in the aggregate $500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System ac
count for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury securi
ties maturing within one year as may be necessary from time

7/17/56 -36
to time for the accommodation of the Treasury; pro
vided that the total amount of such securities so sold
shall not exceed in the aggregate $500 million face
amount, and such sales shall be made as nearly as may
be practicable at the prices currently quoted in the
open market.
Chairman Martin referred to Operation Alert 1956 scheduled
for the period July 20-26 and to the proposal approved at the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee on January 10, 1956 for a pro
gram to train and maintain a group of men as widely dispersed as
possible familiar with open market operations who could carry on in
an emergency. This program, to be inaugurated at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York in October of this year, would contemplate training
at two levels:
(1) Technical personnel, to be trained in the
detailed mechanical operations of the System Open
Market Account. It is planned that personnel of this
type will be assigned on a rotating basis for train
ing at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for a
period of approximately two weeks.
(2) Personnel who might conceivably be called
upon to make decisions carrying out policy, that is,
understudies for the role of Manager of the System
Open Market Account or of his immediate top assistants.
Such personnel will also be assigned to New York on a
rotating basis for a period of approximately three
weeks.
Under this program, it is planned that not more than two trainees in
both categories will be assigned to New York at any one time.
Chairman Martin went on to say that he felt the forthcoming
alert offered an appropriate occasion for scanning personnel to be
assigned in this trainee program and he suggested that the Reserve

7/17/56 -37
Bank Presidents consider in the near future members of their staff
who might be so assigned. Chairman Martin also asked that the Presi
dents send to the Secretary of the Committee at the end of the forth
coming exercise the names of one or two nominees for each of the
categories of personnel to be trained as indicated above, in order
that an appropriate schedule of time of assignments for training at
the New York Bank could be worked out.
Chairman Martin next reported on a meeting held in the Board's
offices on Friday, July 13, 1956, of a steering committee of commercial
bankers working on emergency defense planning measures for the banking
system as a whole. This committee, of which Mr. John J. McCloy, Chair
man of the Board of Directors of The Chase Manhattan Bank, serves as
chairman, was concerned primarily at this meeting with a program for
commercial banks and preparation of a defense manual that might be
made available to the banks. The program had been developed in co
operation with the Treasury Department, the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the
American Bankers Association, and Messrs. Florence and Cocke, Presi
dent and Vice President, respectively, of the American Bankers Associa
tion, attended the meeting as representatives of that association.
Chairman Martin stated that, on behalf of the Presidents' Conference,
Mr. Williams presented to the meeting an outline of the work being
done in the individual Federal Reserve Banks in connection with
defense planning. He also stated that Mr. J. W. Allison was serving

7/17/56 -38
as Special Consultant to the Board of Governors in connection with
defense planning matters.
At Chairman Martin's request, Mr. Treiber reported on the
visit to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York on July 5 and 6, 1956
of members of the staff of the Committee on Government Operations
of the House of Representatives, discussed at the meeting on June 26,
1956. He stated that Mr. William Pincus, Associate General Counsel,
and Mr. Orville J. Montgomery, Counsel, of the Committee arrived at
the New York Bank on Thursday morning, July 5, and after a review
of the scope of the work performed by the Bank as fiscal agent of
the Treasury, they visited the trading room and spent most of their
time during the two days in the Securities Department of the Bank.
They also spent some time in the Government Bond Department, the
Safekeeping Department, and the Securities Custody Department, and
they made a tour of the Bank.
Mr. Treiber said that Messrs. Pincus and Montgomery were
interested in a wide field of activities but centered their attention
on the advisory services and operating functions performed by the
New York Bank and by the Government securities dealers in connection
with the issuance of Treasury securities. They were especially
interested in the role and significance of the dealers in the Govern
ment securities market, how that market operated, and how the Reserve
Bank's trading is conducted, particularly for Treasury accounts, and
the relationships of the New York Bank with the Treasury. Mr. Treiber

7/17/56 -39
said that they also were interested in the proportion of dealer
volume and positions to the total activity normally carried on
in the Government securities market; when told that these data
are considered important trade secrets, they did not push to see
what data are available at the New York Bank. However, they in
quired as to the practicability of dealers being required by legis
lation to submit data on a confidential basis. They also expressed
a desire to revisit the New York Bank at a time when it was involved
in the physical handling of a new Treasury issue.
Mr. Treiber said that Messrs. Pincus and Montgomery referred
to the pending House Bill No. H.R. 2643 proposing that the General
Accounting Office audit the Federal Reserve System, and they indicated
that Chairman Dawson might conduct hearings on the bill some time.
While they thought little significance would attach to an actual
audit of the Federal Reserve System by the General Accounting Office,
some Congressmen might at first show curiosity regarding it. Upon
leaving, Messrs. Pincus and Montgomery indicated that they had been
impressed with the complexity and magnitude of operations connected
with the trading desk and with the physical handling of new Treasury
issues. They were quite complimentary concerning their observations
among the officers and employees carrying out this work at the New
York Bank and stated that they no longer had any doubt that the
Federal Reserve Banks were in fact public institutions clearly operat
ing in the public interest, and that stock ownership by the member

7/17/56 -40
banks was incidental. Mr. Treiber said that the Bank officials
found the visit pleasant and felt that it had been helpful to
Messrs. Pincus and Montgomery.
Chairman Martin commented that it appeared that the visit
had been constructively handled.
Chairman Martin stated that Professor Ira A. Scott of the
University of Minnesota, who had been referred to him by Mr. Powell,
had received a Merrill Foundation grant for study of the Government
securities market, and that he had discussed visiting both the
Board's offices and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for the
purpose of obtaining information to assist in his study. Professor
Scott is currently visiting the Board's offices. Chairman Martin
said that he felt the System should not make the operation of the
Government securities market or the procedures followed by the
System Open Market Account mysterious but, at the same time, it
should not make any confidential documents available to Professor
Scott any more than they would be furnished to other persons not
members of the Committee or otherwise associated with the Committee.
He felt that members of the Committee or the staff should be
authorized to talk with Professor Scott informally and to give him
information regarding the operation of the Government securities
market short of giving him confidential documents, and of course
with the understanding that information as to current policies
would not be discussed. Chairman Martin stated that it was his

7/17/56 -41
understanding Professor Scott was interested in procedures rather
than in policy and in the effect that procedures might have in the
long run on policy.
Messrs. Powell and Roelse commented briefly on their under
standing of the purpose of Professor Scott's visits, and none of the
members of the Committee indicated disagreement with Chairman Martin's
suggestions for giving him assistance.
Chairman Martin next referred to the letter from Mr. Roelse
dated June 22, 1956 and to the outline prepared by the Staff Com
mittee for the study of experience under present operating procedures
in the Government securities market.
Mr. Roelse commented on the outline, stating that the proposal
was to go as far as possible on the basis of presently available informa
tion and to see what gaps existed. If it should prove necessary to go
beyond available data in studying the questions in the outline, the
staff committee would report back to the Federal Open Market Committee
for explicit approval to collect whatever additional data might be
required. Mr. Roelse suggested that it might be possible to obtain
additional information in connection with a questionnaire to be sent
out by the New York Clearing House Association's committee that is
studying the financing of the Government securities market.
Mr. Leedy suggested that the outline might include an addi
tional topic relating to shifts in the ownership of short-term Treasury
securities from commercial banks to non-bank investors, and Chairman

7/17/56 -42
Martin suggested that this topic be transmitted to Mr. Roelse
Chairman Martin also suggested that the outline be considered
as an appropriate start for the Committee study and that it be
approved for this purpose.
There was agreement with this
suggestion.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would
be held on Tuesday, August 7, 1956.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary