A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, October 16, 1956, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Mills
Mr. Powell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Bryan, Alternate
Mr. Fulton, Alternate
Messrs. Allen, Leach, and Mangels, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, Richmond,
and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Parsons, Roelse, and Young, Associate
Economists
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Roosa, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Mitchell, Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago
Chairman Martin noted that Mr. Allen, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago, was attending a meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee for the first time, and he outlined briefly for Mr.
Allen the procedures customarily followed in conducting these meetings.

10/16/56 -2
Mr. Robertson stated that a volume containing the record of
Federal Open Market Committee participation in Operation Alert 1956
had been assembled and was being sent by the Secretary to all members
of the Committee, to each Reserve Bank President not currently a
member of the Committee, and to the members of the staff who ordinarily
work on open market matters or who had special assignments in this
connection during Operation Alert 1956. He suggested that the Com
mittee authorize the Secretary also to furnish copies of the report
to Mr. Arthur S. Flemming, Director of the Office of Defense Mobiliza
tion, and to Mr. James W. Allison, Special Consultant, who is assisting
the Board in its emergency planning preparations for commercial banks.
Mr. Robertson's suggestion for trans
mission of copies of the report to Messrs.
Flemming and Allison was approved unani
mously.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meetings of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on September 11 and 25, 1956,
were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report covering open market operations during the
period June 28 through October 9, 1956, and at this meeting a supple
mentary report covering commitments executed October 10 through
October 15, 1956, was distributed. Copies of both reports have been
placed in the files of the Committee.
In response to Chairman Martin's request, Mr. Roosa commented
on developments in the open market during the period covered by the

10/16/56 -3
supplementary report beginning on Wednesday, October 10. Mr. Roosa
said that, while transactions for the System open market account had
been nominal in amount during this period, much had happened in the
market. The Treasury's special bill was successfully auctioned on
Wednesday, at an average rate of 2.627 per cent, and had since traded
most of the time in a range between 3.06 per cent bid and 3.02 per
cent offered. The results proved that use of the auction technique
was indeed the right answer in present conditions. The Treasury's
regular bill was auctioned on Monday of this week at an average rate
of 3.024 per cent, and presumably would begin trading this morning
just under that rate. The money market, after easing slightly on
Wednesday, returned to full tightness on Thursday and Monday (Friday
was a holiday) with Federal funds at 3 per cent.
Behind this calm recital, Mr. Roosa said, there was some
tension that deserved comment. There were no problems on Wednesday,
and the account bought nothing and had no calls for repurchase agree
ments. But trading in the new bills on a "when-issued" basis began
early Thursday--at least an hour before the market's usual opening
time-and there was general unsettlement, with talk running in all
directions. Offerings of the special bill as high as 3.20 per cent
were mentioned. Word began to pass around that trading above 3-1/8
would mean a Monday auction around 3.15 or 3.20, and if no show of
concern were forthcoming from the System, that would portend a
discount rate increase and, for the banks, "taking another licking

10/16/56 -4
on a Treasury issue." In that setting, he said, the account decided
at 10:30 to ask for offerings. The special bill was excluded, when
the question was asked, on the ground that the account was buying
what was available for regular delivery. It bought something from
every dealer who offered--a total of $31.6 million, for Monday
delivery. From then on, the market found itself, Mr. Roosa said,
and the trading range was established which has continued until now.
Repurchase agreement requests were, in the end, so small they could
be passed over without repercussions. The reserve effects of the
account's purchases were offset by other sales for foreign accounts,
so handled that they were not "shown around" the market and had no
adverse rate repercussions.
Continuing, Mr. Roosa said that tension was resumed on Monday
(yesterday). Would the regular bill go at 3.10 or higher, and renew
the expectations of a signal to raise the discount rate? Given the
reserve projections, he said, the account did not want to buy if that
could be avoided and, in the end, it avoided doing so. However, it
took advantage of a large foreign purchase order and bought from the
dealers who were pressing the "high rate school"--whose prices were,
of course, also the best for the foreign client. The account made
one repurchase agreement for $12 million. By 2:00 p.m. the sentiment
had so clearly jelled around the "low rate school" that the account
could comfortably enter its own tender at a rate calculated to run
off the System's $32.6 million bills maturing next Thursday.

10/16/56
Looking ahead, Mr. Roosa noted that we were now entering
the period of peak float. The projections show a staggering in
crease, but estimates of float around Columbus Day are especially
difficult, and the feel of the market would have to be the guide
for the account. Dealers got $395 million bills in the auction.
However, New York City bank holdings of bills before these two
auctions were down to $4 million, and the breadth of the bill market
might be narrowed by the unavailability of borrowed bills for short
selling.
The recent experience points up two questions for the period
ahead, Mr. Roosa said, and the Account Management would appreciate a
discussion of these at this meeting. The questions were:
1. Would the Committee be concerned if Treasury bill
rates rise further, leading to a belief in the mar
ket that the discount rate must soon be raised again,
and perhaps setting off expectations of another round
of rate increases through the credit and capital
markets?
2. If there would be such concern, what relative emphasis
(both for buying and for selling) should the Account
Management give, from day to day, to these rate de
velopments, to the degree of reserve tightness in the
money centers (particularly New York and Chicago),
and to the over-all statistics of bank reserve positions?

10/16/56
Chairman Martin suggested that this was a question that
should be discussed as a part of the program for open market opera
tions during the next few weeks, and it was understood that the
topic would be considered later during this meeting.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period June 28
through October 15, 1956, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Prior to this meeting a staff memorandum on recent economic
and financial developments in the United States and abroad had been
distributed under date of October 12, 1956, to all members of the
Committee. At this time, at Chairman Martin's request, Mr. Young
summarized the current economic situation substantially as follows:
Domestically, the over-all economic picture continues
to be one of general expansion of activity, rising average
prices for industrial commodities, and high confidence in
both near-term and longer-term business prospects. Abroad,
strength remains the noteworthy feature of the situation.
In particular areas, adjustments in activity and prices may
be noted which run counter to general trends. With the
world economy in the advanced phase of an expansion era,
this selectivity in development calls for close watching,
for, historically, diversity of component trends is an early
indication of general leveling off and later reaction.
Of recent facts meriting highlight mention, those re
lating to prices call for first attention. Among industrial
commodities, advances continue to spread at the semi-finished
and finished levels. Since mid-August, the rate of rise in
average industrial prices has been about 6 per cent per annum
or about the same rate as occurred from mid-1955 to April
1956. The earlier rise featured marked increases in prices
of primary materials, whereas the recent rise, except for
steel and steel scrap, has occurred more heavily at or near
the end product range. Prices of farm products, reflecting
seasonally higher marketings of livestock, have declined a
little in recent weeks, but still average slightly higher

10/16/56
than a year ago.
Employment continues close to recent record levels and,
with seasonal withdrawals from the work force, unemployment
has declined to 2 million. With hours of work up slightly,
with weekly earning at a new high 4 per cent over a year ago,
and with new important wage advances granted in such key in
dustries as coal, southern textiles, and meat packing, the
only word description of the labor market is strong.
Personal income for August was at a $328 billion rate
and up further in September, with the wage and salary component
up particularly and other components up some.
While department store sales in September maintained their
advanced July-August level, total retail sales fell back about
2 per cent, to the level of a year ago. Durable goods sales
were off from August by 6 per cent, accounted for by a decline
in sales of automotive outlets of 11 per cent. Sales at non
durable stores were unchanged for the month but up 7 per cent
over a year ago. Scattered reports for early October suggest
that department stores sales may be running this month a bit
off from July-September levels. The latest report on depart
ment store stocks shows them 9 per cent ahead of a year ago.
September sales of new autos were down an eighth under
August and a fourth below a year ago. With output down
sharply for model changeover, stocks were reduced to about
400,000 units. Used car sales also declined in September
from August, and sales and stocks were both 25 per cent under
September of last year. With model changeovers virtually
completed, output at half a million new passenger cars is
scheduled for October with a still higher assembly rate for
November. While preliminary indications of new model recep
tions is reported by manufacturers to be encouraging, two
items of new car market intelligence suggest caution. The
first is that used car prices softened noticeably in Septem
ber. The second is that intra-industry sales predictions
have been lowered considerably.
Output and sales of major household items in September
continued to hold up at the advanced summer level.
Consumer instalment credit expansion averaged about $175
million a month during the third quarter but, with auto sales
off sharply in September, was probably less than this amount
last month. Repossession rates for new cars, reckoned as a
per cent of number of accounts acquired over the preceding
six months, are up markedly from mid-195, the rates reached
being as high as those attained at any time since the early
thirties. Used car repossession rates are up sharply from
1955 levels and are slightly above the postwar high average
for 1954.

10/16/56
The Board's index of industrial production for August
has been revised upward from late figures to 142, and the
September index is now being estimated at 144, the same as
the previous high reached last December, With steel output
pressing capacity limits, output of producers' equipment
expanding, auto assemblies rising, and textile output pick
ing up, a further rise in the index is to be expected for
October and November.
Agricultural prospects have been improving, and crop
output is now expected to be only a shade under that of last
year. Prospects for cotton, tobacco, oil crops, hay and
forage and vegetables have all improved over the past month.
Total output of meat, though down from the first half of the
year, is expected to exceed last year's record output for
the full year.
Construction activity has been stable at peak levels over
the past three months. In September, industrial construction
was off a little, contract awards were down some from the high
August level, and housing starts were off considerably to a
seasonally adjusted annual rate of one million units. Con
struction costs in the industrial and commercial area rose
further but in residential construction they declined for
the first time in some months. While mortgage lending con
tinues in volume only slightly below the highs of the spring
and summer of 1955, reports of tightness of mortgage funds
and especially of new commitments continue to be frequent.
In recent weeks, discounts on FHA and VA mortgages have in
creased somewhat further in fact, and offerings for purchase
by FNMA have risen sharply.
Business inventory accumulation slowed down greatly over
the summer months to about a third of the monthly increase of
$600 million for the first half of the year. Resumption of a
faster rate of accumulation is to be expected for fall months.
Manufacturers' new orders in August were up sharply to
close to the record level of last December. Unfilled orders
continued to rise and at the month-end were $10 billion higher
than a year earlier.
The National Industrial Conference Board and Newsweek
Magazine are collaborating on a new series of capital appro
priations by large corporations, the first results of which
have just been released. The importance of the first published
figures is in their confirmation of a strong appropriations
underpinning for further growth in capital expenditures.
Preliminary data on U. S. Foreign trade indicate that
exports in August exceeded the previous peak of June. Imports
for the month were down, but are apparently up for September.

10/16/56
The continued large exports surplus of recent months has
been accompanied by a large outflow of long-term private
capital.
Late data on activity abroad confirm further easing
of inflationary pressures in England and Germany, continu
ing inflation in France, and high level activity, with
weight on the side of demand pressures, in most other in
dustrial countries. Sterling seems to be riding out the
confidence and other foreign exchange strains induced by
the Suez crisis; the mark continues to index Germany's
balance of payments strength; and the Canadian dollar is
giving signs of response to disparities in U. S. and
Canadian financial policies.
Chairman Martin next called upon Mr. Thomas who noted that
recent financial developments had been described in detail in the
memorandum from the Board's staff dated October 12 and in the report
of the Account Management distributed before this meeting. He there
fore presented a summary of the principal developments in this area
during the past three weeks in substantially the following form:
(1) Of special interest has been completion of Treas
ury borrowing of $1.6 billion through the sale at auction of
a special 91-day bill. The auction was considerably over
subscribed and practically all the awards were to banks,
which bid at a price that enabled them to sell the bills at
a higher yield and still obtain some return from the tax and
loan account carry. The average yield of the auction--2.63
per cent-and the current market yield--a little over 3 per
cent--give the banks some profit and also indicate remarkably
close market pricing consistent with a discount rate of 3 per
cent. A market yield of as much as 3-1/8 per cent would not
have been out of line. A rise in the market yield on Treas
ury bills to above or around 3 per cent was to be expected
as a result of the additional bills issued and in view of
the demands on the money market. Yesterday's auction for
the regular bill was at an average yield of 3.02 per cent.
This experience attests to the effectiveness of the auction
method of raising funds as against the procedure of attempt
ing to guess the market by offering a fixed coupon.

10/16/56 -10-
(2) Notwithstanding a large volume of new offerings,
the bond market has had a better tone, and yields on out
standing issues have been relatively stable. Terms of the
new issues have had to be carefully tailored to meet in
vestor preferences, however, including some fairly long
noncallable provisions. Treasury bonds showed some de
clines in yields, especially on the medium-term issues
that had previously been weak. Some of the more recent
new corporate issues, however, priced fairly closely, have
moved rather slowly. The calendar of prospective new issues
continues large.
(3) Short-term money rates have tended to rise further
in contrast to the steadier tone in the bond market, and
despite a somewhat easier reserve position for banks as a
whole. This trend in the short market can be explained by
the additional Treasury offering and by the continued tight
reserve position of banks in New York and also in some other
cities, as well as by the relatively strong demand for bank
credit.
(4) Stock prices have recovered somewhat in October,
following a declining tendency in August and September.
There has been little further change in the volume of stock
market credit.
(5) The Treasury cash position has continued in line
with earlier expectations. The deficit has been smaller
than in the same period of other recent years, with receipts
much larger than, and expenditures about the same as, last
year. The Treasury may be able to get through this year
with as little as $1 billion of additional borrowing, but
there is still some uncertainty, especially with respect
to CCC loans that might be turned in by banks. Since these
give a return of only 2-3/4 per cent, banks may wish to turn
them in to the Treasury, but since a large portion of them
are held by country banks, which at this time of the year
have funds available, turn-ins may not be substantial.
(6) Bank loans have continued to expand and investments
to contract, but both movements have been at a slower pace
than in the same period last year. Since mid-year, total
loan expansion has been less than in the same period of any
recent year except 1954. The business loan increase of about
$1 billion at banks in leading cities was appreciably less
than in 1955 but larger than in 1953 and almost as much as in
1952, Loans on securities have shown a continued contraction,
while real estate loans have increased less than in 1955 and
in 1954,a nd all other loans have shown little change in
contrast to rather substantial increases in the same period

10/16/56 -11-
of most other recent years, reflecting largely changes in
consumer credit, but perhaps also less lending by banks for
other purposes.
(7) Interest rates charged on customer loans by banks
in September reflect the increase in the prime rate made in
August. The average rate at New York City banks at 4.20 per
cent represents an increase of about 1/ of a point since
June of this year and a full point from the level maintained
from mid-1954 to mid-1955. Increases at banks in 11 southern
and western cities to 4.53 per cent were smaller, amounting
to little over 1/8 in the quarter and little more than 1/2 a
point since mid-1955. It appears that the banks reporting
interest rates made about the same number of loans in the
first half of September as a year ago, but the dollar volume
was about a fourth larger. Most of the increase was in loans
of $200,000 or more, but all computed size groups, except
loans of less than $10,000, showed increases, particularly at
banks outside New York.
(8) Analysis of the financial position of corporations
shows a marked decline in their liquidity in the first half
of 1956. In the 12 months ending June, they reduced their
holdings of Government securities and increased borrowings
while adding large amounts to inventories. With continuation
of capital expenditures at a high level and with seasonal in
ventory expansion, corporations are likely to continue to need
external financing, particularly if they build up liquidity
reserves against seasonal accrual of tax liabilities. It
remains to be seen to what extent they will add to their hold
ings of short-term Government securities or other liquid assets
to build up tax reserves or whether they will use accumulations
to meet current financing needs, thus further deteriorating
their liquidity positions, but postponing some of their borrow
ing needs until next spring.
(9) Demand deposits showed a somewhat greater than seasonal
increase in September, but the growth for the third quarter as a
whole was less than seasonal, and that for the past twelve months
was quite small, with banks in leading cities actually showing
a decrease for the year. Turnover of deposits, however, con
tinues relatively high and the trends of economic activity and
prices indicate no undue shortage of money.
(10) Reserve needs of banks during the past three weeks have
been somewhat smaller than had been projected, reflecting smaller
increases both in required reserves and in currency needs.
Moderate System open market operations have served to keep net
borrowed reserves of member banks at around $200 million. How
ever banks in New York City, and in a number of other cities,

10/16/56 -12-
have continued fairly heavily in debt. Some of the borrow
ing has been from the Reserve Banks and a considerable amount
from other banks, with very large transactions in Federal
funds. Such transactions serve to distribute available re
serve funds among the member banks before turning to Federal
Reserve credit, which adds to the total supply of reserves.
Country member banks have had a relatively small volume of
borrowing since mid-September.
(11) Demands for reserves during the next three months
will be determined largely by seasonal factors, but will, of
course, also reflect any extra-seasonal credit demands.
(Charts were presented which showed weekly variations in re
serves and the principal factors affecting them, together
with projections based on normal seasonal and growth assump
tions for the next three months. These projections are sum
marized on a table distributed.) During this week and next,
the usual mid-month float and return flow of currency, to
gether with recent System open market purchases, should supply
more than adequate reserves to cover requirements growing out
of the tax and loan account payment for the new Treasury
financing. On several days excess reserves are expected to
exceed borrowings. After next week, there will be wide varia
tions in the supply of reserves, due largely to fluctuations
in float, but the level of net borrowed reserves will probably
average little, if any, over $300 million in November. In
December less than 3/ of a billion dollars of additional
purchases for the System account should be sufficient to meet
normal reserve needs. In the meantime, repurchase contracts
may be appropriate for meeting short-term variations. Some
question may be raised as to whether the reserve positions
projected will be adequately restrictive in view of the
strength of the economic situation and possibility of even
greater ebullience developing after the election.
Chairman Martin suggested that the Committee proceed with com
ments by the individual members and the other Reserve Bank Presidents
with a view to a discussion of the open market policy that should be
followed during the next few weeks.
Mr. Hayes made a statement along the following liness
(1) The general business situation can still be
characterized as moving in an upward direction, especially
as measured by industrial production and price trends,

10/16/56
-13-
Consumer demand is well sustained, while unemployment has
reached the lowest level since 1953. A good many price
increases are still being reported, especially in the area
of finished and semi-finished goods,
(2) However, the inflationary pressures in the economy
appear a little less intense than they were some weeks ago
in the immediate aftermath of the steel strike settlement.
Sentiment is a little more cautious, with attention being
focused more on developments indicative of a possible diminu
tion of upward pressures. Among these developments may be
mentioned the recent easing of several important raw material
prices which, taken in conjunction with the leveling off of
non-residential contract awards and machinery orders, the
hesitancy of the stock market and the uncertainties of the
election, suggests at least the possibility that capital
expenditures may not be as important a source of additional
strength to the economy next year as they have been in 1956.
(3) Housing activity has at best stabilized and may
decline further as a result of financing difficulties and
perhaps some falling off in basic demand. The automobile
industry is of course the major question mark in the im
mediate economic outlook, and it is too early to appraise
the degree of public acceptance of the new models.
(4) While there has been no clear test of consumer
reaction to recent price increases, consumers appear to be
increasingly concerned over the price outlook. In the field
of consumer nondurables, and some durable goods as well,
demand has apparently leveled off in the last few months.
(5) It is encouraging for the long run to note the less
rapid rate of inventory accumulation, which, if it continues,
would suggest somewhat diminished pressure on available
physical resources.
(6) As for bank credit, the growth in total loans in
the third quarter, while substantial, was much slower than
in the first half of 1956 and in the third quarter of 1955.
Business loans accounted for more than the entire increase
in the last three months, but here again the rise was less
than a year ago. It is interesting to note the extent to
which recent gains in bank loans have been concentrated in
New York. From the middle of 1956 to the first week of
October, New York City banks accounted for three-fourths of
the total increase in business loans of the weekly reporting
member banks. This pattern, perhaps to be expected when
capital outlays by the larger corporations are such a major
expansionary force, may be modified somewhat in the next two
months if seasonal needs outside of New York make themselves
felt as expected, and if the recent rough balance between
investor demand and the volume of new capital issues should
continue.

10/16/56 -14-
(7) The Treasury will be coming to the market around
mid-November to refund the December 1st maturity and probably
again in early December to complete its cash borrowing pro
gram, so that assistance to the Treasury will be a System
consideration for most of the balance of 1956. These borrow
ing operations will by themselves have the effect of putting
additional pressure on the market. This suggests that a
further restrictiveness in credit policy during the next two
months will not be needed unless there is additional new
evidence of inflationary dangers sufficiently intense to out
weigh the usual need for maintaining an even keel during
Treasury operations.
(8) In the capital markets interest rates have leveled
off and a large volume of new issues is being absorbed by
investors on the present rate plateau. On the other hand,
these markets are in a sensitive condition, which might be
accentuated if pressure were increased much at this time in
the money center--particularly if the Treasury bill rate should
climb much above 3%, giving rise to inevitable questions as to
further discount rate moves, and making lenders less willing to
accept the present rate structure as a reasonably stable basis
for doing business.
(9) Reserve pressures in the banking system have come to
bear with particular force on the central money market. The
New York banks have already been forced to a position where a
major realignment of their portfolios is necessary and is now
going on. Unless and until reserve pressures are more broadly
distributed, further restraint expressed in larger net borrowed
reserves might have undesirable effects on the capital and
money markets.
(10) The general state of the economy still calls for
maintenance of a policy of credit restraint. As seasonal credit
demands press against the available supply of funds there may be
an automatic tendency toward further tightening outside of New
York, and we would not be averse to seeing somewhat greater use
of member bank borrowings to meet a part of these seasonal needs.
During the next few days net borrowed reserves will be subject
to wide swings because of the influence of float and changes in
required reserves. However, in determining the need for open
market operations, we should be guided primarily not by any
figure of net borrowed reserves, but by the "feel" of the market,
having in mind not only the Treasury's financing problems but
also the desirability, from our own viewpoint as to monetary
policy, of preventing any further appreciable tightening of the
New York market that might again unsettle the capital markets
and intensify the demand for short-term credit. The relation
ship between revailing Treasury bill rates and the discount

10/16/56 -15
rate will bear close watching in this effort to appraise
the "feel" of the market. Specifically on Mr. Roosa's
questions, the Committee should be concerned if bill rates
rise further and the market begins to speculate on another
discount rate increase at this time. These developments
would be undesirable of themselves, and would in fact
signify excessive added tightness in the market. We be
lieve that both the bill rate and the general degree of
money market tightness must be watched, and that any
decided increase in either should be checked. So long as
neither is increasing, on the other hand, we believe that
cautious efforts should be made toward restoring the
statistical position of bank reserves to that prevailing
during the first half of September.
(11) Under present circumstances we would be opposed
to any change at this time in either discount rates or re
serve requirements.
Mr. Bryan said that there had been no changes in the economic
situation in the Sixth District that needed to be called to the atten
tion of the Committee at this time. He did not disagree with the
estimates of the national situation as presented by Messrs. Young and
Hayes. Mr. Bryan went on to say that it seemed to him difficult to
argue either for an easier credit policy or for a more restrictive
credit policy than the Committee had been following. It was necessary
to wait for developments before making any overt or large moves in
credit policy. His preference would be to maintain approximately the
present degree of restraint but to judge that restraint largely on the
behavior of money rates and the behavior of the money market. Per
sonally, Mr. Bryan said, he would be sorry to see the bill rate go
sufficiently above the discount rate to create speculation regarding
a discount rate change at this particular time.

10/16/56 -16.
Mr. Fulton presented information indicating that economic
activity in the Cleveland District continued at a very high level.
However, the automobile business which was becoming increasingly
important in that area appeared to be developing some degree of
caution that it possibly did not have a few weeks ago. Mr. Fulton
said he believed the degree of restraint that was now being applied
to the economy was about appropriate. The lack of liquidity of banks
and the high loan portfolio would have a restraining influence on
further bank loans. Mr. Fulton said he was not greatly concerned
about variations in float because he felt bankers appreciated this
factor and would not look upon reserves that might be supplied just
now through float as a continuing source of funds. He would observe
changes in the bill rate rather than in the net borrowed reserve
figure, feeling that the bill rate should be close to the discount
rate and should not be permitted to rise inordinately above the dis
count rate because of the unsettling effects such a rise would have
on the capital markets. Mr. Fulton said he would like to see the
same degree of restraint that the market now feels maintained for
the next few weeks, with operations being geared to feel of the
market,
Mr. Shepardson commented on his observations of conditions
in the drought area of the Southwest on a trip through that section
last week, stating that in western Texas, Oklahoma, parts of Kansas,

10/16/56 -17
and eastern Colorado the drought was getting progressively worse and
there was no sign of relief, Planting of wheat in Kansas was far
behind normal. The large livestock areas in western Texas and eastern
New Mexico had been largely denuded of animals. On this point, Mr.
Shepardson said there was not the feeling of distress that might have
been anticipated since the market had been fair and stock had been
moving out fairly satisfactorily, most ranchers getting out without
excessive feeding costs. However, even if the area should now start
to receive rain, something like three years would be required to re
establish the carrying capacity of the ranges sufficiently to justify
restocking. This meant there would be a movement of light cattle
from the area for some period of time, and this had been borne out
by a down turn in cattle prices. As to credit conditions in the
drought area, producers did not feel that they were in too bad shape,
Mr. Shepardson said, country bankers reporting that deposits were
holding up and that agricultural loan repayments were being met. He
also noted a tendency for women living on farms to seek employment in
cities and suggested that this may have been a factor helping to hold
up income and to enable farmers in the area to keep current.
As to national credit policy, Mr. Shepardson said that the
situation still justified a continuation of the existing degree of
restraint. While he would not intensify restraint, at the same time
he would not relax pending determination of what might develop follow
ing the election to be held on November 6.

10/16/56 -18
Mr. Robertson said that if it were not for one factor he
would be arguing today that the Committee should have a tighter
policy than it has had. His feeling was that the Committee had
been too easy right along and certainly that had been the case
during the past three or four months. Inflationary pressures still
seem to be very strong, Mr. Robertson said, and the one factor that
would cause him to veer from the view that greater restraint was
needed was the fact that the election was only three weeks away and
he did not feel it possible to determine accurately at this time the
attitude the public will have toward purchases of the new model auto
mobiles, or toward other uses of their incomes. As a result, this
was a rather stagnant periods the Committee should not try to tighten
the market but it certainly should not loosen it, and if there were to
be error it should be on the side of tightness rather than of loose
ness. Mr. Robertson said that his hope would be that the existing
degree of restraint could be continued until after the election, when
it should be possible to see more clearly what economic developments
were in prospect.
Mr. Mills said that his comments would relate to the questions
raised by Mr. Roosa as to the Committee's attitude toward a rise in
Treasury bill yields and also as to its attitude toward System open
market account sales and purchases of Treasury bills as a means of
offsetting fluctuations in float. In his opinion, an oversimplified

10/16/56 -19.
answer to these two questions is for the Committee to adhere to its
established principles for conducting open market policy and thereby
exert its efforts toward seeing that the seasonal and other appro
priate reserve needs of every class of member bank are met. In so
doing, a degree of credit restraint can be maintained comparable to
that ruling over the past two or three weeks. That kind of policy
objective seemingly would allow interest rates to adjust to a supply
of reserves that would in its own right serve to temper any tendency
for the Treasury bill rate to rise sharply.
In that connection, he pointed to a significant development
that was disclosed by the statement of Condition of the Weekly Report
ing Member Banks for the week ended October 3. Examination of that
statement, Mr. Mills said, shows a rather abrupt reduction in the
amount of "loans by banks" while at the same time the total of
"borrowings by banks" had increased measurably, concentrating in the
area of Federal Reserve Bank discounts which rose substantially at
the same time as there was a reduction in borrowing from other sources.
In his opinion, this situation might be traced in part to the usual
seasonal demands for credit that are absorbing country bank and re
serve city bank reserves and in part to the illiquidity of large city
banks who have been obliged to throw back to country bank and reserve
city bank correspondents loans that they would ordinarily carry for
their accounts.

10/16/56 -20
As this combination of circumstances has tended to with
draw reserves from the Federal funds market, Mr. Mills felt that
central reserve city banks might be starved for reserves because
of the lack of Federal funds and, therefore, forced to resort more
heavily to the discount facilities of the Federal Reserve Banks. He
also felt that this condition might be accentuated on October 17 and
October 18 when country banks and reserve city banks, who were the
largest subscribers to the new Treasury tax anticipation bills, must
have the necessary reserves available to support their purchases and
related Tax and Loan Accounts. All told, he felt that the situation
required close attention as it contained the possibilities of excessive
money market tightness at a time of tenseness in businessman psychology
and questioning as to future business prospects.
In view of the Treasury's recurring financing requirements be
tween now and December, it was Mr. Mills' opinion that System actions
should focus on providing a flow of reserves to the commercial banks
that would be consistent with the System's general credit policy and
at the same time conducive to the success of the Treasury's operations.
Every effort should be made to prevent any repetition of the progressive
kind of tightness that reached a climax in late November and early
December 1955.
With respect to Mr. Roosa's second question, Mr. Mills felt
that as far as possible open market actions should ignore fluctuations

10/16/56 -21
in float, whose temporary reserve effects are now familiar to the
commercial banks and do not influence their permanent investment
policies. In line with that reasoning, it was his thought that
until Treasury bill purchases become necessary seasonally to provide
additional reserves with which to support legitimate bank credit
expansion and the outflow of currency, the Manager of the Open Market
Account should confine purchases and sales of Treasury bills to the
minimum possible. Mr. Mills concluded his statement by saying that
he felt rather disappointed that the System bid yesterday to allow
the run-off of $32 millions of Treasury bills at their maturity on
Thursday of this week.
Mr. Leach commented that recent Fifth District economic
developments included an improvement in cotton textiles marked by
an expansion of the order backlog. The improved feeling was partly
due to expected increases in wages which subsequently had taken place,
and partly to Administration assurance that future Japanese textile
imports would not be concentrated on a few products. This would
spread imports over a larger number of items and they would not have
so much effect on mills making the items previously being imported.
Order backlogs now go into or through the first quarter of 1957, and
mill inventories are expected to decline. Profits are expected to
be reduced initially under the new cost-price structure.
Mr. Leach said that he had made an effort to obtain informa
tion regarding the continued inventory accumulations of nondurables

10/16/56 -22
through some of the directors of the Bank in advance of the time when
statistics would be available. One director reported that one of the
largest mail order concerns and other large distributors of soft goods
sensed a change in this situation; distributors were currently placing
limited orders for apparel items and were looking to a reduction in
inventories and to a faster turnover. The director noted that this
contrasted with the relatively liberal order policy that was being
followed a year ago, when these firms anticipated higher prices. Both
this director and a textile manufacturer reported that inventories were
being held down, partly because of the reduced availability of funds for
carrying inventories. Mr. Leach noted that this information from
businessmen, along with the reports that bankers were screening loans,
tended to confirm that the System's credit policy was having the effects
it had been looking for. The information might indicate that the problem
of speculative inventory accumulations would not become very large in
the soft goods industries, Mr. Leach said, adding that a shoe manu
facturer informed him that he anticipated that inventories would be
reduced regardless of whether sales fell off.
As to credit policy for the immediate future, Mr. Leach said
he thought there should be no relaxation or intensification of the
pressure that had been the Committee's objective in recent weeks. The
objectives of the Committee have been right, and it was now accomplish
ing about as much as it could hope for. He would not be worried about

10/16/56 -23
statistical ease or even some actual ease for a short period result
ing from float. He would not wish to increase the degree of tightness
and bring about a disturbance in the capital markets, Mr. Leach said,
and he hoped the bill rate would not be much, if any, above the dis
count rate.
Mr. Allen said that economic conditions in the Seventh District
included an excellent harvest of agricultural products except in the
western part of Iowa where the country had suffered from drought.
Cattle slaughter had increased which might mean the beginning of a
reduction in breeding herds, and it suggested that the supply of low
quality beef might become quite large, with a depressing effect on
prices. Mr. Allen also commented on the automobile situation, noting
that two major manufacturers that had announced prices for new models
had come out with increases averaging something like five or six per
cent. He reported discussions indicating some feeling in the industry
that the increased prices would be a retarding factor on sales, while
others believed that the new model automobiles would sell welldespite
the higher prices. The steel wage settlement has not yet had its full
effect, in the opinion of the automobile industry, Mr. Allen said, and
a further increase in costs was anticipated within the next few months.
Turning to bank credit, Mr. Allen noted that business loans of
Seventh District reporting member banks had increased $50 million since
mid-year, compared with an increase of $225 million in the corresponding

10/16/56 -24
period a year ago. The increase in loans to seasonal borrowers
(food, liquor, and tobacco firms; commodity dealers; textile firms;
and retail and wholesale trade) was larger this year than last year,
he said, which would indicate that banks were taking care of their
regular customers. Loans to sales finance companies and to metals
firms declined considerably.
With respect to the questions raised by Messrs. Hayes and
Roosa as to bill rates, Mr. Allen said he did not think it would be
desirable to intensify the amount of restraint at the present time.
He disliked the kind of speculation that would develop when the bill
rate got higher than the discount rate, although he recognized that
it could be argued that the uncertainties would have virtue. Mr.
Allen suggested that there might be some deflationary factors in the
economy at the present time and that the possible situation Mr. Roosa
had mentioned might take care of itself without need for concern about
the rate on bills.
Mr. Powell said that economic conditions in the Ninth District
were quite good. The District had gone through the year with little
or no harm for the season as a whole from drought, and this year's
farm income would be quite satisfactory. Employment was at an all
time high, with manufacturing continuing active and retail trade at
a high level. Mr. Powell noted that the volume of savings was not up
to the demand, although it was not less than a year ago. This was
because demand for long-term capital had been larger than the savings

10/16/56 -25
could supply, and the District was feeling the same pinch in invest
ment funds that other parts of the country reported. Banks continue
in comfortable position and current borrowings from the Federal Reserve
Bank were small. Mr. Powell said he would be sorry to see Treasury
bill rates above the discount rate for long. He did not think the
Committee could depend on commercial banks to help much with the pro
gram for controlling inflation, and if they saw a favorable opportunity
they would buy Treasury bills, even if they found it necessary to
borrow at the Federal Reserve Bank to carry them. To permit the bill
rate to rise above the discount rate might bring on a policing problem.
If it appeared that the Treasury bill rate was going to rise and stay
up, it would be desirable for the System to work toward an increase
in the discount rate as a protective measure for the restraint program.
This was not a problem at the moment, Mr. Powell emphasised, and he
would recommend that the existing degree of restraint be maintained.
Mr. Mangels said that comments on the Twelfth District economic
picture would be a repetition of reports he had made at the last two
meetings. Further modest improvement was continuing, even in the
residential construction field and in automobile sales. With reference
to residential building, Mr. Mangels reported comments of bankers loan
ing in that field who felt that the most optimistic estimates indicated
housing starts during the next calendar year of about 800,000 units,
or a reduction of about 25 per cent from the estimated starts during
1956. The Twelfth District labor market continued very tight, Mr.

10/16/56 -26
Mangels said, noting that the recent classification of the San
Francisco-Oakland area as one in which there were more jobs than
job seekers brought the District's three principal metropolitan
areas--Los Angeles, San Francisco-Oakland, and Seattle--into the
category of tight labor areas.
Bank loans continued to increase but in the past three months
the growth was more modest relative to the national picture than
earlier this year. Borrowings at the Reserve Bank continued modest.
Banks continued to be net lenders and on October 3 were selling an
excess of Federal funds. Although there was a degree of tightness,
Mr. Mangels said that it was not being felt as much as in some other
districts. He felt that the Committee's action concerning the economic
situation, the Treasury's needs, and other factors, should be to main
tain a healthy climate for Treasury financing and at the same time
maintain a degree of restraint. He did not think the situation should
be tighter than recently, and he would be inclined to supply reserves
to take care of normal seasonal expansion toward the end of this year.
He would not change the discount rate at present and would observe
developments in the rate situation during the next few weeks with a
view to further consideration later on of the need for a change in
discount rate.
Mr. Szymczak said that this was a difficult situation. On the
one hand, all reports indicated a high level of economic activity and

10/16/56 -27
there appeared to be little doubt that a high level of activity
would continue, tending toward inflation with prices generally
moving on the up side. The economy was not without some uncertain
ties, however, depending on sales of new model automobiles and the
effect that such sales would have on production and employment. We
could not know at this time how much effect the increases in prices
of automobiles would have on their sales; both world and domestic
psychological tensions were increasing, all of which would have an
effect on our economy.
Mr. Szymczak said that he thought the Account Management and
the New York Bank had done a good job during the past several weeks.
This had been a difficult period in the market when at times there
was ease generally, but in the New York market considerable tightness.
As for the immediate future, Mr. Szymczak said he would normally offset
fluctuations in float through open market operations. In this instance,
however, he felt that the New York Bank had correctly allowed the
account's bills to run off this week, and this run-off should be suf
ficient at this time to deal with the rise in float without additional
sales of bills. Mr. Szymczak then commented on three items in the
domestic economy which he felt demanded attention: (1) the Treasury's
need for new money; (2) seasonal demands for credit during the rest
of this year; (3) the situation with respect to bill rates. These
three factors would call for buying rather than selling, since it

10/16/56 -28
appeared that the market would soon tend to become tighter. When
this developed, Mr. Szymczak said he would purchase bills to supply
the reserves needed, not only for these three reasons but partly to
keep the psychological factors from affecting the money market.
Mr. Balderston said that he could see the complexities in
the situation referred to by Mr. Szymczak. These stemmed from the
mixed nature of the reports that were beginning to come in. On the
one side, he was concerned about the commitments to increase wages
and to build more office buildings and plants. He felt that a portion
of the economy was over-committed and that trouble would ensue. On
the other hand, he sensed some almost imperceptible changes that would
make the future one of great difficulty, especially in the light of
the Treasury financing to come. He would hope that any psychological
crisis might be avoided, especially in December when seasonal needs
for credit might cause a sudden tightness that was not desired. He
did not like the prospect of positive free reserve figures in November
and felt such a development would be misinterpreted.
With respect to the question raised by Mr. Roosa as to what
should be done with the bill rate, Mr. Balderston said that personally
he would be unhappy if for any reason the System were to attempt to
peg the bill rate at 3 per cent. A rise in the bill rate to 3.10 or
3.12 per cent might lead to unfounded rumors that would presage a
rise in the discount rate, but Mr. Balderston said that he would

10/16/56 -29
regard that as a minor difficulty compared with the obvious fallacy
of pegging the bill rate at any figure. We had learned from sad
experience that the pegging of Government bonds had, as former
Chairman Eccles had expressed it, produced an "engine of inflation."
He would like to see the free market allowed to operate to the extent
compatible with the Committee's policy, even if the bill rate were to
rise to a figure as high as 3-1/8 per cent.
Mr. Robertson asked Mr. Roosa to indicate more fully why the
bill rate might rise above the discount rate, and Mr. Roosa responded
that if the System account were to sell bills in the magnitude implied
by the projections of reserves for the immediate future with a view to
offsetting the expansion of float, an increase in the rate could be
expected. In the atmosphere that we have been through, a rise in the
bill rate above the discount rate would be taken as a signal for a
change in the latter and would run the risk of a disorderly advance
in bill rates. Looking to a period three weeks ahead, Mr. Roosa
thought there was a continuing risk that there would be selling pres
sure in the short area and that there might be attempts to dump the
new special bills as quickly as that could be done. This selling
might generate an increase in the rate on long bills. Mr. Roosa
emphasized that his remarks were not intended to give the impression
that he was advancing a recommendation of what should be done; he
merely wished to indicate that there was a problem on which the
Account Management felt the need for an expression of the Committee's

10/16/56 -30
views. He would not wish to have anyone think that he had suggested
a peg in the bill rate. However, if the bill rate was to be a guide
in the circumstances described, and if the account was to pursue a
restrictive objective of vigorously selling into a rise in float,
there was the risk that the bill rate would be forced up and the Com
mittee would then have to be prepared to encounter sentiment in the
market to the effect that an increase in the discount rate was imminent.
It was not merely that there would be discussion of an increase in the
discount rate, Mr. Roosa noted, but it was the spread of that con
viction with its ramifications in the capital market that would pose
a problem for the Committee, just as had occurred in August before
the discount rate increase. This was not a matter of a pegged bill
rate, Mr. Roosa reiterated, but was a question whether the account
should limit its actions in order to avoid a development such as he
had outlined. This was the type of question that might arise at the
trading desk and one on which it would be helpful to have some discus
sion by the Committee.
Mr. Robertson said that it looked to him as though existing
forces might cause the bill rate to decline rather than to rise.
Mr. Roosa agreed that a rise in the volume of float in the
immediate future would have this tendency. The problem he was talk
ing about was one that might arise if the account attempted to sell
into the rise in float; if the Committee felt that the account should

10/16/56 -31
not be concerned about the rise in float that was already starting
to show, the bill rate might tend downward and the problem he had
presented might not arise.
Mr. Robertson said that the action the account had taken to
let maturing bills run off this week was highly desirable. Also, he
personally would not be concerned if the bill rate were to move above
the discount rate in the circumstances described, so long as it did
not go substantially higher and did not remain there for a long period
of time.
Chairman Martin said that the comments today indicated a clearer
consensus than the Committee had shown at the last several meetings. It
seemed apparent that no one present was suggesting a change in the direc
tive to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The questions concerned
details of operations that revolved around the word "feel." It was very
difficult for the Committee to furnish guides to this, the Chairman said,
but he was glad that Mr. Roosa had raised the questions as he had, and
he felt that Mr. Mills had highlighted the problem when he discussed it
in the framework in which the Committee had tried to operate. Mr.
Balderston's point that we do not wish a pegged market was one that all
agreed upon. It was necessary to be particularly careful in a period
like this not to permit pressures resulting from the Treasury's needs
to cause the Committee to do something that would bring about a situa
tion which would give the Treasury a false idea of its problem when it

10/16/56 -32
came to the December financing. The consensus appeared to be that an
even keel should be maintained as far as possible during the next few
weeks, Chairman Martin said, but he did not think the Committee could
ignore the bill rate and if it went to, say, 3.25 per cent the pressures
might generate a panicky condition. On the other hand, the Committee
was face to face with a situation in which, if it permitted the market
to take control of the discount rate because the bill rate rose a little
above it, the Committee would not be permitting market forces to have
the effects they should have.
Chairman Martin went on to say that his own thinking was that
the Committee should guard the free market as zealously as it could.
It would always have suggestions from others as to what the market
ought to be, but the more the Committee let the forces of the market
operate and the closer it kept its actions to the reserve situation,
the better.
As to the immediate future, Chairman Martin said that he was
inclined to think Mr. Robertson had described the problem correctly,
that is, that a rise in float would tend to cause bill rates to decline;
but the problem for the longer future was going to be very difficult.
The recent Treasury financing had been complicated, but in Chairman
Martin's judgment it demonstrated that the auction method was correct.
However, the "fine pencil boys" did not really see what they were
getting into and this was one of the things that the Treasury may not

10/16/56 -33
have fully appreciated. This was not a criticism of the Treasury's
financing program, the Chairman emphasized, although in his opinion
the Treasury could have offered a larger amount of bills ($3 billion
rather than $1.6 billion) and such an offering would have made for a
better market all around. The offering that had been made had come
out with an average rate of 2.627 per cent, the Chairman noted, but
3-1/8 per cent was a perfectly fair opening price for the bills. The
market had been confused in this period, Chairman Martin said, and if
the Treasury were to come along a little later with an offering of
another billion dollars of bills in the same way, there might be
similar confusion. In carrying on operations during the period ahead,
his plea would be for the Account Management to use its judgment on
the questions raised by Messrs. Hayes and Roosa. If in hindsight the
account made mistakes in exercising that judgment, Chairman Martin
said that he as one member of the Committee, particularly because he
had been a broker, would have a sympathetic understanding of the dif
ficulties that the account faced.
Mr. Hayes said that he agreed with the approach indicated by
Chairman Martin. He had wanted to be as clear as possible about the
Committee's reaction if an undue tightening should develop or if some
positive free reserve figures developed. He gathered from the comments
this morning that some members of the Committee would ignore a positive
free reserve figure while others would like to have the account maintain

10/16/56 -34
a net borrowed reserve figure, and he was still not quite clear as to
the course to be followed.
Chairman Martin responded by stating that, if in the judgment
of the Management of the Account, the positive free reserve figures
were necessary in relation to maintaining the same degree of tightness
that the Committee had been trying to have, he would not be bothered
by their appearance. This was what the Committee meant by speaking
of the "feel of the market." All members of the Committee might not
agree on the level of free reserves or net borrowed reserves at which
that degree of tightness would be obtained, but for the immediate
period ahead the Committee must rely on the judgment of the Management
of the Account. The Chairman reiterated the statement that he as one
member of the Committee would be on the side of condoning any errors
of judgment that might be made by the Account Management in trying to
carry forward on this basis. He added that it was very easy to be
on the outside looking in and to make criticisms, but it was also
very difficult to make a judgment as to just what should be done at
any given time.
None of the members of the Committee indicated a view different
than that expressed by the Chairman.
Mr. Roosa then mentioned a point of procedure in connection
with the possible purchase of the new special Treasury bills maturing
January 16, 1957. These bills would come within range, under the
System account's normal procedures, for regular delivery transactions

10/16/56 -35
today. Three aspects might enter the decision, other than the obvious
favorable considerations:
1. The System account has not, as a matter of policy
for several years, bought securities newly or
recently issued by the Treasury (other than regular
Treasury bills)--i.e., it has avoided direct support
to a Treasury issue.
2. This special bill may be considered the first instal
ment of a June tax anticipation instrument, and the
account has not, as a matter of policy, bought any
Tax Anticipation issues.
3. Any concentration of the account's January redemptions
in this special issue might pose peculiar problems for
the needed refunding in January, assuming that the
rollover would not merely be into another 91-day bill.
The mere presence of this issue in the market should
add to the availability of other January issues, in
any case.
After some discussion of this question, Mr. Roosa suggested that
since it should not prove necessary for the System account to buy the
special bills during the next three weeks in any event, this period would
give the Committee an opportunity to see if these bills were trading off
the yield curve. If they tended to trade above the yield curve, the
System account could then purchase them when purchases become necessary.
Chairman Martin stated that he did not see any reason why the account
should not deal in the tax bills. He agreed with Mr. Roosa's suggestion,
however, pointing out that this simply implies that purchases would be
on the general basis of "best price." He also agreed with a comment by
Mr. Szymczak that it was important that the Committee not allow the
money market on the basis of System operations to distinguish between
the regular weekly bills and the special bills recently offered. None

10/16/56 -36-
of the members of the Committee indicated disagreement with these
views.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Committee voted unanimously
to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York until otherwise directed by the Com
mittee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (in
cluding replacement of maturing securities, and allowing
maturities to run off without replacement) for the System
open market account in the open market or, in the case of
maturing securities, by direct exchange with the Treasury,
as may be necessary in the light of current and prospective
economic conditions and the general credit situation of the
country, with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in
the market to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to
restraining inflationary developments in the interest of
sustainable economic growth, and (c) to the practical ad
ministration of the account; provided that the aggregate
amount of securities held in the System account (including
commitments for the purchase or sale of securities for the
account) at the close of this date, other than special
short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treas
ury, shall not be increased or decreased by more than $1
billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with
discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue
participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such
amounts of special short-term certificates of indebted
ness as may be necessary from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided that
the total amount of such certificates held at any one
time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the
aggregate $500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System
account for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury
securities maturing within one year as may be necessary
from time to time for the accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such securities so sold
shall not exceed in the aggregate $500 million face amount,
and such sales shall be made as nearly as may be practicable
at the prices currently quoted in the open market.

10/16/56 -37
In a discussion of the time for the next meeting of the
Committee, agreement was reached on a tentative date of Tuesday,
November 13, 1956, at 10:00 a.m., partly for the reason that
Tuesday, November 6, would be a general election day.
Chairman Martin stated that Congressman Patman hoped to issue
a press announcement shortly, stating that the Subcommittee on Economic
Stabilization of the Joint Economic Committee would hold a public hear
ing during the first two weeks of December, at which time the members
of the Board and the Presidents of the Reserve Banks would be present
to give testimony on present monetary policy and the basis of its
development during the past six or eight months. In a discussion of
a date for such a hearing it was agreed that a meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee would be held at 10:00 a.m. on Monday, December
10, 1956, and that the members of the Board and the Presidents would
plan to be in Washington on Tuesday, December 11, 1956, for the pur
pose of meeting with Congressman Patman's subcommittee.
Mr. Robertson suggested that at the meeting scheduled for
November 13, a special committee be appointed to review the report
being distributed today on Operation Alert 1956 with a view to sub
mitting its comments to the entire Federal Open Market Committee for
later discussion, and it was understood that this topic would be placed
on the agenda for that meeting.
Mr. Balderston expressed the view that discussions of questions
such as those raised by Messrs. Hayes and Roosa regarding the operation

10/16/56 -38
of the System open market account were most helpful in improving
communications between the Committee and the Account Management
and said that he hoped similar discussions could take place in
the future. There was general concurrence in this view.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary