A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Wednesday, May 9, 1956, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Sproul, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Johns
Mr. Mills
Mr. Powell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. S zymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Fulton, Alternate
Messrs. Bryan, Leedy, and Williams, Alternate
Members, Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Leach, Irons, and Mangels, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Dallas,
and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Abbott, Parsons, Roelse, and Young,
Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Harris, First Vice President, Federal Re
serve Bank of Chicago
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
April 17, 1956, were approved.

Before this meeting there had been distributed to the mem
bers of the Committee a report covering open market operations during
the period April 17 through May 2, 1956, inclusive, and at this meet
ing a supplementary report covering commitments executed May 3-May 8,
1956, inclusive, was distributed. Copies of both reports have been
placed in the files of the Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period April 17
to May 8, 1956, inclusive, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Members of the Board's staff then entered the room to assist in
a presentation of an economic review, illustrated by chart slides. A
copy of the script of the review was sent to each member of the Com
mittee following the meeting.
Mr. Young opened the review with a statement substantially as
followss
So far this year, the aggregate demand for credit has
been very large. Business credit demand has been especially
heavy, both in short- and long-term markets. Consumer credit
demand, while tapering off a bit, has continued fairly strong.
Outstanding credit volume in all sectors has risen to levels
substantially above those prevailing last year. With credit
demand mounting and with bank credit supply under restrictive
pressure, borrowers have found it necessary to offer higher
interest rates in endeavoring to satisfy their financing
needs.
The physical side of the economic picture contrasts
sharply with the financial side, as output has been showing
little change at a high level. For eight months the Board's
index of industrial production has been within the 142-144
range. The number employed in April continued at a high
level, with employment outside manufacturing well above the
1953 peak while employment at factories was still below the
high of that period. Unemployment declined seasonally in
April to 2.6 million.

With near capacity output in some major industries
and with credit extensively relied on to supplement private
resources for spending, upward price pressures on industrial
commodities have continued, though the pace of the price rise
for these commodities has slackened. Prices of farm com
modities have moved upward from year-end lows. Average in
dustrial prices are about 5 per cent above the first half of
1955 and average wholesale prices of all commodities are up
3 per cent. Recently, prices of some leading materials have
reacted from earlier highs. On the other hand, business
circles generally expect very large increases in steel prices
this summer, following negotiation of a new wage contract.
Gross national product in the first quarter was up only
slightly from the fourth quarter, and the rise can be largely
accounted for in terms of higher prices in some sectors. Pres
ent indications point to a moderate further rise in the second
quarter, again partly accounted for by price rise.
Compared with early stages of revival from mid-1954 lows,
when consumer buying led the way, and with most of last year,
when demand advances were general, recent economic strength has
gained special support from business buying. Consumer demand,
on the whole, including demand for nondurable goods and serv
ices as well as for durables and housing, has about held its
own since autumn. The rise in business demand has been in
producers' equipment and business construction. Inventory ac
cumulation has continued near the earlier rate.
Concerning the changed relationship between consumption
and investment expenditures, three questions may be posed.
One is whether a further rise in consumer income, generated
in part by increased capital expenditures, may prompt a fresh
rise in consumption demand before new productive capacity has
greatly supplemented market supplies. A second question is
whether growth in credit demands as generated by expanding
business investment can be substantially counterbalanced by
a larger savings flow so that tolerable balance will be
maintained in money markets. A third question is whether,
with the advance in consumption slackening and with inven
tories still building up, congestion may develop in many
lines, rendering capital expenditure programs less attractive.
Mr. Thomas concluded the review with the following statement on
the credit situation
The world-wide picture shown by today's review continues
to be one of over-all advance. In the United States, with

total output leveling off at close to capacity levels, the
gradual price rise accounts for much of the further lifting
of value aggregates. Over-all credit demand remains strong,
with the balance in excess of available savings pressing
against a bank credit supply subject to Federal Reserve limita
tion. Thus, money rates have risen some, although markets just
now are not as tight as they were three weeks ago.
While production in the economy has leveled off since last
autumn and while consumers have been increasing their debts
less rapidly than before, business borrowing this spring has
been in unusually large volume. To some extent the recent
sudden expansion in business borrowing was not foreseen, and
the reasons for it are not yet wholly clear. Apparently some
of the funds that should have been reserved for taxes had
previously been used to finance the large capital expansion
programs and further additions to inventories. Loan demands
arose from the need to pay taxes without hurting cash posi
tions, and perhaps also from efforts to assure adequate funds
for future needs under relatively tight credit conditions. A
large Treasury cash surplus and substantial debt retirement
have been of some importance in offsetting private credit ex
pansion and reenforcing restrictive monetary policy.
Under the circumstances, some strengthening of Federal
Reserve pressure on the credit brake was appropriate, and the
events of the past month have supported the need for that
action. As the economy approaches the period of a seasonal
uphill climb, some lessening of restraint may be appropriate
to permit needed credit expansion. Yet the advance still
shows evidence of basic momentum, as indicated by the rela
tively high rate of monetary velocity in the face of a re
stricted rate of monetary growth.
While a somewhat faster rate of increase in total out
put and in money balances would be consistent with the
objective of sustained economic growth, there could be more
assurance of sustainability if adjustments in some markets,
such as automobiles, were more nearly completed, if further
business inventory growth were being generally supported by
growth in sales, and if the advance in prices were to cease.
In the absence of clear indications in these directions and
in view of the momentum evident in some important sectors
of the economy, continued restraint on expansion would seem
to be the most appropriate course for current Federal Reserve
policy in the immediate future.
Chairman Martin suggested that, with the review as background, the
Committee's discussion this morning should cover not only open market

policy but Reserve Bank discount rates, discount policy, and all
aspects of the situation having a bearing on the reserve position
of banks. He then called upon Mr. Sproul who made a statement sub
stantially as follows:
1. We are still in an area of low visibility so far
as the balance between inflationary and deflationary
forces in the economy is concerned. Aggregate measures
of economic activity continue to show a roughly sidewise
movement at a high level, supported largely by a heavy
program of capital expenditures and related strength in
the construction and machinery industries. Within the
aggregates, however, movements are taking place which
could have more significance than the apparent steadiness
of the aggregates.
2. A disturbing example is the automobile industry.
Right now this industry, one of the most important in the
whole economy, seems to be in trouble. The hoped for
spring increase in sales has been disappointing, inven
tories of cars remain quite high, and further cuts in
production and employment are being made to try to clear
the decks for the early introduction of the 1957 models.
3. There may be some cause for concern, also, in
connection with the steel industry. Demand for steel
has kept output at or near capacity, and the pressure
of this demand has been showing up in increased prices.
But there is uncertainty as to how much of the current
demand for some steel items is going into inventory,
as a hedge against a possible strike or further price
increases or both. It could be that strength in the
second quarter of 1956 is being borrowed from the third
quarter.
4. The agricultural situation, of course, continues
to pose a problem for the country's balanced economic
growth, and currently is affecting the market for farm
machinery in an important way.
5. It seems to me clearly to be a situation in which
the direction and vigor of movement in the economy is not
certain, that readjustments, and important readjustments,
are still taking place. While consumer incomes and spend
ing continue high, the shift of demand from consumer
durables to consumer nondurables and services creates a
situation of some delicacy.

-6-
6. We get what is perhaps our clearest indication of
the proper course for credit policy from the action of prices
and the trends of bank loans. Prices of many industrial
goods and prices at wholesale continue to edge upward both
because of pressure of demand where we are straining current
capacity, and because of increased costs. Demands for bank
credit continue larger than can easily be explained by the
current needs of a business situation which, in the aggregate,
is moving sidewise. The great bulge in business loans during
March has been little reduced during April, if at all, and
the prospect of another bulge in borrowing during June is
being discussed.
7. It is because of these movements in prices and in
bank credit, and because our increases in discount rates were
taken as warnings rather than storm signals, that I think we
can be satisfied with what we did last month. Now, for a
period, I think we should hold a steady course. We need to
watch the trend of production and employment over the next
few weeks. We need particularly to watch the course of the
capital markets and of bank credit. The capital markets seem
to have found a new trading base; it should be further tested
before any additional move is considered, so great is our
reliance on the capital expansion program for continued
strength in the economy.
8. In the field of bank credit we need to watch out for
what may be the cumulative effects of the developments of the
past year including our policy of credit restraint. The
liquidity squeeze to which both business and banks have been
subjected during the past year may now be showing its real
effects. It is beginning to appear likely that the demand for
bank credit of many industries and businesses, in considerable
part, has grown out of an over-all squeeze on corporate
liquidity, accompanying a growth of inventories and receivables,
and the temporary use of tax accruals for working capital pur
poses. It is beginning to appear likely that the commercial
banks, now recognizing that this situation may not be relieved
in a matter of days or weeks and, in the light of their own
reduced liquidity, are taking more vigorous steps to hold their
loans in check. We have done and are doing enough to keep
credit under restraint at the moment. We do not want to pre
cipitate a decline any more than we want to facilitate an
excessive use of credit if the economy temporarily, and in the
aggregate, is attempting to produce and consume more than its
physical resources will permit.
9. My prescription would be to maintain about the exist
ing degree of pressure on the reserve position of the banks for

5/9/56 -7
the present, to leave the discount rate alone, and to keep
the discount window open as always but with administrative
scrutiny of actual discounting.
Mr. Erickson said that in the Boston District conditions were
about the same as described nationally except in the textile industry.
Employment was higher in most States of the district in March than in
February. At their meeting last Monday, directors of the Boston Bank
reported no evidence of any reductions in plant expansion plans. Mr.
Erickson also reported on a recent business outlook conference composed
of economists from banks and industrial concerns, stating that all but
two of those present held an optimistic view for the whole of the cur
rent year. Two were not quite as optimistic because of conditions in
their local industries. The median of their projections of gross
national product for the last quarter of this year was $407 billion
with a range from $394 to $430 billion, and their median projection of
the Board's industrial production index was 1 6 with a range from 139
4
to 150. Mr. Erickson said the Boston Bank had had no particular in
crease in activity at the discount window since the last meeting of
the Committee except for one day, although banks are talking about the
tightness of money. Mr. Erickson said that he was concerned about the
automobile business, one question being whether there may be a lag in
the effect of the decline in sales of automobiles on the suppliers
which would not be evident for some months. As to credit policy, Mr.
Erickson said that he would favor maintenance of the existing degree

5/9/56 -8
of restraint, but that conditions in the automobile and construction
industries should be observed carefully for any indication that there
should be an easing in credit restraint. He would not favor a change
in discount rate at this time.
Mr. Irons said that activity in the Dallas District continued
at a very high rate. Perhaps there was a lessening in the feeling of
confidence that had prevailed a short time ago. Department store
sales and other lines of retail trade have flattened off. Automobile
sales in Dallas and Houston have not come up to hopes for this spring
and there is great pressure for making sales through trading, dealing,
discounting, and the like. There appear to be very substantial stocks
of automobiles in warehouses. Business and industrial construction is
moving ahead but residential construction is being approached with more
caution. Large numbers of older houses are available for sale. Rain
fall last week in agricultural areas improved the spirits of farmers
and probably improved the outlook for crop production. Mr. Irons said
that he felt the restrictive credit policy probably was beginning to
have some effect. Bankers were beginning to be a bit more careful in
allocating available supplies of credit and were emphasizing the fact
that the restrictive policy is beginning to take hold. The bankers
are not critical of the System's credit policy, and the recent in
crease in the discount rate was favorably received. Mr. Irons said
that he would like to see no change in the discount rate at this time
and would favor a continuation of open market operations in a manner

5/9/56 -9
that would maintain about the degree of restraint that has been ex
perienced, without putting too much reliance on any particular figure
of free reserves. At the same time the System should remain flexible
so that it could move as developments might indicate. The discount
window should, as always, be kept open but administered so as to
avoid misuse.
Mr. Mangels said that demand for loans continues to be quite
heavy in the Twelfth District, noting that from April 4 to 25 loans
of reporting member banks increased $146 million, or 40 per cent of
the national total. Practically all of this rise came in commercial,
industrial, and real estate loans. There has been some indication
that increased borrowing at member banks was resulting from a reluctance
of borrower applicants to sell Government securities at a loss. FHA
and GI mortgage money is tight but funds are available for conventional
mortgage loans at 5, 5-1/2, or 6 per cent. Automobile sales in
California were somewhat larger in March than in February. In Southern
California, banks have tightened up on extensions of credit for auto
mobile purchases, particularly for maturities over 30 months. Resi
dential construction is down about 10 per cent but this has been off
set by an increase in industrial and commercial construction. In
the Pacific Northwest, some softening of the market for plywood is
evident but lumber people have not yet indicated much concern because
of this. In the over-all picture, Mr. Mangels said that the Bank had

5/9/56 -10
received nothing but favorable comment on the System's credit program
and that it had been complimented, and had had no criticism, on the
increase in the discount rate even though the San Francisco Bank's
rate had moved higher than that of other Reserve Banks excepting
Minneapolis. Mr. Mangels said that he would subscribe to the view
that the existing credit policy has been effective and should be
continued without any particular modification for the present, but
with careful observation of developments that might call for a shift.
Mr. Powell said that banks in the Minneapolis District were
borrowing more from the Federal than their proportionate share of the
national total. This was being done by a relatively small number of
banks and for a variety of industrial and commercial purposes. Busi
ness activity continues high and unemployment is very low. A large
part of this exuberance results from growth in heavy construction,
which is at exceedingly high levels. Many projects are in the planning
stage. Mr. Powell noted that there is a gray market in steel in the
Minneapolis District and that some other materials are beginning to
be scarce, particularly window glass and cement. This was true
despite some decrease in the volume of residential building. There
is considerable inventory accumulation but some of the retail stocks
are being worked off. Farmers seemed to have turned the corner, Mr.
Powell said. Loans to farmers have risen more slowly than loans to
industrial enterprises. Farmers are currently more cautious about
commitments for new equipment and machinery. Mr. Powell said that

5/9/56 -11
he had not had the same experience as Mr. Mangels in connection
with the discount rate increase, indicating that there had been
some criticism of the Minneapolis Bank's 3 per cent rate by member
banks in the Ninth District. However, at this point he did not
have in mind recommending action to reduce the pressure inasmuch
as demand for credit is continuing strong, and it was his view that
a continued growth of inventories, which additional bank loans would
foster, would not be healthy.
Mr. Leedy said the Tenth District has not experienced the zest
that has prevailed in most of the rest of the country. Outlook for the
district's principal crop, wheat, has improved because of recent rains
and if moisture is somewhere near normal, this year's crop should be
satisfactory. There has been some complaint about the increase in
the Kansas City Bank's discount rate from 2-1/2 to 2-3/4 per cent in
parts of the district where agriculture has been having difficulty.
Mr. Leedy said that he would subscribe to the suggestion made by Mr.
Sproul for continuing to apply about the same degree of pressure on
reserves that has been applied in recent weeks and to watch the ef
fects of this program carefully. He would make no change now in
existing discount rates.
Mr. Leach said that while large plant outlays are going ahead
in the Richmond District, some signs of slightly less strength have
appeared recently. Production of textiles has declined, particularly
of synthetics, and bituminous coal output has slackened. April

5/9/56 -12.
department store sales slowed a little from March and automobile
sales did not increase seasonally. While these factors indicate
a temporary lack of strength, Mr. Leach said that he continued
bullish on the economy. Loan demand continues strong and banks
expect this to persist. In addition to pressure from within the
district, Mr. Leach reported evidences of efforts by national con
cerns which had had unused lines of credit in the Fifth District for
sometime to seek to use credit facilities in this area, and he noted
that some of the banks were loaned up to the point where they were
not accepting new borrowing customers. System policy seems to be
achieving the degree of restraint appropriate to the current situa
tion, Mr. Leach said, and he expressed the view that the recent in
crease in the discount rate had not yet had its full effect. He
would be reluctant to see any further increase in restraints at this
time in any way.
Mr. Vardaman commented that he had voted to approve the recent
increase in the discount rate with some reluctance and with some fear.
However, whatever fear he had had was now eliminated, and his belief
that the action was correct had been strengthened materially during
the last two weeks by the nature of the complaints and complainers
who have come to him on the telephone and in person. The psychological
effect, he said, especially that growing out of the difference in dis
count rate levels, has been excellent. He felt it extremely fortunate
that two Banks had gone to the 3 per cent level while others had

5/9/56 -13
remained at the 2-3/ per cent rate, and he suggested that this had
practically stopped the tendency that had been developing somewhat
alarmingly to speculate in inventories. The restrictive effects of
the discount rate increase and other System actions have not yet been
fully felt, and developments should be observed closely. Mr. Vardaman
said that he was concerned about the apparent unequal distribution of
credit facilities and loanable funds in different parts of the country.
This was a serious problem, he said, and there was no doubt that small
borrowers even though sound credit risks were suffering. He believed
that in this tight money period the so-called "class B" credits were
almost totally excluded, and this was an unfortunate development a
banking system could not be operated on "class A" credits only. This
was not a responsibility of the Federal Reserve System, however, since
without totalitarian powers the best that it could do was to influence
the total amount of available funds and to leave the distribution of
those funds to the free and uninhibited banking system. He hoped that
the System would let things run along as they are; he would dislike
any further tightening or any attitude that would indicate any move
toward loosening the situation. Mr. Vardaman said that he felt the
statement Mr. Sproul had given was one of the clearest, finest state
ments summing up the current economic situation that he had ever heard.
His suggestion would be that open market policy continue the existing
situation and that there be no change at the discount window for the
present.

-14-
Mr. Mills said that in his judgment, in determining the
System's monetary and credit policy, the time has come to shift
emphasis from what might be called the mechanical factors to the
psychological factors that influence the credit situation. He then
made a statement substantially as follows:
In developing Federal Reserve System monetary and
credit policy, first place must be given to the problem
of the availability of credit. In keeping with the eco
nomic objectives of the System's present policy of credit
restriction, commercial banks are now under automatic
compulsion to screen and select their loans with increas
ing care. With the effects of System policy reaching more
deeply into the reserve city bank and country bank areas,
the practice of critical credit selection by commercial
banks is becoming more widespread, and in that process
complaints about the unavailability of credit have become
more frequent and more vocal.
In the writer's opinion, the basis for the complaints
now being heard is more imaginary than real. Under no cir
cumstances, however, can such complaints be ignored because,
while probably lacking substance at the present time, they
undoubtedly do indicate concern both on the part of com
mercial bankers and their customers about the future avail
ability of credit with which to meet the seasonal demands
that are in the offing. Inasmuch as public psychology at
the present time reflects a measure of doubt about the
economic future, it is incumbent upon the Federal Reserve
System to dispel whatever fear exists about the future
availability of credit for deserving and constructive pur
poses.
It is, therefore, highly important that the System
now clearly confirm by action Chairman Martin's statement
before the Pennsylvania Bankers Association that credit
will be available for the nation's seasonal needs. To
that end, it would be advisable to allow the level of
negative free reserves to recede to around the $450-million
level which it had been the writer's impression at the last
Open Market Committee meeting was to be maintained pending
observation of the effects of the last increases in the
discount rate. In the light of recent experience, a
$450-million level of negative free reserves should be
sufficient to guarantee the commercial banks an adequate

5/9/56 -15
reserve base on which to meet the demands for credit now
before them and at the same time to give confidence to
the business community that the System will make credit
available for seasonal purposes.
System action of this character should in no wise
lead to an unwarranted conclusion in the business com
munity that any major shift in System policy had been
made from credit restriction to relative credit ease.
If, however, evidence accumulates from lessening eco
nomic activity, consideration can then be given to what
ever change in policy is held to be appropriate. For
the present, there would seem to be no reason for any
change in the structure of discount rates.
Mr. Robertson said that he saw nothing in the economic picture
as presented today that would warrant deviation from a course of action
such as that expressed this morning of holding steady, provided he
understood what "steady" meant. If it meant that the Committee failed
to offset the easing expected over the next two weeks, he would be
opposed to such a program; if holding steady meant that the System
would attempt to hold the same degree of pressure over the next few
weeks that it has had in the recent past, he would concur. Even though
he had doubts that the System had made the recent increase in the dis
count rate effective, he thought the natural forces would tend to make
this increase effective in the near future. Mr. Robertson said he
hoped there would be no change in the discount rate and he particularly
hoped that the two Banks which had fixed the rate at 3 per cent would
not prematurely reduce it. This should be a period of careful observa
tion during which pressure would not be reduced and during which the
System should not pay too much attention to cries of tightness on the
part of banks. Tightness was what the Committee wanted. Banks should

5/9/56 -16
be concerned about the volume of credit they were extending and the
reliance they would place on the System in making credit extensions.
Mr. Robertson felt that the statement that Chairman Martin had made
at the Pennsylvania Bankers Association meeting described the approach
to be taken during the next three weeks.
Mr. Shepardson said that he agreed entirely with the position
suggested by others that the present situation should be maintained
for the time being. He went on to comment on Mr. Sproul's suggestions
about administrative supervision of the discount window, stating that
he felt careful judgment should be exercised in this connection. Some
of the comments that had come to his attention, particularly from agri
cultural areas, showed concern on the part of the largely agricultural
banks as to whether, under the policy of restraint, they were going to
have difficulty in taking care of necessary credit accommodations. He
hoped that in any discussions as to use of the discount window, full
account would be taken of the needs of the banks in agricultural areas.
These would of necessity call for longer borrowings, particularly in
sections of the country affected by drought. Weather conditions have
not been favorable this year and that fact should be kept fully in
mind in these discussions. In the over-all, Mr. Shepardson said, he
would continue credit policy about as it is.
Mr. Fulton said that he subscribed to much that had been said
this morning. In the Cleveland District, economic activity continues

5/9/56 -17
very high. Steel mills are very active but expect some decline in
the third quarter due partly to weather conditions, vacations, and
exhaustion of facilities. Demand for steel continues very high and
is expected to be good for the whole year. Many employees laid off
in the automobile industry have found work elsewhere and there has
been a net decline in unemployment. Retail sales are holding up
well. Construction outlook is very good as are the prospects for
further plant expenditures. The comments made by Mr. Vardaman on
the so-called "B" class risks were referred to by Mr. Fulton, who
stated that the consensus of bankers was that firms which were
slightly less than acceptable as credit risks were doing most of
the complaining about the shortage of credit. Mr. Fulton agreed
that the discount window should be readily available to all member
banks, but he said that the Cleveland Bank was observing the use of
funds to be made by its borrowers. He personally had favored a
higher discount rate for the Cleveland Bank than the 2-3/4 per cent
approved but, on the whole, he felt that the present restraint being
exercised on the financial structure was entirely appropriate. There
should be no diminution of pressure and it would be desirable to
counter any easing that might take place during the next three weeks.
Mr. Williams said that economic activity continued high in
the Philadelphia District as a whole, but he made a distinction be
tween the situation in Pennsylvania, on the one hand, and in Delaware

5/9/56 -18
and New Jersey, noting that there had been some failure of pro
jected plant expansion programs to materialize in Pennsylvania
recently. Department store inventories have increased sharply
in relation to sales. Volume of borrowings continues high. The
increase in discount rate has had an effect, Mr. Williams said,
and there is more discrimination in granting credits than had been
the case, with considerable talk as to whether the discount window
would continue to be open. Mr. Williams read a memorandum from a
large Philadelphia bank addressed to its loan officers formulating
policy on credit extensions at this time, the substance of which
indicated the bank's policy of limiting credit extensions on a
carefully selected basis. After reading the memorandum, Mr. Williams
stated that his view as to credit policy would be that there should
be no change in the present policy and that the Committee should
watch developments carefully between now and the next meeting.
Mr. Bryan said that a very slight drop in employment has
taken place in the Sixth District due largely to reductions in
automobile assemblies and to some decline in textiles. However,
despite the decline in employment and in hours of labor, the in
crease in the minimum wage rate has resulted in an increase in
total wage payments. Residential building has increased and, all
in all, Mr. Bryan said that the economic situation is continuing
a sidewise movement. Loans of banks have increased contraseasonally

5/9/56 -19
for the seventh week. Borrowings from the Federal Reserve Bank also
have increased sharply recently and he anticipated a further increase,
as some banks have seasonal problems to deal with. He suggested that
the System is now in a "wait and see" period. There is no convincing
evidence of a turn-around that would warrant easing. There does not
seem to be evidence of excessive tightness. On the contrary, the
effect of the higher discount rate may be wearing off, Mr. Bryan felt,
rather than accumulating. His inclination would be to make no change
in the discount rate at the present time, but he would make the dis
count rate effective. He would not allow any temporary forces in
the market to ease the situation. For the present, he would watch
the capital markets and especially watch the behavior of prices which
he felt represented a grave threat to economic stability. His prefer
ence would be not to allow the bill rate to back away substantially
from the discount rate.
Mr. Johns said that there were no significant differences be
tween the appraisal of the economy for the Eighth District and that
presented nationally by the staff. He referred to the chronically
sick Southern Illinois section, stating that it seemed to be beyond
the reach of monetary policy. He also commented on the employment
picture and the effect of shut downs of industry in industrial loca
tions. Mr. Johns said that generally speaking loan demands continue
very strong in the Eighth District, especially in reserve cities.

5/9/56 -20
National accounts which heretofore have not borrowed in the district
but which have had established lines of credit are beginning to use
them to some extent. There is some evidence that correspondent banks
are beginning to restrict loans to smaller banks and some of those
have resorted to the discount window at the Federal Reserve Bank.
While the Reserve Bank has assisted banks where that seemed justified,
plans have been laid for liquidation of indebtedness. Large banks are
complaining mildly about losses of deposits, Mr. Johns said, due to a
tendency of corporations and country banks to withdraw deposits and
invest them in Treasury bills. Another factor which might become
important later in the year is that banks are already under pressure
because of their capital funds position. Risk-asset ratios are now
about at a point that banks consider to be tolerable and which they
apprehend supervisory authorities will consider tolerable. This
raises the question of what use they would make of reserves that
might be made available to them. Discounts have tended to rise not
withstanding the recent increase in the rate. Notwithstanding that
situation, the response to the increased discount rate has been gen
erally favorable, although some mortgage bankers have complained that
the rate increase has wrecked the construction industry. Mr. Johns
was skeptical of this and felt that policy was doing what it was in
tended to do. Increased borrowings at the Reserve Bank reflected not
only the pressure of loan demands and failure of bank resources to

-21-
rise but a scarcity also of Federal funds. Generally speaking, Mr.
Johns said that he believed that the degree of restraint the Com
mittee has been maintaining is about right. For the time being he
would not change it nor would he change the discount rate. It was
his expectation that he would recommend to the directors of the St.
Louis Bank tomorrow reestablishment of the existing discount rate.
Mr. Szymczak said that he could see no change in the economy
that would call for a change in credit policy. Therefore, he would
vote for a continuance of the tight money policy that has existed.
Mr. Balderston then made a statement substantially as follows:
My comments will be altogether academic in that my sug
gestions will be lost in the minority position. I would
leave the general tightness unchanged until the current
borrowing-spending binge has abated somewhat and the demand
for equipment and construction no longer exceeds capacity.
So, as to the general degree of tightness, I am in agree
ment with the majority view.
But as to the relative reliance upon our several tools,
I would prefer a slight alteration, and am perhaps in dis
agreement with all of you. First, as to the discount rate:
an increase to 3 per cent in one or two additional districts
might induce prudence in impending steel industry moves to
raise wages and prices and it might also serve to postpone
some of the planned construction.
If that were done and only if that were done, a reduc
tion in the net borrowed reserves to the $400-$450 million
level would seem appropriate. As to the discount window,
I would deal with heavy continuous borrowers the way I
would drive a car if I struck a slick, icy pavement going
at a fast speed. Member banks who have been borrowing
continuously should not increase their loans above the
present levels nor should they be forced to liquidate
Government securities. Conversations with member banks
might well be kept on a very informal basis to induce
caution in their extensions of loans without any meetings
or statements leading to rumors that would generate fear
psychology. We are in a situation that takes skillful

-22-
handling. That there is as much continuous borrowing is
to be regretted, but I don't think that this is the time
to reduce it except at a gentle note. The comments of
Chairman Martin and President Florence at the meeting of
the Pennsylvania Bankers Association held at Atlantic City
last week were helpful in indicating the present posture
of the System.
Chairman Martin next made a statement substantially as follows
I think my comments at the Pennsylvania Bankers
Association may have gotten considerably more attention
than they would have gotten if it had not been for a
conjunction of circumstances. It was not my intention
to make any policy at that meeting but to reiterate a
position it seems to me the System has always held vis
a-vis the discount window.
I think the problem we are struggling with here is
one of meaning when we say that we want to maintain the
existing situation or that we will keep the market steady.
This is no criticism of the desk, but the level of net
borrowed reserves got higher during the past two weeks
than I anticipated it would have gotten in the light of
our discussion at the meeting on April 17. However, in
the light of the over-all situation that is not surpris
ing and it probably was net to the good. I think that
is the type of thing we are wrestling with whenever we
say we are going to maintain the degree of tightness that
we have.
I am somewhat enamored of Mr. Balderston's suggestion
of going to a 3 per cent discount rate at one of the Banks.
If such a request came in, I would be disposed to approve
it. But I am not sufficiently persuaded on that to feel
it is anything I would want to take a stand on this morning.
I think we are in a period of "wait and see." That might
be the right step, but it might not have the effect we want.
The point I am driving at here and that we continually have
to assess is not only the administration of the discount
window but the external factors that are always in the public
mind.
Since our last meeting we have had two remarkable state
ments from the President of the United States about the role
of the Federal Reserve System. I think they have been con
structive. We have also had comments by two cabinet officials
which, if newspaper men had their way, would blow this up in
to a great fight of whether the discount rate action was
proper or not. I think there is no fight. There is a dif
ference of opinion but at this moment there is no fight.

5/9/56 -23-
However, it is a factor in monetary and credit policy.
The markets have been influenced by a good many rumors
and by a good many comments about our action on the dis
count rate.
At the Pennsylvania Bankers Association meeting, I
had no idea of what Secretary Weeks or Secretary Mitchell
had said but several persons approached me with statements
to the effect that they had blasted the System. I think
they had no idea of blasting the System but what they said
was newsworthy.
I think we ought to go along with the consensus ex
pressed this morning, recognizing that we ought not to
change horses in the middle of the stream when we are still
under the momentum of a movement unless we have convincing
evidence that one of the major factors in the economic
system has shifted. This factor of momentum is major.
The weather and seasonal influences and other things will
always be of significance, but the factor of momentum is
such that we still might see the declines that are taking
place in automobile sales and production and the increases
in inventories of automobiles and steel disappear in June.
In other words, we should continue to assess this factor
of momentum very carefully.
I think the degree of tightness that we have is ap
propriate. The present consensus in the Committee per
suades me that we are not ready for any major change in
front. The desk will have to bear in mind the fact that
there will be a tendency for ease to come into the picture
in the next three weeks, but that there also is this
psychological factor which will tend to offset that ease.
In the past two weeks, statements by the President and
other factors have created a climate which it is impossible
to assess. I would think we ought to accept the consensus
this morning. I would hope in this connection that we
might have another meeting on May 23 or 24 rather than to
carry it over for three weeks. I would hope that Mr. Sproul
could come down to that meeting. One of the things that has
impressed all of us this morning is how very much we are
going to miss the thoughtful papers that he has presented
in these meetings, and we want the benefit of his comments
just as long as we can have them.
Secretary's note: The two statements
of the President referred to by Chair
man Martin were made at press conferences
held by the President on April 25 and
May 4, 1956. The questions asked by the

reporters and the President's responses,
as published in the transcripts of the
conferences that appeared in The New York
Times for April 26 and May 5, 1956, re
spectively, were as follows:
Excerpt from The New York Times, April 26, 1956
EDWIN L. DALE, JR. of The New York Times-Mr. President,
it has been rather widely reported that your Secretary of the
Treasury and chief economic adviser both had serious reserva
tions about the latest increase in interest rates by the Fed
eral Reserve. There is a rather long history of this situation.
I wonder if you have any comment on it.
A.--Well, I think the only comment I can logically make is
this: The Federal Reserve Board is set up as a separate agency
of Government. It is not under the authority of the President,
and I really personally believe it would be a mistake to make
it definitely and directly responsible to the political head of
the state.
The Federal Reserve Board had the unanimous conclusions of
their twelve district boards that this rediscount rate ought to
be raised, and after studying the whole situation they decided
to go ahead and do it.
Now, of course, the thing was argued for a long time. Cer
tain individuals had viewpoints on opposite sides of the fence.
But having done it, I do have this confidence in the Federal Re
serve Board: They are watching this situation day by day. They
are watching whether money dries up, because there are two things
about money: one, it gets a little dearer in its cost to the
borrower; the other is that it is just not there to borrow. And
they are watching it very closely, and I personally believe that
if money gets to what is normally referred to as too tight, they
will move in the other direction in some way or other as soon
as they can.
Excerpt from The New York Times, May 5, 1956
LLOYD M. SCHWARTZ of Fairchild Publications--Secretaries
(of Commerce, Sinclair) Weeks, (of Labor, James P.) Mitchell and
(of the Treasury, George H.) Humphrey, and apparently Dr. (Arthur
F.) Burns (economic adviser) are all questioning the wisdom of
this Federal Reserve Board's latest rise in discount rates on
member banks.
I wonder whether you have any reservation about that in
crease and the impact of it?

A.--Well now, everybody has their opinion about a thing
like this.
I think I made it very clear last week or the week be
fore that here is an independent body reaching its decisions
through the action, in this case of a unanimous vote of its
member boards, eleven member boards, and of this board itself.
I don't know whether the vote was unanimous in this board,
but anyway they reached a conclusion. It is their duty and
responsibility to make their conclusions effective.
Now, what we are concerned in is that the necessary ex
pansion of this country's industries and economy, in order to
bring about a constantly increasing standard for a constantly
increasing population, that the money is there to do it, that
those finances are there to provide for these expanded facili
ties, and we watch that all the time, and I am sure the board
is doing exactly the same thing.
If it believes that money is getting too tight because of
this, they will take measures to meet it.
There was no indication of disagreement with Chairman Martin's sug
gestion that open market policy for the period until the next meeting of
the Committee be one of maintaining about the existing degree of pressure
on the reserve position of banks.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York until otherwise
directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (includ
ing replacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities
to run off without replacement) for the System open market ac
count in the open market or, in the case of maturing securities,
by direct exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary in
the light of current and prospective economic conditions and
the general credit situation of the country, with a view (a) to
relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs of com
merce and business, (b) to restraining inflationary developments
in the interest of sustainable economic growth, and (c) to the
practical administration of the account; provided that the
aggregate amount of securities held in the System account (in
cluding commitments for the purchase or sale of securities for
the account) at the close of this date, other than special short
term certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time

5/9/56 -26-
for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not
be increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the ac
count of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with dis
cretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue partici
pations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of
special short-term certificates of indebtedness as may be
necessary from time to time for the temporary accommodation
of the Treasury; provided that the total amount of such
certificates held at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks
shall not exceed in the aggregate $500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System ac
count for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury securi
ties maturing within one year as may be necessary from time
to time for the accommodation of the Treasury; provided that
the total amount of such securities so sold shall not exceed
in the aggregate $500 million face amount, and such sales
shall be made as nearly as may be practicable at the prices
currently quoted in the open market.
Chairman Martin referred to a memorandum distributed by Mr. Sproul
under date of May 3, 1956, in which he (Mr. Sproul) suggested that the
Federal Open Market Committee at its next meeting take certain actions.
The suggestions of Mr. Sproul, the discussion of those suggestions, and
the actions taken by the Committee are set forth below.
Suggestion No. 1 - The Federal Open Market Committee authorize
and direct that a staff committee be appointed to study the
facts of our experience with present operating procedures.
This would be spade work. Discussion of the substance would
then take place in the full Committee and the value judgments
would be made by the Committee.
Chairman Martin said that he felt it would be very desirable to
have a staff committee appointed to do the spade work suggested by Mr.
Sproul. This would mean that the substantive matters should be discussed
by the full Committee. The Chairman suggested that the proposal be ap
proved with the understanding that he and Mr. Sproul would discuss who
would be designated for this study from members of the staff of the Board

-27-
of Governors and the Reserve Banks. He added that he felt the Manager
of the System Open Market Account should be one of those designated.
This suggestion was approved
unanimously.
Suggestion No. 2 - The Federal Open Market Committee suggest
to the Treasury that a joint staff committee be appointed at
the technical level to study matters involved in the coordina
tion of debt management and credit policy. This study could
include such problems as
A. The feasibility of experiments with various techniques
for issuing new debt instruments intended to minimize
the collision between debt operations and System policy.
Mr. Riefler's recent memorandum (Experience Since the
Accord with Short-term Federal Debt, April 10, 1956)
suggests one such experimental technique.
B. The significance of the maturity schedule of the out
standing marketable debt as it relates to the invest
ment needs and liquidity requirements of the economy
at large. Our memorandum of September 29, 1955, and
the memorandum from the Board staff prepared in the
spring of 1955 on the need for more bills have touched
upon some aspects of this problem.
C. The effects on credit conditions, interest rates, and
the availability of funds at different maturities re
sulting from various alternative methods of using the
Treasury surplus to withdraw marketable debt from the
market.
Chairman Martin suggested that the Open Market Committee authorize
him to hand copies of Mr. Riefler's memorandum of April 10, 1956 (Experi
ence Since the Accord With Short-term Federal Debt) to Treasury officials
and to take up with the Secretary and the Under Secretary of the Treasury,
after they have had an opportunity to read the memorandum, the desirability
of working out a mutual approach to studying these problems. Chairman
Martin said that he would propose to go forward with this promptly if the
Committee agreed with the idea.
This suggestion was approved
unanimously.

5/9/56 -28
Suggestion No. 3 - The Federal Open Market Committee
arrange to be kept currently informed by the New York
Bank of the progress being made by a committee of the
New York Clearing House, being set up in response to
my (Mr. Sproul's) suggestion, to study the functioning
of the money market with particular reference to the
financing of Government security dealers and the clear
ing arrangements for Government security transactions.
While it is preferable to have suggestions come from
the market for its own improvement, the Federal Open
Market Committee should be prepared to act promptly in
evaluating the results of the Clearing House study and
to take action, if action on its part seems desirable,
when the Clearing House report is completed.
Chairman Martin said that he felt the Committee would like to be
informed by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York of progress made regard
ing this study of the money market.
Mr. Sproul responded by stating that almost two years ago the
original suggestion was made that representatives of the New York money
market study this matter, but that nothing had happened. Therefore, he
recently had taken up with the President of the New York City Clearing
House the question of going forward with such a study. Mr. S. Sloan
Colt, President of the New York Clearing House Association, sub
sequently had informed him that he had designated Mr. John Traphagen,
Chairman of the Clearing House Committee, to oversee such a study. Mr.
Sproul said that a working committee to make the study has now been ap
pointed and is about ready to go to work and he (Mr. Sproul) is expecting
shortly to receive a formal response from Mr. Colt telling him what the
Clearing House Committee has done. Mr. Sproul added the comment that
he would plan to send a copy of his letter to Mr. Colt and whatever

5/9/56 -29
response he received from Mr. Colt to all members of the Federal Open
Market Committee.
It was understood that Mr. Sproul's
suggestion set forth above was approved
by the Committee and that efforts would
be made to obtain information from time
to time regarding the progress being made
by the Clearing House in connection with
the study mentioned.
Suggestion No. 4 - The Federal Open Market Committee to re
quest the appropriate arm of the System to make a study of
the Federal Funds market as it has developed over the past
two or three years. This would seem to be necessary if we
are to have a better understanding of the inter-regional
flow of funds, and should contribute to effectiveness of
the day-to-day operations of the System Open Market Account.
Mr. Leedy noted that the Presidents' Conference had discussed a
study of the Federal Funds market and recommended that such a study be
made.
Chairman Martin said that he believed all members of the Com
mittee were favorable to such a study and that the necessary steps would
be taken to implement it as soon as possible.
Mr. Sproul said that in presenting this proposal at the Presi
dents' Conference earlier this week, he had suggested that it might be
divided into two phases: the first, the development of information as
to what is going on in each of the Federal Reserve Districts with re
spect to developments bearing on the national Federal Funds market and
on local Federal Funds markets that have been growing up. He felt that
this phase of the study might be undertaken by the Federal Reserve Banks
operating under a responsible committee of the Presidents' Conference.

5/9/56 -30
The second phase of a study of the Federal Funds market would deal
with policy questions which would grow out of the study of the actual
developments taking place in the Federal Funds market. This phase
would seem to be more appropriate for study by the Open Market Com
mittee. Mr. Sproul also commented that the Presidents' Conference
committee might well have associated with it a representative from
the staff of the Board of Governors.
Chairman Martin stated that he felt the proposal for the study
of the Federal Funds market was completely appropriate and that it
would be understood that the necessary steps would be taken along the
lines of Mr. Sproul's suggestion.
There was no indication of dis
agreement with Chairman Martin's state
ment.
Suggestion No. 5 - Operations in short-term Government
securities other than Treasury bills.
The supply of Treasury bills in the System Account has
now become so low - approximately $350 million - as to
suggest that the Manager of the Account should have some
discretion as to operations in other short-term Govern
ment securities of up to twelve or fifteen months maturity.
This suggestion is concerned not only with the depletion
of our bill holdings, but also with possible distortions
in the bill market which our operations may accentuate,
causing bill yields to change widely and sharply, quite
apart from underlying conditions in the money market.
In view of the large volume of Treasury bills which has
been pretty effectively removed from active trading, and
the small volume of our holdings it would seem desirable
to widen the area of our operations.
Suggestion No. 6 - Limited authority to make swaps in
Treasury bills. Because of redemptions of entire maturi
ties and because of market preferences for other maturities

5/9/56 -31
when we have sold outright, it had proved almost impos
sible to keep anything like an even balance of holdings
in the different bill maturities in the System Account.
It would be most useful if swaps among bills could be
authorized to help rearrange the bill maturities in the
Account. The Committee could authorize the Account
Management to make offsetting purchases and sales of
Treasury bills for the purpose of altering the maturity
distribution of the System Open Market Account when, in
the Manager's judgment, such purchases and sales would
not distort the functioning of the market, and would
improve the capacity of the Account to perform effectively
in supplying or absorbing reserves.
Chairman Martin suggested that these two proposals of Mr. Sproul
be discussed together. He recalled the Committee's existing instruction
(action taken at the meeting of the executive committee on March 2, 1955,
which became an action of the full Committee at its meeting on June 22,
1955) that provided that the New York Bank effect transactions for the
System account through purchases or sales of short-term Treasury securi
ties, preferably bills. In practice, he said, the Manager of the System
Account had adhered to "bills only" transactions. Chairman Martin said
that if it was necessary to sell some securities it did not seem to him
that it would be inconsistent with the Committee's wishes if the account
sold something other than bills in the short-term area. He called upon
Mr. Rouse to review the current situation in the light of the System's
present holdings of Treasury bills and in terms of how he would go about
making swaps in Treasury bills.
Mr. Rouse noted that the System account now held approximately
$350 million of bills. Projections of reserves for the next two to
three weeks indicated that, under a policy of maintaining about the

5/9/56 -32
existing degree of pressure on the reserve position of banks, the
present holdings of bills would be sufficient in that period. Mr.
Rouse said that he felt an undue amount of talk might be caused if
the System account got entirely out of bills. Having in mind that
the Committee's directive was a "bills preferably" instruction, it
had occurred to him that if sales became necessary these might be
in the form of certificates although he would not have in mind selling
notes which would be due in August and which already have something
of a rights value. Mr. Rouse stated that he wished to put the Com
mittee on notice as to the present holdings of bills and as to the
possibility of using some other short-term securities, if the Com
mittee wished to have him follow that procedure. In view of the dis
cussions of operations in the past, Mr. Rouse said, he would not wish
to engage in transactions in securities other than bills without
having placed the Committee on notice.
As to the proposal regarding swaps, Mr. Rouse noted that the
Systen account was now out of or virtually out of 6 of the 13 issues
of weekly Treasury bills outstanding; of its total holdings of $350
million, $97.5 million was in one issue. From time to time, oppor
tunities arose for the System account to switch from one maturity
into another. He had not come prepared to present a specific pro
posal to the Committee this morning but felt that it would be a
relatively simple matter to make some swaps in order to get a better

5/9/56 -33
distribution of Treasury bill holdings. Mr. Rouse said that he
could see no way in which any outsider could possibly take advantage
of such an operation.
Mr. Mills inquired whether in such a transaction there would
be any sentiment in the market that the account management was cloud
ing the situation as to the purpose of the Committee in carrying on
such a transaction. If so, how could that be dispelled?
Mr. Rouse said that he had not been aware of any misunderstand
ing of the kind Mr. Mills referred to and he doubted whether such a
misunderstanding would result. Mr. Rouse also said that any such trans
actions would probably be in amounts of $10 million or less at any one
time.
Mr. Mills then referred to the practice followed by Federal Re
serve Banks of purchasing and selling United States Government securi
ties for member banks, stating that there had been some question in his
mind whether this was an appropriate service to offer to member banks.
In addition, there was the question whether in a market climate such
as now existed such transactions for member banks might on occasion
give a false lead to the investment fraternity regarding System policy.
Mr. Rouse said that he did not think this was a serious problem.
He described the types of transactions that the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York executes for member banks, emphasizing that banks having con
venient access to the regular Government securities dealers are en
couraged to effect transactions through them.

5/9/56 -34
Chairman Martin commented that the question Mr. Mills had
raised might be reviewed in terms of the practices that were followed
by other Federal Reserve Banks.
Mr. Thomas said that in transactions for the System account
it was desirable to bear in mind that the weekly variations in net
borrowed reserves resulted in different effects in the market at dif
ferent times of the month. That is, a large volume of borrowings
around the turn of the month did not always have a tightening effect
on the market, just as a smaller volume around the middle of the month
did not always have an easing effect. Mr. Thomas said that the next
two weeks would represent a period with a relatively small volume of
net borrowed reserves but that the market might not be any easier
during this period. Thus, it was a matter of observing the market
and getting a feel of the market. Mr. Thomas also said that if pres
sures mounted as anticipated, the System account might be purchasing
bills in moderate amounts during June and in increasing amounts later
on. He thought that there would be a very short period during which
the account might find it necessary to sell any securities and perhaps
not at all. Mr. Thomas also inquired why Mr. Rouse did not feel that
it would be desirable to make sales of the notes maturing in August.
Mr. Rouse said, on the last point, that the only reason he had
suggested that sales be in other securities was that the August notes
have a rights value and that he assumed that the Committee would not

5/9/56 -35
wish to engage in that type of transaction.
Chairman Martin stated that it would seem to him desirable
to avoid sales of the August notes. After further discussion, he
stated that Mr. Thomas' questions pointed up clearly some of the
problems in connection with these two proposals.
Mr. Robertson said that he seriously doubted the need for
sales of securities other than bills or for swaps. He thought the
likelihood of having to make sales from the System account within
the next two weeks was not very great and that after that period
the System would be finding it necessary to buy securities. While
he would have no reluctance to authorizing a move from bills into
the next longer issue of short-term securities, he felt that any
such transactions should take place only when the System found them
to be necessary, and not in advance. He did not think it necessary
to start dealing in securities other than bills today and in fact
would wait to do so until present holdings of bills were exhausted.
Mr. Rouse responded that he did not think there was any dis
agreement between the view expressed by Mr. Robertson and what he had
in mind. He noted that the Committee met at three-week intervals,
that in the interim it might be necessary to effect transactions, and
that the existing authorization is such that he is free to engage in
transactions in short-term securities other than bills. He said that
he wished to bring to the attention of the Committee the situation he

5/9/56 -36-.
had described because he would not wish to effect such transactions
without having discussed the matter with the Committee.
Mr. Robertson referred then to the sixth suggestion regard
ing swaps, stating that he thought it would be very unwise if the
Committee authorized that sort of transaction in the absence of a
clear advance notice to everyone in the market as to what the Com
mittee was doing.
Mr. Sproul said that he did not know what harm could result
from the proposed transactions. The amounts would be so small that
they would not have any effect on the market's knowledge of open
market policy. If the Committee were to deal in other areas of the
market, there might be a question whether it would be interfering
with arbitrage. But when it was dealing only within a 90-day period,
he did not think that the volume of such transactions within a weekly
statement period could possibly cause any danger of a misunderstanding
as to credit policy.
In response to a further question from Mr. Robertson as to
whether harm might result from informing dealers that in the course
of the next month the System contemplated action such as that proposed,
Mr. Sproul said that the danger in such a course was that the System
account would get into the impossible position of trying to explain
each action it took or contemplated taking.
In the course of further discussion, Mr. Robertson suggested
that the question regarding swap transactions be held over until the

5/9/56 -37.
next meeting inasmuch as he would like to have an opportunity to
study the matter further.
Mr. Mills suggested that, until Mr. Rouse had experimented
some, he would not know what his final process would be. It would
be necessary for the Manager of the Account to use his judgment in
carrying out any authorization.
Mr. Sproul said he thought this was somewhat like the question
of dealing in short-term securities other than bills. When the hold
ings of bills in the System account got down to existing levels, the
Manager of the System Account should raise the question. As between
today and two weeks hence, Mr. Sproul said that he did not think the
matter was of importance.
Mr. Shepardson suggested that it might be desirable to authorize
some experimentation during this period so that when the Committee con
sidered it two weeks hence it would have the benefit of the experience
that might be gained.
Mr. Szymczak stated that as long as the Committee was dealing
in bills, it should have a supply of bills of the various maturities
on hand. Therefore, the question was whether the Committee should en
gage in swaps in order to provide such a distribution of maturities.
Chairman Martin said he thought this was a very minor matter.
So far as the objectives were concerned, he would not have any ques
tion about approving the proposal today. This was a matter of judgment
on which there would be differences of opinion on the part of the
members of the Committee as to whether the action proposed was necessary.

5/9/56 -38
The management of the account was quire correct in bringing this to
the attention of the Committee for its judgment. As far as he per
sonally was concerned, Chairman Martin said that he did not like swaps.
He then inquired of Mr. Rouse how important he thought the problem
would be during the next week or two.
Mr. Rouse said that he did not think it a vital matter to
settle today and probably not a vital matter at the next meeting. He
thought it a desirable operation and he would like to get a better
balance in the System account.
Chairman Martin suggested that, since a question had been raised
as to the proposal for swaps and in view of Mr. Rouse's comments that it
was not a vital matter for the next two weeks, action be postponed with
regard to the sixth proposal Mr. Sproul had made. He also suggested
that the Committee indicate its approval of transactions in other short
term securities than bills. He noted that this would be within the Com
mittee's existing instruction to the New York Bank which provided that
transactions for the System account be in the short end of the market,
preferably bills.
No disagreement with Chairman Martin s suggestions was indicated.
Chairman Martin then noted that the next meeting of the Open Mar
ket Committee would be held on Wednesday, May 23, 1956, and he again ex
pressed the hope that Mr. Sproul would be able to attend that meeting,
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.