A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, November 27, 1956, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Johns
Mr. Mills
Mr. Powell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Messrs. Allen, Bryan, Leedy, and Williams, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Leach, Irons, and Mangels, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Dallas, and
San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Abbott, Hostetler, Parsons, Roelse,
Willis, and Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
November 13, 1956, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York

11/27/56 -2
covering open market operations during the period November 9, 1956
through November 20, 1956, and at this meeting a supplementary report
covering commitments executed November 21 through November 26, 1956,
was distributed. Copies of both reports have been placed in the files
of the Committee.
Mr. Rouse said that the past two weeks had presented a difficult
period. It was largely a psychological situation but there has been a
substantial number of transactions in dealers' hands to be worked out,
and there had been an occasional urgent sale, In addition, press stories
suggesting the likelihood of an increase in the discount rate had in
creased the difficulties. The Government securities market had declined
quite sharply during this period with some of the aspects of the 1953
developments but so far there had been no "snowballing." In response
to a question from Mr. Balderston as to whether there had been evidence
of foreign selling, Mr. Rouse responded in the affirmative, stating
that there had been steady selling of Treasury securities from countries
in Western Europe and that it had not been limited to bills.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period November
9 through November 26, 1956, were ap
proved, ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Young made a statement on recent business developments in
which he summarized and supplemented the information given in the staff
memorandum distributed under date of November 23, 1956. His report was
substantially as follows:

11/27/56
Despite the shortness of time since the last meeting,
late information does add a little to that reported then.
For instance, it is now clearer that the economic effects
of the Middle East crisis are very serious and will not
soon be overcome. Domestically, momentum of business ad
vance is further confirmed. At the same time, some data
"straws in the wind" are suggestive of possible slackening
of economic advance later.
As to specifics:
In Western Europe, petroleum shortages have already
led to consumption cutbacks; a 20 per cent reduction in
oil consumption for a six-month period is in prospect;
some scare buying has developed in consumer markets in
several countries; and balance of payments strains for
both Britain and France have intensified. International
shipping rates have risen sharply further.
In this country, industrial prices have continued to
show an upward tendency. The price advance for fabricated
items has been extended and prices of basic industrial
materials have also risen, in part because of Middle East
crisis. For industrial products, the price rise from mid
October to mid-November, was 1/2 per cent or about the same
as in the preceding month. The average of wholesale prices
continued stable, reflecting the effect of offsetting de
clines in farm prices. Lower farm prices resulted mainly
from seasonal reductions in prices of livestock.
Consumer prices to mid-October showed about the same
rise as mid-August to mid-September, and will possibly show
as much again to mid-November. This will mean that over a
million workers or more will get a 2 to 3 cent an hour cost
of-living advance the first pay period of December. Another
million approximately will become eligible for a 3-cent cost
of-living wage increase in January. Some 3-1/2 to 4 million
workers are now covered by cost-of-living clauses in union
wage agreements.
Current data on industrial output point to a further
gain in the Board's index for November of 1 or 2 index points,
pushing the index into new high ground. Durable goods
activity accounts for most of this up push, but nondurable
goods output, especially in textile lines, is also showing
further rise this month.
New automobile sales have shown strengthening this month
in response to new model introductions, and used car sales
have about held stable. Advertised prices of used cars, after
allowance for depreciation, remain at about last month's
levels, indicating considerable strength in the used car mar
ket. Used car prices typically recede when new models are
introduced.

11/27/56
Department store sales have finally shown strong upward
rebound, and with sales of auto dealers on the uptrend, Novem
ber retail sales should show an appreciable rise over a year
ago. In October, they were barely 2 per cent ahead of October
a year ago.
October reports from FHA, VA, and FNMA field offices have
just become available. While construction and mortgage money
conditions are reported still tighter and builders plans are
said to continue downward, some other factors are on the stronger
side. Residential construction costs held steady for the second
consecutive month as did also new home selling time; sales of
existing houses are reported to have improved.
Preliminary estimates of total national product for the
fourth quarter are placing the figure at $422 billion, up about
$8 billion from the third quarter and $20 billion or 5 per cent
from a year ago. About half of the GNP rise over the year, of
course, represents price rise.
Among the informational "straws in the wind, the following
are the main items
The value of contract awards was off significantly in
October. Awards for residential construction were off most
but awards for industrial and public utility construction were
also off considerably. This showing of contract awards may
merely reflect a shifting seasonal pattern, for the awards
series, as is well known, is highly variable.
Informal and highly preliminary reports on the McGraw-Hill
plant and equipment expenditure survey suggest that the final
report will point to only a small percentage rise in expenditures
in 1957 from present levels. Indications in last fall's survey
were that these expenditures might be expected to show an appre
ciable further rise in 1957.
In last meeting's report, attention was called to the present
stage of inventory development. Data on business inventory posi
tions are far from satisfactory for current appraisal purposes,
in part because of complexity of measurement. On a value basis,
it seems clear that inventories relative to sales are now con
siderably higher than a year ago and about the same as in the
first part of 1953. Conditions are, of course, quite different
as between the two periods, for one thing because national
security expenditures were being cut back in early 1953 while
currently they are expanding a little. At the same time, in
ventory abundance at a stage of full momentum with intensive
resource utilization, suggests that inventory trends need close
watching.
Another "straw in the wind" is to be found in the renewed
rise of business failures in October, Number of failures from

11/27/56
May to September ran about a fifth higher than earlier and
failure liabilities also averaged about this same percentage
higher but showed more month to month change. In September,
failures in number and liabilities fell sharply. In October,
they have risen again to a new postwar high. This level,
however, is still a little under that of the late thirties.
Finally, the number of corporate earnings reports reflect
ing a cost-profit squeeze continues to increase, Of a sample
of 388 large manufacturing companies whose earnings reports
are followed by the Board's staff, more than two-fifths re
ported lower third quarter earnings than last year.
Against these informational "straws in the wind," one must
keep in mind the uncertain potentialities of the Middle East
crisis. In the existing state of nonwar, outbreak of hostili
ties is a possibility constantly to be reckoned with. For war
prevention objectives, some step-up in the Government's military ex
penditures may be unavoidable over the months ahead. Such a
step-up would work to sustain or even increase demand pressures
in the economy.
Following a brief discussion of the decrease in profits of many
corporations in the third quarter of this year and of the rise in busi
ness failures during October, Chairman Martin asked Mr. Thomas for a
summary of credit developments and prospects, and he made the following
statement:
The most striking recent financial development has been
the sharp decline in Treasury bond prices during the last few
days. This has been accompanied by a rise in Treasury bill
rates to a new high level, which has occurred despite a
relatively easy reserve position for member banks as a group.
As pointed out by one market commentator and suggested by
others, the Federal Reserve does not have to impose additional
restraints--the existing ones are severe enough.
The bond market is once again going through the process
of dropping to a new level and this process is always an ordeal
until a level is reached at which transactions are resumed.
The current decline in Treasury bond prices was preceded by
sharp decreases in prices of corporate and of State and
municipal bonds, and by higher offering yields on new issues.
In contrast to earlier periods of declining bond prices,
stock prices have also been weak.
Explanation for this market behavior can be found
largely in the analysis of the economic situation already

11/27/56
presented to you. The weight of the evidence indicates that
demands for goods and services are likely to continue press
ing against the limits of supply. This means that the demands
for credit will continue to be equally pressing. At the same
time, credit availability is probably more restricted than it
has been previously. Banks are somewhat less willing to borrow
to expand their loans; they have largely run out of liquid
assets to sell; and to sell longer-term securities would in
volve severe losses. Other financial institutions are also
having difficulty in selling Government securities to acquire
other loans and investments that are available. Nonfinancial
corporations are not buying bills and other short-term securi
ties to the same extent as they were a year ago, because they
have other uses for their funds and are having difficulty in
borrowing in the market for capital expenditures.
It is possible that some would-be borrowers are appre
hensive of even tighter credit conditions and are anticipating
needs, thus helping to bring on the situation they fear. If
this were occurring, however, the excess funds might come back
into the short-term market and there is as yet no evidence of
such a movement. Banks and other investors, in fear of higher
interest rates and in order to take losses for tax purposes,
may be attempting to liquidate bonds regardless of price and
without the offsetting purchases that characterize tax swaps.
Another element of money market pressure has been the con
tinued tight reserve positions of New York and Chicago banks,
notwithstanding the easier situation for member banks as a
group.
Business financial pressures have continued strong through
out the year. While income tax payments are relatively low in
this period, advance provision must be made for the heavy tax
payments that will be required in the first half of next year.
Moreover financing of customers through accounts receivable
usually increases sharply at this time of the year, Short
term financing needs slackened in summer and early fall, as
the rate of inventory accumulation was reduced, but plant and
equipment expenditures have continued to rise.
Internal sources of funds have not kept pace with these
financing requirements. Profits in the second half have been
lower than in the first half of the year and below those in
the second half of 1955, while increased dividend payments
have largely offset the further growth in retained deprecia
tion allowances. Reductions in liquid asset balances and
increased short-term borrowing earlier in the year had reduced
corporate liquidity by mid-1956 to the lowest point in the
postwar period, and the need to restore liquidity and to
provide for future tax payments has limited further financing

11/27/56
from these sources. Business needs for external financing,
particularly for long-term funds, have therefore remained
strong since midyear, and flotations of securities have
been in record volume.
Treasury cash financing and refunding operations that
have been hanging over the market have been completed for
this year. Perhaps the market has felt that there may have
been some nursing of it which can be ended now that Treasury
needs are met. Views as to the prospects for a budget sur
plus have been undergoing some scrutiny recently. In view
of higher income estimates, it seems likely that, barring
a tax cut, budget receipts will exceed the estimates of the
midyear Budget Review for fiscal 1957, and will increase
further in fiscal 1958. There has been some discussion,
however, of a tax cut for small corporations that might
carry with it other cuts.
Prospects for expenditures are still uncertain. There
are intimations of some increase over previous estimates in
spending for defense purposes, and additional expenditures
are in prospect for the new highway program and for old-age
benefit payments. Interest costs are rising and agricultural
programs are still an uncertain element.
Present indications are that there will be some surplus
if taxes are not reduced and it may even be big enough to
undermine objections to a tax cut. Hence the balancing ef
fect of a budget surplus and further public debt retirement
upon expansion in other sectors for the coming year is still
not assured.
Results of recent Treasury financing operations provide
a June maturity of only $1.3 billion of tax certificates,
whereas funds available for debt retirement in that month
may be as much as $4 or $5 billion. Hence the refinancing
scheduled for January and February can include some addi
tional June maturities.
Total loans and investments of city banks have in
creased somewhat in the past four weeks, largely because of
bank purchases of the new special bill issue in the latest
week. Eliminating that change, a largely seasonal expansion
in business loans was approximately offset by a reduction in
investments. The commercial loan increase of about $650
million was little less than that in the same period last
year, but the other types of loans showed little change
this year in contrast to substantial increases a year ago
in real estate and consumer loans. Hence the increase in
total loans has continued less than a year ago. Bank sales
of Government securities (eliminating the recent bill

11/27/56
purchase) have also been smaller than they were at this
time last year.
Bank deposit growth in recent weeks has apparently
not been up to usual seasonal amounts. Currency in cir
culation, however, after lagging somewhat in October, has
subsequently shown a greater than seasonal increase. Turn
over of bank deposits continued at a high level in October.
Net borrowed reserves of member banks have been at a
relatively low level during the past two or three weeks,
notwithstanding a substantial increase in required reserves
in connection with sales of the special Treasury bill around
the middle of November. Float generally has continued at a
relatively high level. System purchases of bills, including
those acquired under repurchase contracts, have increased by
$470 million since the end of October.
In order to cover usual heavy needs for reserves in
December and keep net borrowed reserves below $200 million,
the System will need to acquire an additional $$00 million
of bills during the next two weeks. Some of these may be
supplied through additional repurchase contracts, which
are profitable for dealers when the bill rate is above the
Federal Reserve repurchase rate. In view of the delicate
state of the market and the special needs for considerable
liquidity, at this time of the year, it would seem appro
priate to keep net borrowed reserves at $200 million or
even lower through December.
In response to a question from Chairman Martin, Mr. Thomas said
that it appeared that the increase in the money supply during calendar
year 1956 would approximate 1-1/2 per cent if current projections were
realized.
Chairman Martin next turned to discussion of open market policy
and at his request Mr. Hayes expressed his views on the situation and
the policy that he would recommend. Mr. Hayes' statement was as follows:
1. There seems to be little that's new to report in
the general business and credit situation since our meet
ing two weeks ago. In most branches of activity the econ
omy is still expanding, although housing is an important
exception. Full consequences of the Suez crisis are still
none too clear. However, the likelihood of oil shipments
to Europe has reversed the previous downtrend of oil prices,

11/27/56
the probability of a new tanker program may add to the
demand for steel over an extended period, and defense
expenditures are likely to increase in fiscal 1958 and
perhaps toward the end of fiscal 1957. The Middle East
situation undoubtedly still contains explosive possi
bilities calling for a watchful attitude on our part.
2. Residential construction prospects continue to
deteriorate. October housing awards were off 16% from a
year ago, and gains in nonresidential awards were insuf
ficient to prevent a decline of 8% in total construction
awards. Most forecasts point to some further declines in
housing activity next year.
3. Retail trade, while admittedly at a high level,
has been less buoyant than might be expected under present
conditions of high output, employment, and income. Depart
ment store sales in New York, after showing a sharp rise
in the week ended November 17, turned down again last week,
and for the last 4 weeks were 1 per cent below a year ago.
Domestic auto sales for 1957 are now estimated at about
6.5 million units--10% more than in 1956--but this can
hardly be considered better than an informed guess at this
early stage of the season.
4. While optimism is certainly dominant in the views
expressed by most business economists, it is interesting
to note that the median figure for the Federal Reserve Board
index of industrial production recently forecast by a group
of the System's own business economists was 148 for the
second quarter of 1957-representing a gain over the present
figure which would be scarcely in line with long term normal
growth.
5. As for capital expenditures, a number of national
and regional surveys point to a gain of about 10% in 1957
over 1956, but this would imply no gain over current levels.
As we have previously noted, there is accumulating evidence
that the boom in capital investment may be cresting out in
1957.
6. Since the last meeting there has been further sub
stantiation of the reversal in the decline in business loans
which had prevailed through most of October. It seems
probable that the expansion of such loans witnessed in recent
weeks will continue through the rest of the fourth quarter,
but the total gain for the quarter for all member banks
appears likely to be somewhat smaller than in the fourth
quarter of 1955. In recent weeks banks have experienced a
further loss of liquidity through sales of U. S. Government
securities, although their holdings of Treasury bills have
now been increased somewhat by the latest special issue.

11/27/56 -10-
The banks in the central money markets are still in an
extremely tight position. On a national basis our
projections now point to net borrowed reserves of $48
million in the current statement week, $07 million in
the week of December 5th, and $713 million in the week
of December 12th.
7. With the recent refunding out of the way, we hope
that the Treasury's financial requirements will no longer
need to be a major consideration in the determination of
monetary policy, as they have been during most of the last
two months. On the other hand, the capital markets are in
a highly sensitive state, with a sizable calendar of offer
ings still overhanging the market and with unusually diffi
cult marketing conditions causing confusion in the municipal,
and to some extent in the corporate, market. Moreover, there
are some indications that U. S. Government bond yields are
still out of line with those obtainable on corporate and
municipal bonds. These sensitive conditions are accentuated
by doubts as to whether current Treasury bill rates point
to the likelihood of a further discount advance. Those
doubts were intensified, and not diminished, by a purported
System statement on the Dow-Jones ticker on Friday, Novem
ber 23, which has been interpreted as confirmation that the
System has up to now regarded a further rise as necessary,
and is only postponing that action temporarily. Pressure
on prices of both bills and the new certificates seems to
result chiefly from lack of sizable investor demand rather
than from any heavy selling, although selling is currently
picking up in intermediate and longer term areas, contribut
ing to the further downward price movements in that part of
the market.
8. Credit restraint seems now to be taking hold more
severely than at any time in the past two years. We can
see no justification for any increase in the recent degree
of restraint in view of the uncertainties both in the
domestic economy and in the international outlook. We would
be opposed to any increase of the discount rate at this time,
and we feel that any suggestion of an increase should be
avoided as potentially disruptive of the money and securities
markets. In the area of open market operations, the System
should buy Treasury bills quite liberally in the next three
weeks to prevent seasonal needs from generating greater
restraint than now exists. We think it would be desirable
for the System account to make these purchases day by day
in relatively moderate amounts on each operation so that
it may enter the market frequently as a buyer, In fact, we

11/27/56 -11
would not hesitate to buy amounts in excess of those
needed to offset seasonal factors, in an effort to keep
the disturbed conditions now prevailing in the security
markets from developing into a disorderly situation. In
order to emphasize the importance of preventing an inten
sification of present pressures because of seasonal in
fluences, we would suggest that the directive might be
changed by amending part (b) of the first paragraph to
read "to restraining inflationary developments in the
interest of sustainable economic growth, while avoiding
further pressures in the money, credit, and securities
markets resulting from seasonal factors."
Mr. Johns said that he would continue to characterize the
economy as one of full employment at or approaching capacity in many
respects. There were elements in the picture that should be taken as
counseling moderation in any attempt to strengthen the Committee's
restrictive policy, however. Parts of the economic review presented
by Mr. Young suggested that soft spots might develop in the economy
in the future. The upward movement that had been confidently forecast
by many as a post-election development had not yet become evident.
The international situation also created uncertainties in the outlook.
In these uncertain circumstances, Mr. Johns said, he would be inclined
to make no overt changes in policy. We were approaching a difficult
year-end situation and actions by the Committee should not accentuate
these problems. The Committee would have to supply reserves over the
year-end after which it would have to absorb a considerable volume of
reserves, Mr. Johns noted. He agreed with Mr. Hayes that the present
effects of the restrictive policy were perhaps biting deeper than they
had been and that their cumulative effects were becoming quite easily

11/27/56 -12
observable. The impaired liquidity of banks and the failure of
bank credit to expand seasonally this fall indicated that the re
strictive policy had taken firm hold. Mr. Johns said that a change
in discount rate should not be undertaken at this time and that the
reserves that would be needed toward the year-end should be supplied
without reluctance.
Mr. Bryan reported no marked developments in the Sixth Dis
trict; the economy was continuing to expand but at a slackening pace
with an evident tightening of credit. On the national picture, the
situation was complex. We were having one of the wildest capital
goods booms that had ever been seen, superimposed on a consumer spend
ing boom which in turn was superimposed on a demand for more leisure
on the part of the American public. It was difficult to know what
the Committee's policy should be, Mr. Bryan said; the short-term
situation was almost certainly inflationary with price rises and cost
rises occurring across the board. However, the long-run situation
complicated the Committee's problem immensely and raised a question
as to what the Committee now should do. The economy was rather
clearly developing excess capacities in many lines attributable to
the present capital goods boom. There was excess capacity in textiles,
farm implement, and other industries including probably the automobile
industry. Shortly there probably would be excess capacity in the build
ing materials industry. This poses the classical problem as to what
monetary policy should be when the short-run and long-run problems

11/27/56 -13
give possibly different indications. This problem is similar to
that of knowing how to use monetary policy when a boom is caused
by a segmented expansion in one sector of the economy or by a
geographically localized situation.
Mr. Bryan's conclusion was that the Committee should not now
ease its present restrictive policy. He doubted whether overt action
should be taken in the form of a change in discount rates at the
moment since such action would signal a shift toward a tighter policy,
but he would not wish to preclude the idea that the System might be
compelled to further discount rate action before we were through with
the capital goods boom. Mr. Bryan felt that open market operations
should be directed toward maintaining at least the present degree of
restraint and certainly not easing it. As to guideposts that should
be used in open market operations in order to maintain that degree of
restraint, he would take into account the behavior of the capital
markets at the present time and would not supply reserves in amounts
that would cause these capital markets to rise or that would prevent
what he felt was a very constructive and necessary readjustment as
between short- and long-term interest rates. The Committee obviously
would wish to take action to prevent the appearance of disorder in
the capital markets.
Mr. Williams summarized developments in the Philadelphia Dis
trict as reported on the basis of field surveys among bankers and other

11/27/56 -14
businessmen. Their attitude seemed to be that "we have tight money;
probably we need it; let's live with it." Mr. Williams also suggested
that it was somewhat surprising that there was no great opposition to
current credit policy in Philadelphia since the restraint seemed to
be more effective among city than among country banks. There was,
however, some evidence of apprehension in academic circles as to the
dilemma the central bank might find itself in in trying to maintain
full employment on the one hand and stable prices on the other.
Mr. Williams went on to say that the crucial question was
whether additional restraint seemed appropriate in view of recent
developments. The rise in the bill rate above the discount rate was
not in itself sufficient reason for an increase at this time, he said,
but if the bill rate were to continue above the discount rate for
some time the case for an increase in discount rate would become
stronger. In view of the present weakness in the capital markets
and the possibility that the position of the bill rate above the
discount rate was only temporary as a result of the recent Treasury
financing, and taking into account the pressure that would develop
on reserves during the next few weeks, Mr. Williams felt it desirable
to watch developments closely before taking any action toward addi
tional restraint. He also commented that timing was always important
in policy actions and he observed that money markets always tighten
up seasonally toward the end of the year. For this reason and be
cause of other developments that could be expected during the next

11/27/56 -15
few weeks, his view was that reasons for changes in monetary policy
should be more compelling at the present time than ordinarily. Thus,
we might find that conditions after the turn of the year (but before
the February 15 Treasury financing operation) would offer a more
"normal" environment for considering a change in policy. Mr. Williams
concluded that open market operations should be conducted with a view
to seasonal developments, that the Committee should be especially
sensitive to the possibility of developments that might take place in
the capital markets, and that the System should not at this time make
a change in discount rates.
Mr. Fulton said that activity in the Cleveland District was
continuing at a very high rate. He commented on conditions in a
number of individual industries, stating that there was no widespread
indication of fear of a downturn among businessmen. Inventories were
increasing somewhat but this was necessary for various industries if
they were to be in a position to make reasonable deliveries of their
products. Plant and equipment expenditures continued at a very high
rate and this might bring about overcapacity in some industries.
Demand for bank loans continued high, Mr. Fulton said, but he noted
that insurance companies were resuming the purchase of mortgages that
had been committed to them. Mr. Fulton felt it would be completely
inappropriate to make any change in discount rate at this time.
Existence of the bill rate at a level slightly above the discount
rate was not disturbing to him feeling it was influenced by the

11/27/56 -16
Treasury's recent financing. He felt there should be no apparent
relaxation of pressure on the market but funds needed for the year
end should be supplied willingly. While the Committee should make
no change of policy, it should be alert to the needs of the financial
community.
Mr. Robertson agreed that this was a very difficult period and
he also agreed that the restrictive policy which the Committee had been
following was probably biting harder now than at any time thus far. He
felt, however, that the state of business activity was such that the
Committee should not show any evidence of easing its policy. It should
provide for seasonal needs as had been suggested but in doing so should
maintain the same degree of restrictiveness that had been applied during
the recent period. Mr. Robertson also said that now was not the appro
priate time for a change in the discount rate, although that might be
come desirable shortly. If this approach were to be followed, he could
see no need for changing the directive at this meeting.
Mr. Mills said that in his opinion the difficult position of
the United States Government securities market had a first claim on
the Committee's attention. In terms of policy action this would mean
that second place should be given to consideration of setting any
particular level of negative or positive free reserves. In elaborating
on these views, Mr. Mills made a statement as follows
The extreme weakness in the U. S. Government securities
market can be attributed to

11/27/6 -17-
1. Cumulative seasonal pressures which have acted to
remove buying interest both for Treasury bills and longer
term U. S. Government securities.
2. Congestion in the market for new securities where
available investment funds are insufficient to clear the
actual and potential supply of securities.
This is the type of situation that can lead to a crisis
of confidence and a disorderly market unless the Federal Re
serve System intervenes aggressively. This intervention
should be in the form of stepped-up purchases of Treasury
bills calculated to supply new reserves to a point in volume
that will
1. Bring the yield on Treasury bills down to the dis
count rate, or below, and thereby signal that the System has
no early intention of raising the discount rate.
2. Provide the commercial banks with a margin of re
serves that will serve to assist in the retention of their
present holdings of U. S. Government and other securities
and thereby remove market concern as to the possibility of
a further commercial bank divestment of securities with a
resultant market pressure. A margin of new reserves in the
hands of commercial banks would also permit them to extend
a modest amount of new credit to security dealers undertaking
the issuance and distribution of new security offerings. In
combination, the provision of reserves that will permit the
commercial banks to retain their present holdings of securi
ties and to participate moderately in the distribution of
new offerings of securities should communicate strength to
the prices of longer term securities and tend to restore
market confidence.
3. Strengthen the liquidity of the commercial banks.
Although the actions recommended will inject new reserves
into the commercial banks, the existence of high loan-to-de
posit ratios will act as a sufficient restraint to prevent any
unwise expansion of bank credit and, in any event, the first
step that commercial banks can be expected to take before
considering expanding their loans will be to improve their
liquidity. Under these circumstances it is, as indicated,
unlikely that the acquisition of new reserves will stimulate
an undesirable expansion of bank credit at this time.
In net result, the effect of the System policy actions
proposed should be that of having given general support to
the U. S. Government securities market in order to relieve
seasonal pressures and to permit the commercial banks
adequate reserve leeway with which to clear up the tight
spots in the securities and credit markets. There should
be ample time after the turn of the year for the System to
reverse the actions proposed at this time if it should

11/27/56 -18
develop that a greater volume of reserves had been provided
than was necessary to accomplish the objectives sought after.
Mr. Vardaman concurred in the remarks that had been made by the
several Presidents who had spoken this morning and specifically stated
that he was whole-heartedly in agreement with the statement made by Mr.
Hayes. Also, he was in agreement with what he understood to be the
implications of Mr. Mills' statement.
Mr. Leach said that the Fifth District economy was showing a
little less price pressure than was found in some other areas. Cost
increases were occurring in soft goods industries but at a slower rate
than in heavy goods industries of other districts, where both negotiated
and automatic wage increases have had greater effects. Even the smaller
Fifth District increase could not, in the case of cotton textiles, be
passed on in the form of higher prices, Mr. Leach said, although bi
tuminous coal producers were able to pass on their higher wage costs
to consumers.
On the national level, Mr. Leach felt that the only workable
assumption for the Committee's purpose was that the Middle East situa
tion would continue to create uncertainties for some months. These
might well produce some increase in expansionary pressures, but avail
able data reveal no significant change in the phase of business
activity in recent weeks.
Mr. Leach did not think that the prospective developments
warranted a change in credit policy at this time, and conditions
in the capital and money markets were such that any added restraint

11/27/56 -19
now might add to difficulties. Consequently, he did not favor an
increase in restraint. Neither would he wish to see any decrease
in restraint. This would mean that there should be neither a change
in the discount rate, nor should there be a change in the feel of
the market. We know that announced capital issues have been post
poned, he said, and it seems probable that many unannounced issues
have also been postponed or cancelled. At the moment, it was Mr.
Leach's feeling that monetary policy was accomplishing all that
could reasonably be expected from it and that the possible gain
from an attempt to increase tightness would be more than offset by
the risk of undesirable developments in the securities markets.
Mr. Leedy said that he had no new information to report with
respect to economic activity in the Tenth District. He noted, how
ever, that in Oklahoma there would be some shifting of deposits at
the end of the month connected with the ad valorem tax assessment,
and that this had already been reflected in a rise in borrowings
from the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
With respect to credit policy, Mr. Leedy said the domestic
situation gave no basis for applying additional pressure. Rate of
growth in almost every segment, including the credit field, had
slowed down. The foreign situation complicated the picture but
did not seem to call for additional restraint. He would not rule
out the possibility that the bill rate may stay above the discount
rate only temporarily. Projections indicated large amounts of

11/27/56 -20
reserves would be needed between now and the end of the year to
prevent an increase in restraint, and Mr. Leedy said that he could
see no objection to the course proposed by Mr. Hayes for open mar
ket operations during the immediate future. He felt that the manage
ment of the account should be given ample latitude during this period
so that the System would not contribute to any further demoralization
in the Government securities market.
Mr. Allen stated that expectations of a large harvest in the
Seventh District were being realized and that industrial production
was at a high level, reflecting in part the Detroit automobile situa
tion. He noted that the industry now expected automobile production
of 6-1/2 million passenger cars during the forthcoming model year,
and that it was estimated that this might result in a rise of about
2 to 2-1/2 billion in automobile credit outstanding. After commenting
on other factors in the Seventh District business and financial pic
ture, Mr. Allen said that he would not favor a more restrictive credit
policy at this time, and he certainly would not favor any easing of
policy. He agreed with Mr. Hayes' recommendations for open market
operations during the next two weeks.
After commenting on the Ninth District business and financial
picture, Mr. Powell noted that nationally December was a month in
which the Committee could permit restraints other than monetary re
straint to have a major part in the restraining influence that seemed
to be necessary. Retail inventories would begin to press on prices in

11/27/56 -21.
certain areas and this would produce a degree of the restraint that
was needed. He agreed with Mr. Mills that the Open Market Committee
had a major responsibility to keep the Government securities market
from becoming disorderly, stating that it would be desirable for the
System account to purchase Treasury bills rather liberally at the
present time, buying them somewhat in advance of the seasonal needs
that were going to develop between now and the year end. Mr. Powell
would not wish to see the discount rate increased at this time, adding
that the Committee should aim at keeping the business situation on an
even keel.
Mr. Mangels said that the Twelfth District economy continued
at the same high level he had reported at other recent meetings. He
agreed with the suggestion Mr. Hayes had made on the policy that
should be followed during the next two weeks. He also concurred with
the views expressed by a number of those present that the System
should not increase the degree of restraint at this time but should
supply reserves freely and willingly during the period immediately
ahead. On the discount rate, Mr. Mangels said that his opinion was
that there should be no change now. The executive committee of the
San Francisco Bank would meet tomorrow, he said, and he felt sure
there would be no action to change the rate at that time. However,
a meeting of the directors of the San Francisco Bank was scheduled
for December 13 and there was some indication that some of the di
rectors might then suggest an increase. What the outcome of that

11/27/56 -22
discussion would be, he, of course, could not know at this time, Mr.
Mangels said, and his recommendations would depend on developments
between now and mid-December. Mr. Mangels concurred in the suggested
change in wording of clause (b) of the directive as proposed by Mr.
Hayes, stating, however, that he did not think it was particularly
essential to make such a change.
Mr. Irons said that there had been little change in the situa
tion in the Dallas District during the last month or two and that
activities were continuing at a high level. He could see no change
in the national picture that called for a modification of credit policy
at this time. An element of strength in the outlook for 1957 was the
expectation of continued large capital expenditures. While there ap
peared to be no reason for easing policy at this time, Mr. Irons felt
that the Committee should give the management of the account substantial
leeway to act during the next several weeks. Tone and feel of the mar
ket would be most important during this period, Mr. Irons said, and he
could see no objection to putting $400 or $500 million into the market
between now and the year end on the basis of the projections that had
been prepared. He would not favor a change in discount rate now nor
would he favor any other overt action to indicate a shift in credit
policy.
Mr, Erickson said he had no additional information to report
concerning activity in the Boston District. He referred to views ex
pressed at an economic roundup recently which forecast a rise in gross

11/27/56 -23
national production and in the Board's production index during the
first half of 1957, as well as an increase in the level of wholesale
prices. He also told of discussions with an insurance company execu
tive last week who reported a rise in the volume of policy loans, and
he suggested that this indicated an increasing effect of restrictive
monetary policy which was causing some persons to borrow for payment
of taxes and others to borrow on life insurance policies because the
banks were tightening up on their loans to individuals. In addition,
the insurance company executive stated that they had reviewed their
policy on forward commitments as had some other insurance companies,
and were taking a more realistic position at present, which Mr.
Erickson understood meant they were not committing themselves so far
in the future as they had in the past. As for credit policy, Mr.
Erickson said, he would favor no change in the directive at this time
nor would he change the discount rate now. He agreed with the course
suggested by Mr. Hayes for open market operations for the next two
weeks.
Mr. Szymczak said that the two points made by Messrs. Hayes
and Mills merited serious consideration. First, he felt that if the
directive was to be changed that should have been done about a month
ago, when we began to supply reserves to meet seasonal and Treasury
requirements, but whether the Committee should change it now or
whether it would be better to wait for developments during December
and consider the matter again in January was a question . Mr. Hayes'

11/27/56 -24
suggested change would apparently call for nothing different from
what the Committee was now doing. His own inclination was to lean
toward the use of the broad language in the present directive so
as to avoid the necessity for changing it too frequently to meet
temporary situations. He felt that changes in the language of the
directive should be used to indicate a more fundamental change in
policy than was called for at this time.
The second point had to do with the Government securities
market. Mr. Szymczak commented that this was one of the Committee's
problems that had been with it ever since the Committee came into
existence. He felt we had to take it into account realistically but
it was a question of the extent to which the Committee should help
the Government securities market and of the extent to which it should
do only what was required in terms of monetary policy. He referred
to earlier wording in the Committee's directives to operate with a
view to an orderly Government security market and stated that it had
been difficult for the System to get away from that consideration
which with time became major.
As to the discount rate, Mr. Szymczak said that to some extent
the market had already discounted an increase of 1/ of a per cent in
the rate. However, he did not recommend an increase at this time.
The System, he said, should not disturb the markets further by an
action that would be looked upon as a dramatic step that would confirm
to some the view that the System felt additional restraint was needed

11/27/56 -25
Mr. Szymczak said that he would favor a program under which the Com
mittee would not go as far as Mr. Mills seemed to suggest but which
would move in the direction in which the Committee has been moving
for several weeks, that is, a program that would continue bill pur
chases between now and the end of the year.
Mr. Balderston said that Mr. Bryan had set forth the problem
that had been concerning him. This certainly was not an appropriate
moment for overt changes in monetary policy. Consequently, until the
next meeting he would continue the present degree of restraint aiming
at net borrowed reserves of around $200 million without a change in
either the Committee's directive or in the discount rate. Mr.
Balderston went on to say that he thought the Committee should be
prepared for an emergency meeting or for a telephone hookup in the
event of a disorderly securities market. If such a market should
develop, he felt it important that the Committee not act prematurely.
As to the long run, Mr. Balderston said that he felt sure
there was a fundamental change in the foreign and domestic outlook.
The impact of the change on the domestic economy was not yet clear
but it seemed to him probable that much of what Mr. Bryan had indi
cated would come to pass. If so, this would increase the strains
in the domestic economy, especially in the metals and metal produc
tion industries. The inflationary pressure would be increased in
this country at the very time the European economy was being starved

11/27/56 .26.
for oil and some raw materials. Abroad, he foresaw a downturn of
productivity as inevitable, a downturn that would most certainly
be accompanied by cost and price rises, by a possible devaluation
of currencies, and by pleas to the United States for financial and
material assistance. These pleas, plus a step-up in military appro
priations in this country, would cause Governmental expenditures to
rise substantially during the next year. Mr. Balderston expressed
concern that the nation was entering this situation loaded with debt
and other commitments. Both inflationary and deflationary aspects
are likely to occur simultaneously, and he did not think that general
monetary controls alone would prove adequate. They would need to be
strongly supported by fiscal policy. Mr. Balderston suggested that
it was none too soon for the Treasury to plan steps that would cause
the budget surplus to increase next year. Only if fiscal policy served
as a full partner of monetary policy would it be possible to minimize
the inflation. Mr. Balderston said he could see nothing that this
Committee could do today to prepare for what he felt was an inevitable
sickness abroad, but it seemed none too early to prompt the Treasury
to make plans to prevent the disappearance of the budget surplus.
After Mr. Hayes, at Chairman Martin's request, re-read his
suggested change in clause (b) of the Committee's directive, the
Chairman said that while he did not think the matter of great importance,
he favored the change. He felt it desirable that the wording of the
directive not get frozen, and he believed there had been shades of

11/27/56 -27
change in what the Committee had been doing. He had vacillated back
and forth a number of times in the past few weeks as to what was
called for. He agreed with Mr. Bryan that short-term and long-term
problems presented a dilemma as to the role of monetary policy.
Chairman Martin said he also agreed with Mr. Mills that at the end
of the year the capital and securities markets would become of major
importance in the atmosphere in which the Committee was operating.
To recognize this did not mean that the Committee wished to move
toward a peg in the Government securities market. The Committee
might have to put double the amount of reserves in the market, how
ever, if it permitted a situation to develop too far before providing
some additional reserves. His views were still colored, Chairman
Martin said, by what happened at the end of 1951. He hoped the Com
mittee would not let the market get away from it at this point.
However, this did not mean that we needed to make overt changes in
policy and he did not think there was any specific level of net
borrowed reserves that offered a guidepost to bring about the de
sired situation. As Mr. Irons had pointed out, the Committee should
be prepared in managing the System account to be alert to the amount
of reserves that would be needed in the market between now and the
end of the year.
Chairman Martin said that the Committee need not try to fore
cast business too far in advance but he felt that it should come to

11/27/56 -28
some conclusion as to the outlook. Since his return from Europe
early this month he had been trying to reach a conclusion on this
point and on the relationship of developments in the Middle East
to our domestic situation. He believed it too early to say that
the boom had ended in Europe. However, factors might be developing
which would bring about a decline in business and the Committee
should bear that in mind. He was not weakening in his conviction
that the elements for growth in our economy were still with us,
but a minor cyclical movement might be developing.
Turning to current policy, Chairman Martin said that while
there seemed to be minor differences of opinion at this meeting, in
general the consensus was surprisingly good. For his part he would
favor a change in the wording of the directive along the lines Mr.
Hayes had suggested.
Mr. Hayes again read his proposed change, which would supple
ment the existing words, "to restraining inflationary developments in
the interest of sustainable economic growth," by adding "while avoid
ing further pressures in the money, credit, and securities markets
resulting from seasonal factors."
Mr. Mills said that he felt the change Mr. Hayes had suggested
in the directive would be desirable as a means of expressing in the
record an indication that the Committee was alert to the kind of
pressures that developed each year end. Such wording of the directive
would indicate that the Committee was proceeding in a way that would

11/27/56 -29
modify these year-end developments.
Mr. Vardaman concurred in the views expressed by Chairman
Martin and Mr. Mills, stating that it seemed to him important that
the record show that the Committee recognized recent developments
and their possible effect on the economy.
There followed a general discussion of the change that Mr.
Hayes had proposed in the wording of clause (b) of the directive
during which the consensus of comments indicated that some modifica
tion of the existing wording would be desirable. After considering
various suggestions, there was agreement that clause (b) of the first
paragraph of the Committee's directive should be changed to indicate
that operations for the System account should be with a view among
other things "to restraining inflationary developments in the interest
of sustainable economic growth, while recognizing additional pressures
in the money, credit, and capital markets resulting from seasonal
factors and international conditions."
Mr. Rouse stated, in response to Chairman Martin's question,
that he had no suggestions for other changes in the Committee's direc
tive.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the following directive to the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, with the
modification in clause (b) set forth
above, was approved:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges
(including replacement of maturing securities, and

11/27/56 -30-
allowing maturities to run off without replacement) for
the System open market account in the open market or, in
the case of maturing securities, by direct exchange with
the Treasury, as may be necessary in the light of current
and prospective economic conditions and the general credit
situation of the country, with a view (a) to relating the
supply of funds in the market to the needs of commerce and
business, (b) to restraining inflationary developments in
the interest of sustainable economic growth, while recogniz
ing additional pressures in the money, credit, and capital
markets resulting from seasonal factors and international
conditions, and (c)t o the practical administration of the
account; provided that the aggregate amount of securities
held in the System account (including commitments for the
purchase or sale of securities for the account) at the close
of this date, other than special short-term certificates of
indebtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be increased or
decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with
discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue
participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such
amounts of special short-term certificates of indebtedness
as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total
amount of such certificates held at any one time by the
Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate
$500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System
account for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury
securities maturing within one year as may be necessary
from time to time for the accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such securities so sold
shall not exceed in the aggregate $500 million face amount,
and such sales shall be made as nearly as may be practicable
at the prices currently quoted in the open market.
Chairman Martin called upon Mr. Mills for a statement with re
spect to the proposal made at the meeting on November 13, 1956, that
the limit on the authority of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to
purchase bankers' acceptances be increased. A memorandum from Mr. Rouse
on this subject had been distributed to the members of the Committee

11/27/56 -31
under date of November 16, 1956.
Mr. Mills noted that the proposal made by Mr. Rouse was that
the limit on the authority for direct purchases of bankers' acceptances
by the New York Bank for its own account, as given by the Federal Open
Market Committee at the meeting on March 2, 1955 and as renewed at the
meeting on March 6, 1956, be increased from $25 million to $50 million.
Reasons for the proposed increase, Mr. Mills said, were that the tight
credit market and the withdrawal to a degree from the bankers' acceptance
market of some foreign central banks had overloaded the market beyond its
capacity to absorb the volume of acceptances offered, at least at the
ruling rates that were in effect at the time of the meeting on Novem
ber 13. For these reasons the Committee might wish to increase the
limit on purchases as a safety valve since holdings of the New York
Bank were rising toward the $25-million level. A disadvantage to the
proposal was that the System, by giving support to the bankers'
acceptance market, might narrow that market and reduce the incentive
for dealers to exploit and expand the market beyond its present limits.
Mr. Mills went on to say, however, that in view of the unsettled inter
national situation and in view of the importance of foreign banks to
the bankers' acceptance market, it would be his opinion that the limit
on purchases of bankers' acceptances should be increased as suggested,
but with the understanding that the System would tend to be a reluctant
purchaser rather than a free purchaser of additional bankers' acceptances.
At a later time, when a clearer view of the bankers' acceptance market

11/27/56 -32
could be revealed, the Committee should review the matter further to
determine whether the limit should remain at $50 million or be reduced
to the previous $25-million level.
Mr. Hayes stated that the New York Bank was suggesting that
another limit be placed on the amount that might be purchased, namely,
that it could not exceed either $50 million or 10 per cent of the total
volume of prime bankers' acceptances outstanding at the end of the pre
ceding month. It would be understood, he said, that the New York Bank
would continue to deal only at the market and would not allow itself to
become the residual buyer for bankers' acceptances. In addition to the
value of acceptance purchases in giving assistance to dealers, Mr.
Hayes felt that the acceptance should be a regular means of carrying
on open market operations, being used as a money market instrument.
He also stated that the Committee should feel free to review the
authorization and to change it at any time.
Mr. Robertson said that he would oppose the suggested increase
in authority to purchase bankers' acceptances. He felt that the argu
ments for the increase were exactly the same as those made when the
proposal first came up, when the Committee agreed to go along with the
idea on the basis that it would be desirable for the central bank to
show an interest in the acceptance market but not for the purpose of
carrying out monetary policy. It was his view that the current pro
posal was not for the purpose of showing an interest on the part of

11/27/56 -33
the central bank; rather, the central bank was becoming a residual
buyer for acceptances and would be taking the excess supply off the
market, at the going rate, at a time when regular buyers were not
willing to do so. Mr. Robertson said that he felt it would be wiser
if the Committee were to avoid subsidizing the acceptance dealers.
If it wished to support the acceptance market it would be preferable
to do so on the basis that had been followed years ago of standing
ready to be a residual buyer of acceptances, but at a rate which
would not provide dealers with a profit.
Mr. Allen said that he had questioned the desirability of
this proposal on somewhat the same grounds that Mr. Robertson mentioned,
He had reviewed all of the memoranda that had been supplied on this
subject since 1954, he said, and on the basis of his knowledge and
experience in dealing with this market he did not feel that System
purchases of bankers' acceptances within the present $25 million limit
were of any importance in supporting the market. He questioned who
would be assisted by increasing the limit, stating that purchase of
an additional $25 million would simply place more money with the
banks that needed it today and that only those few banks would profit
from the action. It was his view that this was a good time to permit
the acceptance dealers and others interested in the market to go out
and find a new market for the acceptance.
Mr. Hayes commented that a number of commercial bankers in
New York and elsewhere had for some time been trying to build up the

11/27/56 -34
market for acceptances, and recently there had been some evidence
of a broadening of the market.
Mr. Rouse said that as far as the New York Bank's operation
was concerned, the volume of acceptances had fluctuated seasonally
within the existing limit since the authority was given early in 1955,
and in general it would continue to do that. He added that the Bank
had not been a residual buyer at any time in this period and would not
contemplate getting into that position.
Mr. Vardaman said that the decision should not be based on
whether the authority would help the dealers. It was a question of
the value of the authority in stimulating the use of the acceptance
as an instrument in foreign or domestic trade. If the banks benefited
that was all right with him, Mr. Vardaman said, and if the instrument
was worth-while, which he believed it was, it was desirable to encourage
the development of a market for its use.
Mr. Saymczak stated that he too favored developing the bankers'
acceptance as a money market mechanism and that he would favor the in
crease in authority as proposed.
Mr. Thomas said that the acceptance was a particularly convenient
instrument for Federal Reserve policy in that it enabled banks to create
instruments to obtain reserves for seasonal purposes. It was a particu
larly convenient instrument for foreign trade. If the banks saw that
the Federal Reserve was willing to buy, say, $50 million of acceptances,

11/27/56
-35
there would be more of an incentive to increase their use, and banks
might move in the direction of reducing their commission on these
instruments. It was Mr. Thomas' view that there would be a great ad
vantage in having the System indicate an increased interest in this
particular market.
Mr. Johns stated similar views, and he described the increased
use of the bankers' acceptance that had developed among Memphis banks
in financing cotton transactions. Mr. Johns said that he would favor
wider use of the instrument.
Chairman Martin said that this was the basic point in the discus
sion, that is, whether the Committee believed that the acceptance was an
instrument that should be encouraged. He noted that there was a dif
ference of opinion, stating that Mr. Robertson had eloquently discussed
the matter at a number of meetings of the Committee. There was a ques
tion whether we would achieve our purpose, but Chairman Martin stated
that his judgment was that a showing of System interest in the market
would help to develop it. He did not object to the Reserve Banks being
residual buyers of acceptances. However, he did not feel the proposed
increase was a matter of major importance although he would favor in
creasing the limit.
Mr. Robertson said that in his view such action would have the
opposite effect on the development of an acceptance market. The more
the System bought acceptances, the more it deprived the dealers of the
incentive to go out and develop a market.

11/27/56 -36
Mr. Mills said that he was impressed by the atmosphere
of emergency and crisis that we faced in the money market. Whether
the System dealt in Treasury bills as being the instrument nearest
to money or in bankers' acceptances was just one step removed. When
New York banks were experiencing unusually tight conditions the
bankers' acceptance offered a means for adjusting their reserve posi
tion rather than going to the discount window. This was a flexible
instrument which would provide reserves at a time when they were
needed.
Messrs. Williams, Erickson, and Leach expressed themselves as
favoring the development of a greater market for bankers' acceptances,
and Mr. Balderston also indicated that he would favor approval of the
increased limit on the authority for the New York Bank.
Chairman Martin reiterated that he, too, would favor the sug
gestion Mr. Mills had presented for increasing the authorization from
$25 to $50 million on an experimental basis.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee authorized
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to
buy and sell for its own account prime
bankers' acceptances in accordance with
the authorization given in March of 1955
and renewed on March 6, 1956, provided
that the total amount of such acceptances
held at any one time by the Bank should
not exceed $50 million and provided
further, that such holdings should not
be more than 10 per cent of the total of

11/27/56 -37-
bankers' acceptances outstanding as shown
in the most recent acceptance survey con
ducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York.
On this action Mr. Robertson voted "no."
Mr. Allen, although not a member of the
Committee, indicated that he would not favor
the foregoing action.
Secretary's note: The resolution ap
proved at the meeting on March 6, 1956, as
changed by the foregoing action, reads as
follows:
The Federal Open Market Committee hereby authorizes the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York for its own account to buy
from and sell to acceptance dealers, at market rates of dis
count, prime bankers' acceptances of the kinds designated in
the regulations of the Federal Open Market Committee, at such
times and in such amounts as may be advisable and consistent
with the general credit policies and instructions of the
Federal Open Market Committee, provided that the aggregate
amount of such bankers' acceptances held at any one time by
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall not exceed $50
million and provided further, that such holdings shall not
be more than 10 per cent of the total of bankers' acceptances
outstanding as shown in the most recent acceptance survey
conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The Federal Open Market Committee further authorizes the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to enter into repurchase
agreements with nonbank dealers in bankers' acceptances cover
ing prime bankers' acceptances of the kinds designated in the
regulations of the Federal Open Market Committee, subject to
the same conditions on which the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York is now or may hereafter be authorized from time to time
by the Federal Open Market Committee to enter into repurchase
agreements covering United States Government securities,
except that the maturities of such bankers' acceptances at
the time of entering into such repurchase agreements shall
not exceed six months, and except that in the event of the

11/27/56 -38
failure of the seller to repurchase, such acceptances
shall continue to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank
or shall be sold in the open market. Such repurchase
agreements shall be at the same rate as that applicable,
at the time of entering into such agreements, to re
purchase agreements covering United States Government
securities.
Chairman Martin noted that the next meeting of the Committee
was scheduled for 10:00 a.m. on Monday, December 10, 1956.
Chairman Martin stated that the members of the Board of Governors
would like to have the Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks comment
concerning the maximum permissible rates of interest payable on time
and savings deposits, as fixed by the Board of Governors in Regulation
Q, Payment of Interest on Deposits. He noted that this matter had been
discussed on a number of occasions over a period of time and stated that,
in view of requests being received for a change in the limit, it would
assist the Board if each of the Presidents would express his view con
cerning the rates that should be permitted under the regulation. A
summary of their conclusions follows:
Mr. Hayes said that in its recommendation to the
Board of Governors, the New York Bank had initially
recommended going to 2-3/4 per cent on time deposits
with a maturity of 90 days or more and had recommended
no change on the rate for savings deposits. The
assumption had been that a differential of 1/4 per
cent between the time deposit rate and the savings
deposit rate would not be particularly significant.
Subsequently, however, Mr. Hayes said that he had con
cluded that in view of rising market rates of interest
he would prefer that the rates on both savings deposits
and longer-term time deposits be increased to 3 per cent,
with some related modification of shorter-term time

11/27/56 -39-
deposit rates. In his opinion such action would be
justified in the light of current market rates of in
terest and in view of the fact that these rates had
not been changed in 20 years.
Mr. Johns stated that he would support the views
expressed by Mr. Hayes.
Mr. Bryan said that he was strongly in favor of going
to 3 per cent as a permissive maximum rate on both time and
savings deposits.
Mr. Williams noted that there was strong opposition in
the Third District, especially in the outlying areas, to an
increase in the maximum permissive rate. His personal posi
tion was that he was sensitive to the problem that had been
presented by the New York banks and he indicated that some
increase in the maximum rates might be called for.
Mr. Fulton was opposed to any increase in the maximum
permissible rate on either time or savings deposits, feel
ing that it would encourage banks to reach for high-yield
investments with possibly catastrophic results.
Mr. Leach stated that, while he previously had been
opposed to an increase in the maximum permissible rate
under Regulation Q and while most bankers would be opposed
to an increase, if he were a member of the Board of
Governors he would vote to increase the rate above the
present 2-1/2 per cent ceiling on both time and savings
deposits.
Mr. Leedy said that while an increase in the maximum
would be unpopular with banks he could not see that the
bankers' attitude should be controlling. Basically, he
felt the Board should not be in the business of attempt
ing to regulate rates on time deposits and he said it
was particularly undesirable that they be regulated in
the detail required by the law and Regulation Q. He could
not see any justification, however, for continuing the
maximum rate of 2-1/2 per cent that had been fixed in
1936 when the whole structure of interest rates was
completely different from what it is now.
Mr. Allen said that the bankers in the Seventh Dis
trict were opposed to an increase in the maximum permissible

11/27/56
-40
rate, that the directors of the Detroit Branch of the
Chicago Bank yesterday adopted a resolution opposing an
increase in the rate, and that he personally would not
favor an upward movement in the rate until more banks
had gotten closer to the existing 2-1/2 per cent maximum
permitted and had shown that they could live with the
expense implied by such a rate.
Mr. Powell said he would not be opposed to increasing
the maximum permissible rate on time and savings deposits
to 3 per cent, believing that to be a natural rate and the
sort of rate that people feel that they should receive on
long-term savings. Banks were making good profits and all
other interest rates had risen to what he felt was a more
normal level than had existed for many years. Since the
banks could afford to pay more on savings, he would support
a 3 per cent rate at this time.
Mr. Mangels said that the bankers in the Twelfth District
would not favor an increase in the maximum rate. His personal
view would support an increase in the maximum rate permitted
on time deposits up to six months' maturity along the lines
suggested in the question presented to the Presidents' Con
ference in September, but he would not favor an increase in
the over-all ceilings under Regulation Q.
Mr. Irons would support an increase in the maximum rate
to 3 per cent on both time and savings deposits. He would
not be in favor of an increase in the rate on time deposits
without a corresponding increase in the rate on savings
deposits.
Mr. Erickson stated that he would now favor an increase
in the maximum permissible rate on both time and savings
deposits.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary