A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, January 10, 1956, at 10:45 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. E arhart
Mr. F ulton
Irons
Mr. L each
Mr.
Mills
M M r r . , Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. S zymczak
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Sproul
Messrs. Erickson, Johns, Powell, and Young Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Williams, Bryan, and Leedy, Presidents, Fed
eral Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Atlanta, and
Kansas City, respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs, Daane Hostetler, Rice, Roelse, Wheeler,
and R. A. Young, Associate Economists
Mr, Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr, Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Assistant Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Mr, Gaines, Special Assistant, Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the minutes of the meetings of the
Federal Open Market Committee held on November 30,
December 8, and December 13, 1955, were approved,

1/10/56 -2.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York covering open market operations during the period December 13, 1955,
through January 4, 1956, and at this meeting there was distributed a
supplementary report covering commitments executed January 5 through
January 9, 1956, inclusive, Copies of both reports have been placed in
the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the transactions for the System
account during the period December 13, 1955
January 9, 1956, inclusive, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
Chairman Martin then called upon Mr, Ralph Young for a state
ment on recent economic developments, and Mr. Young summarized the
situation substantially as follows:
With indexes both of industrial activity and of industrial
prices penetrating new high ground, with demands in many lines
pressing against capacity, and with open season for forecasting
at hand, many observers seem to be regarding a downturn in 1956
as more than a possibility, indeed, even a likelihood. With
this view expressed by some observers of recognized competence,
magnifying glasses, too frequently out of focus, are being put
to use in watching economic indicators typed as leading.
As we read the current data, there is no visible con
juncture of developments at this time that would spell general
downturn in the foreseeable or near-term future. Economic
activity in this country is still advancing, but limitations
on the pace of further advance in output are plainly in evidence.
With aggregate demands still undergoing expansion, pressures on
supplies are finding further expression in rising prices for
industrial output.
Abroad in industrial countries, most recent data show that
advance in activity has been extended, and with intensive
utilization of manpower and capital resources, pressures toward
price advance have also been manifest, Foreign trade has con-

1/10/56
-3-
tinued to advance over-all, especially for industrial products,
and further large gains have been registered for foreign hold
ings of gold and dollars. The drain on British reserves has
apparently been brought to a halt. Taken as a whole, the
domestic and international situation may be characterized as
still showing, at least on the industrial side, an inflationary
color.
As to specifics of the situation:
GNP for the final quarter of 1955 is estimated at $397
billion, up $40 billion from mid-1954. Personal income rose
further, especially the wages and salaries component. Weekly
earnings in manufacturing at the year end were about 8 per cent
over a year earlier. The labor market continues farily [tisgich]t ,
so that some bidding up of wages as well as increases now
scheduled by contract and the change in the minimum wage law
will operate in the months ahead to increase wage rates and
incomes further,
Industrial production registered a further index point
gain in December to 145, about 5 per cent above midyear and
12 per cent over a year ago. Production at year end was
being maintained or expanded, with output in a number of lines
as high as capacity or materials supplies would permit. In
the auto industry, cutback in schedules was in process; output
of other consumers durables also was off some, but mainly
reflecting work stoppage in TV and appliance lines. In non
durable lines, where capacity margins obtained, output was
rising in response to heavy consumer buying during the autumn.
In equipment industries, where capacity was being pressed,
backlog orders were piling up,
Much talk has gone on about a weakening in auto markets,
but considering this is the second year of the forward look
and also the off season, sales levels for both new and used
cars seem well maintained, Sales competition for new cars is
keen, however, and prices of the three lower priced makes are
about at last summer's levels for cash deals. Sales of house
hold durables held through the fourth quarter at close to high
October levels. In the auto as well as diversified consumer
durable lines, output and sales at the year end seemed in
tenable balance,
Instalment outstandings increased about $350 million in
November and probably more than this in December, Terms compe
tition appears to have stabilized, but forces again to intensify
it appear strong,
Value of new construction in December was slightly off from
high spring levels, reflecting mainly a reduced volume of resi
dential building. The value of residential construction contract

1/10/56 -4-
awards for November and December was up.
The System's survey of residential real estate markets,
just completed, failed to disclose a surplus housing condition
in any major market. It did bring to light, however, that
housing demand is less urgent than earlier; that new house and
used house price trends are seemingly diverging--the former up,
the latter down; that builders still confront difficulties in
obtaining new commitment money; and that builders are hesitant
not only because of financing problems but because of demand.
In recent weeks, prices of industrial materials have been
showing renewed strength. Steel scrap, nonferrous metals,
lumber, cement, paper, cotton textiles, fuels, and hides and
leather have all registered new advances. An early steel price
rise is reportedly in the making.
With demands for finished goods strong and materials and
other costs rising, upward price pressure on finished products
continues and various prices have been raised recently. Over
all prices of industrial commodities are up about 5 per cent
over midyear,
Farm prices declined further in November and early Decem
ber, reflecting further decreases in meat prices. With pressure
of heavy slaughter abating, meat prices have strengthened some
recently.
Price advances in consumer markets commenced to be evident
about midyear. They have been increasingly numerous in recent
months, with the result that, despite lower meat prices this
fall, the consumer price average has been edging up,
With sales at manufacturer and distributor levels rising
further, and with stock-sales ratios at low levels, pressures
to add to inventory continue. A larger rate of inventory gain
is expected for the fourth quarter compared with earlier in the
year, though it will partly reflect a considerable price ele
ment. New orders in durables manufacturing were up in November
from October, though they were not as large as in August and
September. The rise in new orders for producers equipment,
however, was especially large. Unfilled orders for durables
for November exceeded $50 billion, up $7 billion above the low
point of a year earlier.
Mr. Thomas then made a statement concerning recent credit and
financial developments, Mr. Thomas' statement, like that made by Mr.
Young, to some extent summarized and supplemented the information pre
sented in the staff memorandum dated January 6, 1956, copies of which

1/10/56 -5
were distributed before this meeting,
Mr. Thomas noted that there had been somewhat conflicting
developments in the credit picture in recent weeks. The reluctance of
banks to grant credit seemed to be increasing and money market pressures
appeared to be growing, with interest rates continuing high, even though
from a statistical standpoint it appeared that there had been less
pressure on reserves than a few weeks earlier. Deposits and currency
showed a greater than seasonal increase in December, bringing the
total growth for the year up to nearly 3 per cent--close to the 1954
rate of growth. Business loans at weekly reporting member banks con
tinued to increase in December and the total increase during the last
half of 1955, Mr. Thomas said, was over $3 billion compared with
increases of about a quarter billion dollars each in the corresponding
periods of 1953 and 1954 and an increase of $2-1/2 billion in 1952.
The reporting member banks also increased their investments during
December, reflecting purchases of Treasury tax anticipation certifi
cates in that month. This increase was in contrast with the downward
tendency in holdings of Government securities by reporting member banks
during most of 1955. Mr, Thomas also noted the large volume of new
securities offered during November and December, followed by some slacken
ing in recent weeks,
Mr. Thomas pointed out some of the unusual factors that had
affected member bank reserves during December 1955, and suggested that
the temporary nature of some of the sources of reserves-the unusual

1/10/56 -6.
large float and low Treasury balance--might account for the failure of
money markets to ease, Other factors were the distribution of the
reserves mostly outside of New York and the effect of the higher dis
count rate on banks' willingness to borrow. He referred to a sheet
that was distributed at this meeting showing a pattern of projected
changes in reserves. These projections indicated that (in the absence
of System action) net borrowed reserves of weekly reporting member
banks during the week ending January 11m ight be around $150 million.
With a run-off in System bill holdings now scheduled for January 12,
an increase in net borrowed reserves was anticipated during the follow
ing weeks.
With respect to the outlook, Mr. Thomas said that if there
were no further action on the part of the System other than repayment
of existing repurchase agreements, net borrowed reserves could be
expected to be in the $300 to $500 million range for several weeks.
The question the Committee faced was whether this amount of net
borrowed reserves with a 2-1/2 per cent discount rate would result in
more pressure on the market than was the case last fall when the
discount rate was 2-1/4 per cent. Mr. Thomas said that, in view of
the general world-wide tendency for wages and prices to increase and
pressures for expansion, there appeared to be no indication of a
need for less restraint at the present time than existed during the
fall of 1955. The question was whether the Committee needed stronger
restriction than existed at the present. The answer might be reached

1/10/56 -7-
through watching the behavior of the money market and the credit
situation,
Chairman Martin stated that Mr. Thomas had pointed up very
well the problems facing the Committee. It became more and more
apparent, he said, that psychology played a great part in determining
the tone of the market, Chairman Martin went on to say that Vice
Chairman Sproul was unable to be present today, and he called upon
Mr. Treiber as alternate for Mr. Sproul for comments with respect
to the economic situation as observed in the New York District and
to open market operations.
Mr. Treiber made a statement substantially as follows
1. The year 1955 marked a great economic expansion with
gradually increasing credit restraint.
2. Our policy of credit restraint, as expressed in open
market operations, caused or permitted borrowings of member
banks to increase from nominal figures in January 1955 to
about $1 billion in November, while so-called free reserves
declined from about plus $350 million to about minus $500
million. The discount rate was advanced in four steps from
1-1/2 to 2-1/2 per cent. Interest rates in the market,
particularly at short term, responded to these changes in the
availability and cost of bank reserves and, presumably, the
use of bank credit was also affected by increases in its cost
and by greater difficulty in obtaining access to it. Although
bank loans increased greatly as economic growth gained momentum
during the year, this increase was accompanied by a substantial
liquidation of bank investments. The increase in the money
supply was significantly less than the increase in economic
activity.
3. The clear course of our policy was dimmed but not
abandoned during December, when the needs of Treasury borrowings
and refundings, and the special seasonal and year-end strains
and stresses, caused us to permit some statistical easing of
the reserve position during the latter half of the month, This
was recognized by the market for what it was, however, and credit

1/10/56
did not really become easy. In fact, the market was in such
a state of uncertainty, at times, as to create a danger that
anticipation of shortages of funds might outrun the immediate
aims of credit policy.
4. As we enter 1956 our problem becomes more difficult.
The economic outlook is cloudier. It is apparent that economic
expansion will not continue at the same rapid rate and that
demands for bank credit will be less intense. The need for in
creased credit restraint may now be less than it has been
because the boom is further along toward a crest; signs of slow
ing down have already appeared in some key areas, such as auto
mobile production and residential housing, and consumer expend
itures appear to have leveled off.
5. On the other hand, employment and personal income are
hign, and plant and equipment expenditures are expected to
establish volume records. Foreign demand for U. S. industrial
products is strong. Prices of industrial materials have con
tinued to rise and it looks as if inventories will be accumu
lated during the months ahead at a more rapid rate than they
were in 1955. Large supplies of farm products at lower prices
have reduced the advances that otherwise would have been re
corded in commodity prices and living costs.
6. If credit is too readily available before we adjust to
a flattening out of the rate of economic growth, we could have
an upward spiralling of prices based on increased costs and
some continuing shortages of materials. We don't want to
encourage such a development. Cn the other hand, we don't want
to increase credit restraint unnecessarily; we don't want to
jeopardize adjustment of the economy to a slower rate of growth
which otherwise might be successful.
7. Treasury operations during the first half of 1956 will
be anti-inflationary. Even though there may be various pro
posals for tax relief and for increased spending, any proposals
that may be adopted will have little effect on actual receipts
and disbursements during the first half of 1956.
8. The immediate task of credit policy is to guard against
the still potent inflationary pressures in the economy while
avoiding the excesses of credit restraint that might in a taut
money market cut off necessary credit.
9. Attainment of this aim counsels our seeking to regain,
through open market operations, the position of credit restraint
that we had achieved in November before the special needs of
December altered our course, but that we should do no more for
the present. The demonstration of our intention to do that
much will give us a test of market reaction to continued credit
restraint at a time of a prospective slowing down in the rate of

1/10/56 -9
economic growth, and the way may then be clearer for our next
move, whether toward more or less restraint of the continuance
of the status quo,
10. Repurchase agreements now on the books (about $120
million) are scheduled to run off this calendar week. Treasury
bills maturing Thursday, January 12, held in System account and
amounting to about $202 million, will run off, reducing member
bank reserves by that amount. If our projections are approxi
mately correct, net borrowed reserves for the next statement
week should average something over $400 million. This will
bring us back, so far as negative free reserves are concerned,
to near where we were at the end of November.
11, Between now and the next meeting of the Committee,
modest sales of Treasury bills from the System portfolio may
be in order from time to time to maintain the desired degree of
restraint. Unless the projections go awry, and of course they
can easily do so--as Mr. Thomas has pointed out this morning
large System transactions in the market will not be called for.
Mr. Johns said that he hoped he was not too much affected
in his views by the developments which he saw or thought he saw in the
St. Louis District. He had no desire to differ with the broad aspects
of the appraisals of the situation that had been given this morning,
but in the Eighth District there were some signs of weakness which he
thought should not be overlooked. Agricultural income in that District
did not decline during the past year as it had nationally and as had
been expected in the Eighth District, This was because of the large
cotton crop, however, and the agricultural outlook for the St. Louis
District is not good-a decline in farm income is now contemplated
for this year, Mr. Johns also cited soft spots in the District,
mentioning Evansville, Indiana, where several important industrial
plants have been closed down or had operations sharply curtailed
recently. After making allowances for these factors, however,

1/10/56 -10.
Mr, Johns said that he agreed that the outlook was for continued ex
pansion although probably at a slower rate. He referred to the under
standing of the Committee four weeks ago that it should attempt to
regain the degree of credit restraint that had existed in November,
recognizing that it might not be able to do so very quickly. It had
not been able to do so yet, he said, and he was inclined to the view
that perhaps the Committee should not attempt at this time to regain
quite the degree of restraint that had been attained in November.
Not much different, he said, but he would not be disappointed if
during the next two weeks the Committee still failed to regain the
November degree of restraint.
Mr. Bryan said that in the Sixth District the general
picture of conditions continued to be one of economic boom and, in
some spots, rather an economic expansion at a rate that may be un
sustainable, This, of course, had to be related to the agricultural
situation which was roughly the same as that described by Mr. Johns
for the Eighth District. While there were no visible signs of general
economic softening, Mr. Bryan suggested that some pervasive effects
on the economy might come about by reason of the increased rate of re
payments on the large volume of consumer instalment debt now outstand
ing, so that repayments might shortly equal and then exceed new
consumer debt commitments. He supposed this would have a rather
general effect, probably within a few months, of "taking the bloom
off the boom." He sensed from his conversations with persons around

1/10/56 -11
Atlanta that there was a tendency for persons to become more careful
shoppers, and he cited both automobiles and housing as items for which
potential buyers probably were less ready to make commitments than had
been the case a few months ago. Mr. Bryan said that he had some doubts
whether the boom was going to go much further. Until the picture was
clearer, he would not take additional measures of restraint in the way
of an increased discount rate or otherwise, although he would like to
recapture more of the November degree of restraint than had existed
in the past few weeks. If, in the next two or three weeks, the
situation should show too much easing in terms of money rates, he
would like to see the System account take active steps to counteract
that tendency, realizing that with the Committee meeting at short
intervals it could shift readily if necessary,
Mr. Williams said that in the Third District there was a
general expectation of a good year during 1956 but not one of easy
gains, Conditions were spotty; some areas were having boom, while
conditions in others were not good. Mr. Williams referred tot he
comment by Mr. Young in the economic review to the effect that the
situation was highly competitive but that it appeared that sales would
hold up. He stated that the Philadelphia Bank had made surveys of the
sales outlook in automobiles, both by telephone and personal interview,
and after summarizing some of the information developed in the surveys
stated his conclusion to the effect that automobile dealers were

1/10/6 -12
anxious to sell new cars for immediate delivery at substantial dis
counts from list prices, and to apply such "discounts" as the down
payment. It was Mr. Williams' view that a large part of the so-called
"profit margin" of automobile dealers was represented by the discounts
to which he referred. Thus, while automobile dealers might maintain
sales, they might not be making much money. The used car market is
distinctly better than the new car market, Mr, Williams said, but it
too is much more competitive than formerly. Essentially the same
picture exists in the real estate market in the Philadelphia District,
Mr. Williams added: there is an increased supply of houses but it is
not alarming. As Mr. Bryan had indicated for the Atlanta District,
potential buyers were shopping around much more carefully than previ
ously and the situation was becoming more competitive. There is no
long run pessimism apparent in the Philadelphia District, however,
and in some parts of the District such as southern New Jersey and
Delaware there is distinct optimism. Mr. Williams expressed the view
that if the Committee were to move upward in the degree of pressure
being exerted, it should be ready to move downward: he would follow a
policy of watchful waiting during the next few weeks until the Committee
could see ahead more clearly,
The situation in the Cleveland District continued to be one of
boom, Mr. Fulton said. The Westinghouse Electric Company strike was hav
ing repercussions in several cities, but there was still a shortage of
skilled labor. Metal prices were increasing and back orders were heavy,

1/10/56 -13
and the situation in the District as a whole continued to be one of sus
tained high economic activity. Even though business was going to be
highly competitive during the coming year, Mr. Fulton felt that it would
be a mistake to relax credit restraint since such a program would only
add to the inflationary potential. On the basis of the economic picture
as currently observed in the Cleveland District, his view was that it
would be desirable to try to regain the degree of restraint that existed
toward the end of November.
Mr. Shepardson said it seemed to him that, even with the variations
in conditions in different segments of the economy brought out this morn
ing, there was still evidence of a good deal of pressure resulting from
price increases. Some further increases seemed almost inevitable, Under
these conditions it would seem highly desirable to hold at least a stable
line for the present. At the preceding meeting there had been agreement
that it would be desirable to try to recover the degree of restraint that
had existed earlier. While that had not been done, an effort still should
be made to get back to the November level.
Mr. Robertson said he did not believe the bloom was off the boom.
There possibly had been a let-down after the Christmas splurge, but he
would be surprised if the boom did not continue, However, there was suf
ficient uncertainty at the moment to make him reluctant to take much
action one way or the other. In terms of open market operations, his
feeling was that for the next two weeks the Committee would do well to
watch the situation carefully. There should be no relaxation, but he

1/10/56 -14
would be reluctant to move strongly on the side of restraint,
Mr. Mills said that he generally shared the views expressed
by Mr, Robertson, Starting with the postulate that a degree of credit
restraint should be continued, for which there are sound reasons, it
would seem that the Committee should move in a framework that would
determine what the availability of credit should be. As a guide,
Mr. Mills suggested that the Committee should follow with even more
attention than usual the shifts in loan volume at reporting member
banks, particularly in central reserve cities. There is an under
current of doubt which may not be clarified for a month or two.
Additional credit may be necessitated by involuntary inventory
accumulations or it may come out of legitimate demands that have not
been satisfied previously and which will press most heavily on central
reserve city or reserve city banks at a time when they are already
under the pressure of a heavy loan volume. With their lessened ability
to shift readily out of Government securities to provide a source of
loanable funds, it may be justifiable to assist banks in meeting these
needs. Therefore, Mr. Mills said, he believed that in looking at the
total volume of credit the Committee should not be overly concerned if
it failed to see as sharp a credit contraction in the first weeks of
this year as might ordinarily be expected. At this juncture, the Com
mittee should be wary about considering an unseasonal loan demand as
having dangerous symptoms of an inflationary character. To bring these
factors into its vision would mean that the Committee should move

1/10/56 -15
cautiously toward regaining the position of restraint that existed
in November, and that it should be very alert to the movements in
the volume of loans and to the resultant pressures on the money
market as reflected in prices of United States Government securities.
If it found a burden of necessitous credit moving toward the larger
banks and if they had no choice but to dispose of United States
Government securities in substantial amounts to meet this demand,
the Committee might find the Government securities market adversely
affected, to the detriment of its own policies. Mr. Mills said that
his feeling was that the Committee should move cautiously and, if at
all possible in moving to a higher level of net borrowed reserves, give
some public indication through its actions of the direction and pur
poses of System policy. These indications should be given well in
advance of the Treasury's having to come to the market for refunding
needs in March and April.
Mr. Powell noted that it was midwinter in the Ninth District
and that industry and trade were affected materially by snow and cold
weather, which made it difficult to analyze closely the basic economic
developments. Retail trade in December was quite poor in the District,
he said, and while year-end inventory figures were not yet available,
he had the impression that retailers were left with quite a heavy volume
of inventories. This probably had something to do with the volume of
credit being used currently. Mr. Powell could see no particular purpose
in making it more difficult for retailers to unload these inventories

1/10/56 -16.
by putting pressure on them through higher interest rates. On the
other hand, agriculture--the principal industry of the Ninth District-
has been spending beyond its means, and this has resulted in higher
loans at agricultural banks, This increase in credit had been accom
panied by some deterioration in its quality. Good farmers are making
money but total farm income is slightly down from a year ago and this
means that the marginal farmer is going to have to reduce his expend
itures eventually. An increase in interest rates would be a help in
dealing with conditions in this field, Mr. Powell felt,
Looking ahead into 1956, Mr. Powell said he was somewhat
concerned about inventory accumulations. He had not been concerned
on this point last fall because at that time increasing sales justi
fied the higher inventories. If sales were to taper off nationally
in 1956, however, Mr. Powell thought there was real danger that
inventories would be getting out of line. From that standpoint, it
might become necessary not only to make sales from the open market
account but a higher discount rate might be needed before the year
was far along. This is the season of the year when plans are being
made, Mr. Powell noted, and if business concerns were to be cautioned
against making too extravagant plans, the Federal Reserve should set
the stage in the credit field. He was inclined to favor an early
increase in the discount rate and meanwhile, to continue pressure on
the money market through open market operations as a means of getting
the year started with the tone the Committee thought would be needed.

1/10/56 -17
Mr. Leach said that for some time he had thought the economic
outlook for 1956 was strong, despite prospective weaknesses in the
residential construction and automobile industries. On the basis of
recent surveys, he was inclined to think that the decline in residen
tial starts in 1956 would not be as great as had been anticipated and,
consequently, construction as a whole should move up from the present
level. Because of this the general outlook now seemed slightly stronger
to him than it did before. On credit policy, the question as he saw
it was whether the Committee should continue the same degree of re
straint it had last November or whether it should increase that re
straint, We are still rather close to the uncertainties that existed
in the Government securities market in December, Mr, Leach said, and
it is too early to know what will happen to loans in January. At the
moment, he would prefer to postpone any decision as to moving toward
greater restraint and to consider the question further at the next
meeting. Net borrowed reserves around the $350 to $400 million level
shown in the projections seemed to him to be about right, and he thought
that the Committee would not need to do much through the open market
account between now and the next meeting to be held late in January
other than to let some maturing bills run off, Mr. Leach said that he
definitely would not favor an increase in the discount rate at this
time.
Judging by employment figures, Mr. Young said that the Chicago
District was still in a period of boom. Less than 3 per cent of the

-18
1/10/56
total labor force was unemployed in December. Residential awards
have been less than they were but nonresidential contracts have been
up by around 20 per cent, more than offsetting the decline in residen
tial activity. Mr. Young commented on a number of panel discussions
held recently with business leaders, including the heads of steel,
oil, mail order, and other companies as well as bank loan officers.
Without exception, he said, these individuals were extremely optimistic.
The farm situation had its problems, particularly the livestock pro
ducers, and farmers were increasing debt by incurring unsecured obli
gations and increasing open end mortgages. However, the steel industry
had plans for substantial expansion in capacity, and the over-all sit
uation was very good despite some uncertainties, such as in the auto
mobile industry which now talks in terms of a 10 to 20 per cent
reduction in the number of cars to be produced this year. Mr. Young
said that he would have about the same views on credit actions as
indicated by Mr. Robertson, that is, the Committee should move very
slowly, looking at the situation from day to day but not moving in
either direction until the picture was a little clearer,
Mr. Leedy recalled that there was fairly general agreement
when the present policy was adopted as to the degree of pressure the
Committee wanted to apply and as to the conditions in the economy that
justified that action. While there was some evidence that in certain
segments of the economy there was some lessening of upward pressures,
he thought the evidence was not yet sufficient to justify any change

1/10/56 -19.
either in the direction or the extent of the pressure to be applied
in the credit field. His view was that the Committee should attempt
to regain the position it was in before the Treasury's December
financing. However, it should move in this direction very cautiously.
Mr. Leedy thought there had been plenty of latitude given to the
management of the account under the existing policy to permit it to
feel its way along. He would not wish to have operations conducted
in a way to let the market feel that it had a signal that there was
any change in the views held by the Open Market Committee,
Mr. Earhart indicated that his views were similar to those
expressed by Mr. Leedy. California had been suffering from floods
and it was not yet possible to assess accurately the final measure of
the damage to the economy. It was clear that lumber production had
been seriously affected and this was a very important industry in the
Twelfth District, Mr. Earhart said that it was difficult to see anything
tangible that would change the opinion that the economy was faced with
conditions of very high activity and high employment. From the psycho
logical viewpoint, however, one could not help but sense that people
have changed their views and, while still optimistic, many are express
ing caution. In other words, there has been a little change in what
might be called the general public psychology and this is apparent
whether one talks with a businessman or with the man in the street.
In terms of net borrowed reserves, Mr. Earhart said he would be disposed
to run along for the next two weeks at the $300-400 million level,

1/10/56 -20.
maintaining substantially the position that now exists. He agreed
with Mr. Leedy's comment that it would be undesirable to give a
signal which might indicate a change either way in the Committee's
policy. His thought was that it would be desirable to have a situa
tion for the next two weeks where, if any psychological factors arose
which called for it, some relaxation could be adopted or, if the
action of Treasury bill prices so indicated, the Committee could step
up the pressure.
In the Dallas area, Mr. Irons said, conditions at the end of
1955 were similar to those described for the United States--strong,
but with some reservations because of uncertainties as to the outlook
for residential building and the automobile industry. An agricultural
problem existed and it had been aggravated recently by drought, but
this was not a problem on which open market policy could help much.
Mr. Irons said it was difficult to know just what was happening in the
automobile market, although he felt sure that cars were being sold
competitively. Current models do not seem to have been received as
well as other recent models. On the other hand, industry and trade
generally were at peak levels and the economic situation seemed to be
strong, a boom with some elements of uncertainty, Under these condi
tions, Mr. Irons would not launch into a more restrictive credit policy
but would maintain a degree of restraint about comparable to that ex
pected prior to the Treasury's financing in early December, This should

1/10/56 -21
be not only in terms of the volume of free reserves, but also in terms
of money rates and the entire credit picture. Mr. Irons said that he
would not favor raising the discount rate now.
Mr. Erickson commented on conditions in various industries
in New England, including electrical machinery, machine tools, paper and
pulp, jewelry, shoes, and textiles. His remarks indicated that current
activity was generally at good levels, with forward orders in some
industries at new highs. Agriculture in the First District, heavily
weighted by dairy and poultry, was higher in 1955 then in 1954.
Mr. Erickson said that the Boston Bank had made a check of conditions
in the automobile market and found the situation similar to that which
Mr. Williams had described for the Third District, In purchasing cars
for its own use, the Bank found that substantial discounts from actual
list prices were readily available. Mr. Erickson remarked that "some
of the steam has gone out of the engine" and a leveling off might come
earlier than some economists had expected. He thought the Committee
should be regaining the degree of restraint that it had early in
December, proceeding cautiously in that direction, but that for the
present no change should be made in the discount rate.
Mr. Szymczak said that nothing in the economic situation
had occurred to call for a change in the policy being pursued by the
Committee, so far as he could see. However, the present was the time
of year when seasonally the System could absorb some of the reserves
that it had supplied in December, and he would not be quite as cautious

1/10/56 -22
as others had indicated in proceeding in that direction, including
perhaps sales from the System account as well as runoff of maturing
bill holdings, Mr. Szymczak said he doubted that this was the time
to increase the discount rate although it was possible that later on
the System would feel that that should be done.
Mr. Balderston said that it might be assumed that a 2-1/2
per cent discount rate was appropriate for the time being in view of
the topping off that may be in the making, even though upward price
and wage pressures continued. The Committee should not forget that
demands upon metal producers and metal working plants are very heavy
and demands for scrap are world-wide. He could see little chance
that the price of steel and other metals would not rise this spring,
Mr. Balderston said he was concerned that the wage adjustments other
than those that would come automatically might be more liberal than
is prudent because of general price increases during the spring. He
also suggested that the Committee keep in mind the fact that on top
of the involuntary inventory accretions to which Mr. Mills had referred,
there may come a temptation to pile materials for stock, provided
manufacturers believe prices are going to move higher and they are in
a position otherwise to stockpile. In view of these factors--the
topping off and the upward price and wage pressures--Mr. Balderston
said that he would keep the discount rate just where it is. Assuming
that it is an appropriate rate, he would also favor keeping the bill
rate in the general neighborhood of the discount rate with such a level

1/10/56 -23.
of net borrowed reserves as would accomplish that end. What this level
might be he did not know. However, he would use rates as the principal
indicator, together with such "feel" of the market as the trading desk
is able to get. He would certainly not want the Open Market Committee
to indicate any change in policy during this period of watchful waiting.
Chairman Martin said that, as he had commented regarding other
recent meetings of the Committee, there was a surprising degree of
unanimity indicated by the comments made this morning as to what the
situation called for in the way of credit policy. He judged that the
consensus was to maintain the policy the Committee had been pursuing.
Some favored a little move in one direction, others would move a little
in the other direction, but on the whole the view was to continue about
what was being done. Chairman Martin said that he was in agreement with
this view. At least two of the comments had included the phrase "watch
ful waiting," This, too, seemed appropriate, Chairman Martin said. He
wished to add the comment that the public would be watching more care
fully than for some time the way the Federal Reserve handled the return
flow of currency this year. As he had stated at the meeting a month ago,
Chairman Martin said he did not think it was possible to regain the degree
of tightness that had existed in November. It was not possible now to be
precise in determining just how operations should be carried on. However,
he would emphasize the view that in carrying on its operations the Com
mittee would not wish to permit any signal to be given which would indicate
that it had in mind any easing until it was satisfied that it was ready for

1/10/56 -24
a move in that direction. It was the Chairman's judgment that it would
not be possible to change back from such a view, if it once were given,
Chairman Martin suggested, and there was no indication of a different
view, that policy be continued until the next meeting in the general
posture he had described.
At this point Chairman Martin noted that it was contemplated
that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday,
January 24,1956, at 10:00 a.m.
Chairman Martin then asked that Mr. Rouse comment on his
statement of policy and whether there was need for some clarification.
Mr. Rouse agreed with the view expressed by Chairman Martin
that the market will watch closely what is done with respect to the
System account during the next few weeks. The market understands that
repurchase agreements will not be available after Thursday of this week,
and dealers are somewhat unhappy that they will have to pay 3-1/2 per
cent to carry bills which were purchased at 2-1/2 per cent. Mr. Rouse
thought there was a good likelihood that there could be a runoff in
Treasury bills against the return flow of currency this month. He also
referred tothe interest being shown in distribution of stock of the
Ford Motor Company and to the prospect that all of the current offering
would be absorbed by the public at once. Some of the funds which the
Ford Foundation would receive would be placed in short-term securities
which would have an effect in the market. Mr. Rouse said that, as
Mr. Thomas had pointed out, fluctuations in float and the Treasury

1/10/56 -25
balance have made it very difficult to increase net borrowed reserves
as rapidly as he had hoped. The System account had been taking
advantage of every opportunity to get back the degree of restraint
that existed last November, but this had proved to be almost impossible.
Mr. Rouse noted that there had been some discussion in the
press of the date for this meeting of the Committee and said that there
was a tendency for the market to be conscious of the meeting day. He
wondered whether it was necessary for the date of the meeting to be
given out.
There was some discussion of this question during which
Mr. Thurston, in response to Chairman Martin's question, stated that
so far as he knew there had been no definite policy with respect to
giving information on dates of meetings of the Open Market Committee.
However, he rarely received an inquiry as to the meeting days. His
inclination, he said, would be not to conceal the date for a meeting
if he were asked unless there seemed to be some definite reason for
doing so.
Mr. Irons recalled that the announcement that appeared in the
Federal Reserve Bulletin for July 1955 concerning the discontinuance of
the executive committee of the Federal Open Market Committee indicated
that the full Committee thereafter would meet at frequent intervals,
rather than on a quarterly basis,
The discussion of this point closed with a comment by Chairman
Martin to the effect that if inquiries arose, it might be as well to

1/10/56 .26.
answer them in general terms, indicating that the Committee met at
frequent intervals.
Chairman Martin then inquired of Mr. Rouse whether he would
suggest any change in the directive to be issued to the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, and Mr. Rouse said that his suggestion would be that
the directive be renewed in its present form.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Committee voted unanimously
to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York until otherwise directed by the
Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (including
replacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities to
run off without replacement) for the System open market account
in the open market or, in the case of maturing securities, by
direct exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary in the
light of current and prospective economic conditions and the
general credit situation of the country, with a view (a) to
relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs of com
merce and business, (b) to restraining inflationary developments
in the interest of sustainable economic growth, and (c) to the
practical administration of the account provided that the aggre
gate amount of securities held in the System account (including
commitments for the purchase or sale of securities for the
account) at the close of this date, other than special short
term certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time
for the temporary accomodation of the Treasury, shall not be
increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one
or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time
to time for the temporary accomodation of the Treasury; provided
that the total amount of such certificates held at any one time
by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate
$500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System account
for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury securities maturing

1/10/56 -27-
within one year as may be necessary from time to time for the
accomodation of the Treasury; provided that the total amount
of such securities so sold shall not exceed in the aggregate
$500 million face amount, and such sales shall be made as nearly
as may be practicable at the prices currently quoted in the open
market.
Chairman Martin next brought up the authorization for re
purchase agreements. Neither the Manager of the Account nor any member
of the Committee suggested any change in that authority.
Thereupon, the following authorization
was approved by unanimous vote
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is hereby authorized
to enter into repurchase agreements with nonbank dealers in
United States Government securities subject to the following
conditions:
1. Such agreements
(a) In no event shall be at a rate below whichever
is the lower of (1) the discount rate of the
Federal Reserve Bank on eligible commercial
paper, or (2) the average issuing rate on
the most recent issue of three-month Treas
ury bills;
(b) Shall be for periods of not to exceed 15
calendar days;
(c) Shall cover only Government securities matur
ing within 15 months; and
(d) Shall be used as a means of providing the
money market with sufficient Federal Reserve
funds to avoid undue strain on a day-to-day
basis,
2, Reports of such transactions shall be included in the
weekly report of open market operations which is sent
to the members of the Federal Open Market Committee,
3. In the event Government securities covered by any such
agreement are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant
to the agreement or a renewal thereof, the securities
thus acquired by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
shall be sold in the market or transferred to the
System open market account,
Chairman Martin noted that there had been distributed imme
diately before this meeting a report dated January 9, 1956, from the

1/10/6 -28
Subcommittee on Defense Planning (Messrs. Shepardson, Sproul, and
Robertson), and he called upon Mr. Robertson, as Chairman of that
committee, for comment on the report.
Mr. Robertson stated that the report of the Subcommittee
on Defense Planning was based upon his memorandum dated September 29,
1955, which had been distributed to the members of the Committee in
October. The program now submitted by the committee prescribed the
ways and means for carrying out a plan essentially as proposed in
the memorandum referred to, as supplemented by suggestions made by
Mr, Sproul and recorded in the minutes of the meeting held on
October 25, 1955. This involved the means for rebuilding the Com
mittee in the event of an emergency, the authorization for purchases
of Government securities by individual Federal Reserve Banks under
certain conditions, a proposal that the Open Market Committee provide
guides for the Reserve Banks in the exercise of their discretion re
garding purchases of Government securities, and a training program so
that a number of persons within the Federal Reserve System would be
available to carry on open market operations in the event of an emer
gency,
Mr. Earhart noted that one of the proposals in the subcom
mittee's report was that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York adopt
the practice of sending weekly to the relocation centers of each
Reserve Bank copies of pertinent open market accounts and daily advices
of transactions. (This would be accompanied by discontinuance of the

1/10/56 -29
maintenance of duplicate records as now done by the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago.) He noted that in at least the Twelfth District
there was more than one relocation center and that the records center
might not necessarily be at a relocation center. He raised the
question whether it might be possible to send the proposed reports
of accounts and transactions to the records center as a preferable
means of assuring that they would be available in the event of an
emergency.
Mr. Robertson responded that the intention was to have such
reports at the place where records would be available to the relocation
center, and he suggested that it be understood that any problems of
distribution by the New York Bank of the reports mentioned be handled
individually by the Reserve Bank concerned in consultation with the
Secretary of the Committee.
Chairman Martin stated that in a telephone conversation with
Mr. Sproul this morning, the latter had indicated that he was prepared
to have the Committee act on the program proposed in the subcommittee's
report at its meeting today, Chairman Martin inquired whether any other
members of the Committee had questions or suggestions concerning the
program proposed in the report. In the absence of comment, he suggest
ed that the Committee approve the program as submitted by the Defense
Planning Subcommittee,
Mr. Treiber noted that the last paragraph of the report
suggested that drafts of appropriate resolutions for adoption by the

1/10/56 -30
Open Market Committee and drafts of the guides referred to for pur
chases of Government securities by individual Federal Reserve Banks
and for the use of personnel who might assume responsibility for
leadership in reactivation of a Government securities market, be
prepared by a group to be appointed by the Open Market Committee
from members of its staff having to do with open market operations.
He inquired whether it was contemplated that this committee be appoint
ed at the present meeting.
Mr, Robertson stated that he contemplated that this would be
deferred until the Secretary of the Committee had had an opportunity
to consider the procedures to be followed in implementing the subcom
mittee's report.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the report
of the Subcommittee on Defense Planning was
approved with the understanding that the
necessary steps would be taken to carry out
the program outlined.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary.