A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, August 21, 1956, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Johns
Mr. Mills
Mr. Powell
Mr. R obertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. V ardaman
Mr. Fulton, Alternate
Messrs. Bryan, Leedy, Treiber, and Williams,
Alternate Members, Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Irons and Mangels, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and San
Francisco, respectively
Mr. Harris, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Abbott, Parsons, Roelse, Willis,
and Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on August 7, 1956, were ap
proved.

8/21/56 -2
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report covering open market operations during the
period August 7, 1956, through August 15, 1956, and at this meeting a
supplementary report covering commitments executed August 16, 1956,
through August 20, 1956, was distributed. Copies of both reports have
been placed in the files of the Committee.
Mr. Treiber stated that Mr. Rouse had not come to this meeting
because he felt it desirable to remain in New York in view of the dis
turbed situation in the Government securities market. He went on to
say that net borrowed reserves had been larger than anticipated and
that one of the reasons for this was a greater decline in the volume
of float than had been expected. Government securities prices de
clined sharply during the last few days on the rumor that credit policy
might become more restrictive, although the market steadied yesterday
after purchases of $69.5 million of bills for the System account Mr.
Treiber suggested that these declines were related to recent increases
that had taken place in yields on corporate, State, and municipal
obligations. If no further System actions were taken, projections of
the New York Bank indicated that average net borrowed reserves during
the week ending August 22 would approximate $331 million. Mr. Treiber
added that a report from the trading desk that morning indicated a
great deal of uncertainty in the market, reflecting the discussion as
to tight money and higher interest rates in the New York papers, and
the reaction to the announcement that the First National Bank of Boston

8/21/56 -3
had increased its prime loan rate to 4 per cent.
Chairman Martin referred to Mr. Treiber's comment on float,
noting that in accordance with the authorization at the preceding
meeting a committee on float comprised of Messrs. Erickson, Johns,
and Robertson, Chairman, had been appointed.
Mr. Robertson added that the committee would meet today with
a subcommittee that had been appointed to assist in its study of float.
Mr. Mills referred to Mr. Treiber's comment on the assumption
that the increase in yields for U. S. Government securities was a
natural alignment with the increase in yields for corporation, State,
and municipal securites a[nsdi cr]a ised the question whether it was not
more accurate to interpret the increase in yields on corporation,
State, and municipal obligations as the result of a supply and demand
situation in which market demands far exceeded the supply of invest
ment funds. He cited the fact of a similar supply and demand situa
tion at the time that yields on Treasury bills were forced down sharply
and out of line with the general structure of interest rates, but in
this instance with the demand for Treasury bills exceeding their avail
able supply. Under these circumstances, Mr. Mills wondered if there
were grounds for believing that present high yields on corporation,
State, and municipal obligations are the result of a special supply
and demand situation in the investment market and, therefore, it
might not be correct to assume that the yields on U. S. Government

8/21/56
securities should increase in direct relationship with rising yields
on corporation, State, and municipal obligations. Mr. Mills stated
that it was his belief that recent increases in yields on U. S. Govern
ment securities were a direct reflection of tight money market condi
tions.
Mr. Treiber responded that corporate, State, and municipal
obligations were alternative investments for U. S. Government securi
ties to an extent and that there was some shifting from one type of
investment to another.
Mr. Hayes commented that it was difficult to separate the
factors influencing these types of investments since they were closely
related. He mentioned especially the tendency for higher rates on
corporate bonds to lead to additional bank loans as an alternative
source of financing, with the further result that banks were likely
to liquidate Government securities to raise the required funds.
Mr. Mills suggested that the Committee should avoid a too
facile conclusion in explaining the changes in the Government securi
ties market.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period August 7
through August 20, 1956, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
At Chairman Martin's request, Mr. Young made a statement on
the economic situation, supplementing the staff memorandum distributed
under date of August 17, 1956. Mr. Young's statement was substantially

8/21/56
as follows:
Since the last meeting of the Committee, domestic
economic activity has featured three developments of special
note:
(1) Price advances in the industrial commodity
area, especially for metals and metal products,
have been numerous and sizable.
(2) Industrial output has rebounded sharply from
the July steel strike reaction.
(3) In the central money markets interest rates
have risen appreciably.
The round of industrial price advances was tipped off by
the general increase of about 7 per cent in steel prices.
Prices of pig iron, coke, stampings and steel parts, and some
machinery were promptly raised. About this time and also fol
lowing wage settlements, prices of aluminum, magnesium and
their products were advanced. Among materials, scrap copper
recovered some, steel scrap attained a new high, rubber and
tin rose a bit, and glass and brick were marked up further.
At the consumer goods level, various metal product items,
tires, and gasoline have risen.
While the general industrial price picture has had a
noteworthy upward tilt, two significant areas, namely textiles
and lumber, have been showing weakness.
Farm prices have changed little since May, with grain
prices evidencing fair strength and livestock prices, espe
cially for cattle, a definitely rising trend.
Consumer prices, which rose about 2 per cent from early
spring to June, are expected to show a further rise to mid-July,
reflecting higher food costs and further rise in rents and
prices of services.
With over-all activity in metal fabricating activity up in
July, rather than down as a result of the steel shutdown, the
rebound in steel activity has carried quickly to 95 per cent
of capacity this week. While textile activity has been off
further this month and auto assemblies have been off considerably
for model changeover, other manufacturing areas have been operat
ing at advanced levels. Thus, a better over-all performance for
industrial production is likely this month than was expected two
weeks ago.
Construction activity in July advanced further, with resi
dential construction about unchanged and industrial construction
and construction for military installations up. Construction
costs continue to rise, but with some slackening in rise
observable in residential building costs.
Some questions have arisen recently about the strength of
the construction area because seasonally adjusted contract

8/21/56 -6-
awards have been declining since January. This is an erratic
series and a satisfactory seasonal adjustment is difficult to
effect. Taking the performance of contract awards for the
year to date, it is of interest that awards have run 8 per
cent above a year earlier. While considerably below early
in-the-year figures, awards for the past two months have only
been slightly below the all-time record for these months set
last year.
Recent wage settlements as well as other labor market
data confirm the continuation of strength for the labor mar
ket. While nonfarm employment was off in July, the decline
represented mainly the direct effects of the steel strike,
The average work week in manufacturing was unchanged at 40.1
hours, though it usually declines in July, and average hourly
and weekly earnings experienced only a small decline as a re
sult of the steel strike.
Farm production reports, reflecting improved agricultural
conditions, now indicate a total output about the same as last
year's, with livestock production up moderately and crop pro
duction off moderately. If the average of farm prices holds
at current levels and with soil bank payments of a quarter of
a billion dollars realized farm income should be maintained
close to last year's total. Credit extensions to farmers have
expanded further this year, but growth in nonreal-estate
borrowing has been at a slower rate than last year.
Personal income is estimated to have shown a slight de
cline in July from the record June level, resulting mainly
from the effects of the steel strike, but the rebound in
industrial activity should put the August total ahead of June.
In addition to the recovered flow of wage payments, income
figures will commence to register recent wage settlements as
well as upward cost-of-living adjustments.
Reflecting sustained strength in personal income and also
favorable shopping weather, as well as widespread consumer
optimism, retail sales for July were up 3 per cent over a year
ago. Durable goods sales were off mainly because of reduced
automobile sales. Sales at furniture, appliance, and depart
ment stores were in record volume, and sales gains at non
durable goods stores showed a very large increase from a year
ago. Department store sales in August thus far have held at
July levels. New car sales for early August have run about
at the same rate as July, but used car sales have been up
some. Stocks of new cars were up some, but for used cars
down further. Outstanding instalment credit, seasonally ad
justed, continues to show a small rise--about $125 a month,
Diversified consumer durable goods paper and personal loans
are now accounting for more of the rise than automobile paper.

8/21/56 -7
In major countries abroad, most recent information
continues to show intensive utilization of productive
resources and upward price and balance of payments
pressures. Some European experts are commencing to
feel that world-wide boom is losing momentum and tapering
off, and are asking whether this development, if actually
occurring, may not make more critical various persisting
imbalances as well as uncovering new and unsuspected
weaknesses. Foreign economic trends in these circum
stances will warrant specially close attention by System
observers.
Mr. Thomas reviewed important developments in the financial
area since the preceding meeting, stating that the most striking of
these was the sharp rise in interest rates of all kinds. Pressure
on capital markets had continued and several offerings had been de
ferred or withdrawn. A moderate seasonal increase had taken place
in bank loans. The first phase of the Treasury's cash financing
had been completed with much of the offering having been placed in
banks, at least temporarily. The reserve position of banks had
tightened from the unduly easy situation that existed in June and
July. Operations for the System account had been resumed within the
past week, in line with the policy of meeting seasonal needs for re
serve funds.
Treasury bill rates rose from around 2-/ per cent in July
to above 2-3/ per cent last week, Mr. Thomas said, and this week's
bill auction averaged 2.82 per cent. Rates on three to five year
Government issues currently had risen to nearly 3-1/2 per cent, a
new high level since 1930. Yields on long-term securities also had
risen and were now close to their 1953 peak. Mr. Thomas also noted

8/21/56 -8.
that a Boston bank had increased its prime rate to 4 per cent. The
rise in money rates appeared to be partly seasonal and was related to
the Treasury's financing, Mr. Thomas said, and it also reflected a
growing recognition of demand pressures, actual and prospective, in
money markets; expectation of an increase in the discount rate; the
cash offering by the Treasury; and the tighter reserve position.
Of the $3.2 billion total of Treasury tax anticipation certifi
cates paid for on August 15, about $2 billion were subscribed for by
banks, but many of these were sold immediately to nonbank customers.
The Treasury balance was expected to be around $5.6 billion by August
22--an amount adequate to meet needs until late October, after which
perhaps $2 billion of new financing would be needed to cover require
ments during the remainder of this year.
Reporting member banks showed an increase of over 3/4 of a
billion dollars in total loans and investments during the last five
weeks, Mr. Thomas said, compared with an increase of $200 million in
the corresponding period of 1955. Most of this increase was in hold
ings of U. S. securities reflecting the tax anticipation certificates
acquired last week; loans increased less than last year. Demand
deposits adjusted showed a bigger decrease during the past week than
a year ago but this followed increases in immediately preceding weeks
that were larger than a year ago. The reserve position of banks was
tighter last week than had been contemplated, partly because float
declined to a more nearly normal level after the abnormal increase

8/21/56 -9
during June and July. Mr. Thomas stated that in the absence of
further System action, net borrowed reserves might rise to around
$600 million in the week ending August 29 because of a further de
cline in float and because of a run off in repurchase agreements.
Assuming normal seasonal changes and moderate growth in deposits,
the September average would be above $600 million and the October
average would be above $700 million.
Mr. Thomas then referred to a development since the end of
1954 in credit extensions by banks, stating that there had been a
steady increase in loans and a decrease in holdings of Government
securities that had resulted in a rise in the ratio of loans to total
loans and investments to the highest levels since the early 1930's.
While this ratio was only the roughest sort of an index, the recent
development raised the question whether the higher current ratio of
loans to total loans and investments would cause banks to restrict
lending regardless of the availability of reserves. Mr. Thomas also
pointed out that the sales of Government securities by banks meant
that other investors had purchased them when they had not been willing
to buy corporate securities, and he suggested that this might indicate
a need for a higher interest rate on the latter. Higher bill rates
and a larger volume of bills might induce banks to acquire and hold
more Treasury bills and to make fewer loans. Also, higher interest
rates on bank loans might encourage borrowers to go to capital markets
for long-term capital purposes even at higher rates. Mr. Thomas

8/21/56 -10
suggested that higher rates on private security issues might attract
savers away from Government securities. In concluding his comments,
Mr. Thomas referred to the continued heavy demand for capital funds
which was putting pressure on banks. In his view, this indicated a
need for continuation of the policy of restraint that the Committee
has been following.
Mr. Johns referred to a discussion he had had with a business
man within the past few days and to some of the comments Mr. Young had
made in his review of the economic situation. This businessman indi
cated a growing concern that the capital expenditure boom might be
"tailing off", Mr. Johns said, and he inquired of Mr. Young regarding
information bearing on this question.
Mr. Young responded that figures on plans for plant expansion
for the United States would not be available until September. However,
recent similar data for Canada which would be affected by much the same
factors as data for the United States showed quite an increase in
capital expenditure plans of businessmen, compared with figures of
expectations compiled last spring.
Mr. Thomas commented that postponement of plans for plant
expansion would be a desirable development, in view of the near-capacity
level of activity that now exists.
Chairman Martin then called on Mr. Hayes who made a statement
substantially as follows,
1. Most of the measures of production, consumption,
and prices seem to confirm that the economy is still

8/21/56 -11-
definitely in an expanding phase. There are a few indications,
however, that consumer demand may have lost some of its forward
momentum. Sales of new homes in some areas have fallen off
rather sharply in recent weeks, and a further decline in resi
dential building appears likely. Also, the current boom has
been in progress for about two years and, with the exception
of the highway program and perhaps heavier defense expenditures,
there are no major new forces of expansion in sight.
2. The tendency toward price increases is spreading both
in raw materials and in finished goods. This trend results
primarily from recent wage increases rather than capacity limi
tations or demand pressures. Eventual offsets to rising costs
through increasing productivity are only a long range possibility
and are no remedy for the inflationary threat in the near future.
3. Pressure of demand for long-term capital funds is more
pronounced than pressure on physical resources. With business
and personal savings insufficient to match this demand, the
latter is tending to "slop-over" into demand for bank credit,
and this is accentuated by the reluctance of borrowers to accept
sharply higher long-term interest rates. The recent deferring
of a number of long-term offerings points up this problem. We
cannot look with equanimity on the use of a large volume of
bank credit for capital purposes.
4. Bank credit is expected to increase substantially this
autumn, though probably less than a year ago. A large amount of
reserve funds will have to be supplied during the remainder of
the year to meet normal seasonal requirements.
5. The money market has been and remains very tight. The
generally restrictive policy that the System has been following
for more than a year has already created a notable degree of
credit restraint and has been successful in restricting the
growth of the money supply during the past year. Banks are very
short of liquid assets and are already "rationing" credit to a
considerable extent. Fears have been expressed in some quarters
that credit might become unobtainable by many prospective
borrowers at any price.
6. Under these circumstances, while continuance of a
general policy of restraint is justified, we are inclined to
doubt whether the use of open market operations to effect ap
preciably greater restraint would be justified. Net borrowed
reserves have recently been around $300 to $400 million and
gross member bank borrowings around $900 million to $1 billion.
There may be risks in forcing borrowings much above the $1 bil
lion level. In other words, the System should probably be
prepared to supply through open market operations most of the
reserves needed for seasonal purposes in the next few months,
in order to leave net borrowed reserves and gross borrowings
somewhere near their recent levels. Our tentative projections

8/21/56
-12-
suggest that moderate purchases of Treasury bills might be
required in the next few weeks.
7. It is problematical whether corporations and indi
viduals remote from the money market are sufficiently aware
of the desirability of resisting price increases, deferring
borrowing programs, stretching out capital spending programs,
and expanding corporate savings as much as possible.
(Parenthetically, it may be noted that equity financing has
tended to be neglected in favor of debt increases, despite
the new highs in the stock market.)
8. An increase in the discount rate would appear called
for at this time. The way has been paved by continued imposi
tion of strong credit restraints through open market operations.
A rate rise would very probably not result in a more serious
credit stringency than is desired. It would serve as a clear
signal to the general public that the System is concerned over
the inflationary outlook and is trying to resist this trend.
We would hope that any action on the rate by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York would be coordinated with similar moves by
other Reserve Banks (other than those whose rates are already
in excess of 2-3/4 per cent). For this reason our Directors
decided to defer action at last Thursday's meeting--although
majority sentiment seemed to favor an increase now or in the
very near future--so that the subject could be discussed fully
here today.
9. In regard to timing of any rate increases, the
prospective Treasury cash financing in October and a large re
funding in November seem to mark the next six weeks as the
only favorable period during the remainder of 1956.
10. As for the amount by which the rate should be raised,
we recognize that a case might be made for an increase of 1/2
per cent, one argument being that the market has already dis
counted a rise of 1/4 per cent by the ten Banks whose rate is
now 2-3/4 per cent. However, we are afraid that a rise of
1/2 per cent might constitute too severe a "shock" to the market
and might touch off a disorderly erosion of bond prices that
would necessitate System intervention. Also there is at least
a possibility that present boom tendencies may be more temporary
than current business reports might suggest. Moreover, it might
be a mistake to take rather drastic action when monetary measures
at best are probably of only limited effectiveness against a
cost inflation such as we now face. Also, a sudden large change
in interest rates might create undue difficulties for the Treas
ury. The substantial adjustment now going on in market rates
on long and intermediate maturities and also in the Treasury bill
rate is accomplishing much that might be accomplished by a very
sharp increase in the discount rate. This reduces the need for
more dramatic rate action.

8/21/56 -13
We therefore feel that an increase of 1/4 per cent
to 3 per cent is indicated, as it should provide the
needed signal to the business community, should probably
cause relatively little disturbance to the market, and
should help to establish a new rate plateau on which dealers
and underwriters could base their rate quotations and break
the present log-jam in the capital markets.
In response to a question from Mr. Vardaman, Mr. Hayes said that
it was difficult to name any figure of net borrowed reserves that should
be used as a guide to open market operations although he had used the
figures of $300-$400 million as a rough indication of his thinking.
However, operations should be governed more by the feel of the market
than by any figures.
Mr. Erickson said that the economic state of New England did
not differ from the general description given in the economic review
presented at this meeting. Sales, production, and employment are up.
In June, loans of reporting member banks went up moderately, but during
the past two weeks they had increased very markedly. Mr. Erickson re
called that at the preceding meeting of the Committee he reported a
smaller use of the discount window in the First District. That had
not been the case during the last two weeks, he said, when borrowings
had increased to an average around $50 million. In speaking of screen
ing loans, he told of a comment by one of the Boston bankers who had
turned down an attractive 5 per cent large term loan application.
Mr. Erickson's view was that the discount rate should be in
creased, and he stated that he planned to recommend such an increase
at the meeting of the Boston Bank's directors to be held on September 10

8/21/56 -14
although he would attempt to have a special meeting called to con
sider the question if action was taken by other Reserve Banks prior
to that time. He hesitated to suggest any figure of net borrowed
reserves to be used as a guide to open market operations, stating
that these should be judged by the feel of the market. He hoped,
however, that negative free reserves in the $300-$400m illion range
would do the job.
Mr. Irons said that conditions in the Dallas District did
not differ greatly from the reports he had given in other recent weeks.
There had been further improvement in the petroleum industry, in retail
trade, and in nonagricultural employment. While there had been some
decline in residential building and drought continued to worsen the
outlook somewhat in nonirrigated areas, on the whole the same high
level of activity that had been maintained for many weeks continued
in the Eleventh District, with such changes as were occurring being
largely seasonal in nature. In the credit area, reporting member
bank loans increased last week after several weeks of rather little
change. Mr. Irons judged that there was less pressure than was true
somewhat earlier and he noted that member bank borrowings at the
Federal Reserve Bank were running in the $18-$25 million area in
contrast with $40-$50 million a couple of months ago. As he had
indicated at earlier meetings, relatively few banks were borrowing
and only four or five of these were country banks.
Mr. Irons said that he felt we had reached the point where

8/21/56 -15
the discount rate should be increased to 3 per cent but he would dis
like going to a higher level at this time. He did not think action
should be delayed much longer and he planned to recommend an increase
at the next meeting of the directors of the Dallas Bank. This was
scheduled for September 13, but if another Reserve Bank acted before
then, Mr. Irons stated that he would attempt to have a special meeting
of the Dallas directors arranged to consider the question of the dis
count rate as soon as possible. He concurred in the view that this
was a period in which open market operations should complement the
discount action. He would not use any figure of net borrowed reserves,
feeling that operations should be left to the management of the account,
which should take actions with respect to the availability of reserves
on the basis of needs, in accordance with the current general policy
of the Committee.
Mr. Mangels said that the Twelfth District had given little
evidence of change in economic activity since the preceding meeting.
Demand for bank credit continues strong and banks still give assurance
that they are screening loans carefully, although they state that no
legitimate demands for credit are being turned down. Bank loans in
the Twelfth District increased during July and early August at a
lesser rate than Mr. Thomas had reported for the national total, Mr.
Mangels said, or than the increase in June of this year or July a
year ago. The moderate net increase reflected additional loans to

8/21/56 -16
mining and manufacturing firms as well as some increase in construction
loans, while consumer loans declined.
Mr. Mangels suggested that the policy agreed upon by the Com
mittee two weeks ago was about what should be continued for the present,
with negative free reserves somewhere in the $300-$400 million range,
depending upon the feel of the market. As to the discount rate, con
trary to his report of two weeks ago, the directors of the San Francisco
Bank at their most recent meeting unanimously acted to maintain the
existing 3 per cent rate. Another meeting of the executive committee
which would be attended by almost all directors of the San Francisco
Bank would be held tomorrow, and Mr. Mangels said that he presumed
the existing rate would be maintained at that time.
Mr. Powell said that the pattern of business conditions in
the Ninth District was becoming fixed for the rest of this year. While
the wheat crop is running about a quarter below that of last year,
other crops are turning out to be large and livestock prices have
risen since last winter, with the result that the farm sections of the
district will have at least an average income this year. In the city
area, retail trade is just about holding even with a year ago, which
is quite a reduction from the experience of the last several months
when the Ninth District was showing some of the largest gains in
retail trade. Banks are considerably more comfortable than they were,
with some reduction in loans and sales of sizable amounts of Government

8/21/6 -17
securities. They are not borrowing heavily at this time.
Mr. Powell stated that nationally he felt the situation was
delicate and that we might be on the verge of a disorderly market,
although it had not yet reached that stage. An increase in discount
rates for other districts seemed to be in order, and there was no
expectation of a move to reduce the rate in the Ninth District. Open
market operations should be conducted rather aggressively, Mr. Powell
said, noting that this was the beginning of the peak of demand in the
agricultural areas and that an increase in reserves through the open
market could result in little danger at the present time, especially
since such reserves would be needed shortly in any event to meet the
seasonal demands. His preference would be to purchase bills to meet
this need and to attempt to offset nervousness and uncertainty in the
money market.
Mr. Harris said that the tone of economic activity in the
Seventh District was similar to that described for other areas. The
steel strike repercussions were nowhere near as great as had been
feared. Production of automobiles was not likely to exceed 6 million
passenger cars and 1.1 million trucks this year, compared with a total
of 9.2 million vehicles last year. New car stocks are expected to
be down to 550 thousand by August 31, about 100 thousand less than a
year earlier, and year-end inventories are expected to be about the
same as the August 31 figure. The automobile industry as a whole is

8/21/56 -18
very happy with the rate of clean-up of 1956 models and has complete
confidence in the outlook for the 1957 models.
The subject causing most comment in the Seventh District
during the past few days, Mr. Harris said, has been the state of the
bond market. Some bankers feel that the market is disorderly and have
wondered why the System does not do something about it by way of putting
in reserves. One of the directors of the Chicago Bank indicated he
would be loath to vote for an increase in the discount rate unless posi
tive action were taken by the System to put reserves into the market
to relieve the situation. Another banker had indicated that he no
longer subscribed to Treasury bond issues because the market price
would be below his subscription price before the securities were de
livered. Mr. Harris felt that the uncertainty indicated by these and
other statements was important. At the same time, many have already
discounted an increase in the discount rate and have projected condi
tions that might exist based on increases in that rate to 3 per cent,
3-1/4 per cent, or 3-1/2 per cent. It might be desirable to increase
the discount rate to 3 per cent to indicate an awareness on the part
of the System of the rising price level, Mr. Harris said, but before
doing so he would like to see the System put some reserves into the
market through purchases of bills. He would like to see net borrowed
reserves in the $200 million area or less. In other words, the Com
mittee should reassess its present policy with a view to adding re
serves to the market.

8/21/56 -19
Mr. Leedy said he had no material changes to report for
economic activity in the Kansas City District since the meeting
two weeks ago except that agricultural conditions had worsened in
certain areas because of the drouth. On credit policy, Mr. Leedy
felt that in the period immediately ahead the System should move
promptly on the discount rate, especially in view of the fact that
the prime rate and other money rates have already been moved up.
The Open Market Committee might continue with the policy agreed upon
at the meeting two weeks ago of applying pressure on bank reserves.
Perhaps it should aim in the direction of reducing net borrowed re
serves somewhat while adjustments to an increase in the discount rate
were taking place.
Mr. Leedy went on to say that the question in his mind was
whether the System would be in position to move further toward restric
tion a little later, and whether an additional increase in the discount
rate beyond a rise of 1/4 per cent would be required this fall. If
further increase were to be necessary, he felt the System would be in
difficulty unless the first step were taken promptly. One reason for
a move of 1/4 per cent at this time was to get the market settled a
little by eliminating uncertainty over the discount rate. Mr. Leedy
emphasized that in making this suggestion he was speaking in the light
of national conditions inasmuch as conditions in the Kansas City District
were not such as to require immediate action on the discount rate.

8/21/56 -20
Mr. Vardaman said that he felt about the same as he did two
weeks ago when he thought somewhere in the neighborhood of $200 million
negative free reserves would be proper, with the understanding that the
Committee might go as high as $400 million if that seemed necessary in
the light of any special circumstances that might develop. He was not
conscious of any circumstances that had developed that had warranted
more than $200 million of negative free reserves. He agreed that no
single figure could be used as a guide and that the management of the
account had to "play by ear" but he would prefer now to have a policy
that would call for negative free reserves somewhere in the $200-$250
million to zero area at this particular time as a means of reestablish
ing confidence. Mr. Vardaman added he was not particularly concerned
with the apparently chaotic conditions in the Government securities
market, believing that this situation would straighten itself out. As
to the discount rate, he did not feel that bringing the 10 Banks now
below the 3 per cent level up to that rate would have any effect in the
market, and he thought Mr. Leedy might have a point in suggesting that
the Committee should be poised to go above a 3 per cent rate a little
later if that seemed necessary.
Mr. Mills said that as he looked at the problems of the Com
mittee, the abrupt increase that occurred in the level of negative
free reserves to around $400 million had superimposed heavy pressure
on an already tight money market and has been responsible for the
disturbing market situation. As an indication of tightness he

8/21/56 -21
referred to the approximately $11 million of bankers' acceptances
reported by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to be overhanging
the market. The fact that the commercial banks took up $2.2 billion
of the Treasury's recent $3.2 billion offering of tax anticipation
certificates was also held by Mr. Mills to be a significant indication
of tightness in that corporations and other types of investors did not
participate more broadly in the offering. Considering the illiquid
positions of the commercial banks, the possibility could now be raised
that unless supplied with some new reserves they would be compelled
rapidly to sell off their holdings of the new tax anticipation certifi
cates and, in so doing, contribute further to the difficult position of
the U. S. Government securities market.
Mr. Mills stated that in his opinion the System was presently
following a destructively restrictive credit policy which, unless
changed, would in its logical conclusions lead to waves of unemployment
with consequences both to the Federal Reserve System and the economy
that would be too many to discuss at the present time. It was his be
lief that a retreat should be made, to the end of bringing the level
of negative free reserves down toward a $200 million level, but on a
gradual basis that would test the response of the market to such actions
by the System and in that way guide the System to the point at which the
market for U. S. Government securities would stabilize. It was Mr.
Mills' opinion that such a point of stability would fall realistically
in line with a 3 per cent discount rate, and it was his thought that

8/21/56 -22
that discount rate at the Federal Reserve Banks was in order.
Mr. Robertson said that perhaps he was more fearful of infla
tion than some others had indicated by their comments this morning.
Policy has not been too restrictive, he felt, and the results that
have flowed from carrying on that policy have been just about what
should have been expected. Mr. Robertson said that he would not be
concerned with the market, and he would align himself with the view
expressed by Mr. Leedy that pressure should be kept on. He doubted
the adequacy of a 3 per cent discount rate and, while it was probable
the System would go to that figure rather than to a higher rate at
this time, he thought we might be better off to go to a higher rate
now. He agreed that the System should be poised for a higher rate
later on.
Mr. Robertson referred to the continuous borrowing showing
up at the Reserve Banks, stating that he felt the Committee and the
System should study the desirability of a penalty rate to be applied
to continuous borrowers. While banks might be screening loan applica
tions, a very large volume of credit was still being created and this
was inflationary. In reiterating the view that pressure should be kept
on through the open market window, Mr. Robertson said he would not
hesitate to offset some of the need for additional reserves by supply
ing them through the open market during the next two weeks so long as
nothing was done to indicate a retreat from the level of restriction
that had been attained.

8/21/56 23
Mr. Shepardson said he felt much as Mr. Robertson had indi
cated. There were definite indications of rising prices and there
was no indication of assuaging that trend. The comment had been made
that possibly credit restraint could not do much toward stopping in
flation, but his view was that this was no reason for the Federal Re
serve System to fail to use all the restraint that was proper in an
effort to keep balance in the economy. An attrition of the dollar was
most unfortunate and it was almost impossible to regain its purchasing
power once inflationary influences had been felt. Mr. Shepardson's
feeling was that the discount rate should be increased as soon as
possible and he thought the System probably would need to go higher
than the 3 per cent level before this year was over. The System should,
of course, supply the reserves needed to meet fall seasonal demands but
these should not be supplied freely or in a way that would appear to
negate the aims of the System that would be suggested by an increase in
the discount rate. In other words, the additional reserves that might
be needed should be supplied sparingly.
Mr. Fulton said that one of the surprising things in the
Cleveland District was the rapidity with which the steel industry
had come back into production following the strike settlement. Mills
report they are booked almost solid for the fourth quarter of this year
and express reluctance to take on more orders for steel. Tool steel
and structural shapes are in record backlog, Mr. Fulton said. Other
industries are also reporting high levels of activity and hugh backlogs

8/21/6 -24-
of orders. Unemployment is very moderate and the situation as a
whole is one in which all employable persons are able to find jobs
readily. Loan demands in the Cleveland District are continuing strong
and bankers look for further moderate increases in applications for
short-term credit this fall. They state that demand for term loans
is far beyond what they can handle. Some bankers have indicated that
interest rates for bond financing have risen to a level that has caused
corporations to turn to bank credit instead of floating new issues for
capital expenditures. Bankers state that they are being selective but
that demand is very insistent and large in total. It would be in
appropriate for the System to supply funds through the open market in
such quantity as to permit price pressures to build up further, Mr.
Fulton said. He believed that restraint should be maintained, there
should be no relaxation, and discount rates should be brought up to
the 3 per cent level.
Mr. Williams said that the directors of the Philadelphia Bank
acted a few days ago to increase the discount rate by 1/4 of one per
cent to the 3 per cent level, following a full staff presentation of
banking and economic data which showed that pressure of demand for
credit in the Third District was relatively stronger than in the
United States as a whole. The directors also discussed the situation
in the United States as a whole. Two of the directors from the utili
ties field, in voting for the increased discount rate, emphasized the

8/21/56 -25
view that the market needed some certainty and while they were not
enthusiastic about higher rates, they felt such a move would be de
sirable. Bankers in the Philadelphia District are concerned that
they will not be able to meet the legitimate needs of business for
credit this fall. Mr. Williams said that he felt the System should
move to a higher discount rate. The Manager of the System Account
would have to handle the situation skillfully during the period of
adjustment to that rate, but the general objective should be to main
tain pressure on the market. The country was obviously in the throes
of uncertainty but this was only in terms of the internal situation
and there was more to be lost by postponing action on the discount
rate than by moving in the direction of putting pressure against the
inflationary influences.
Mr. Bryan reported little change in the Atlanta District since
the meeting two weeks ago noting that consumer spending continued to
increase and that loans at commercial banks had risen rather contra
seasonally. Several banks which had been out of debt at the Reserve
Bank a few weeks ago have now come back in. On the national picture,
Mr. Bryan said that the difficult problems before us included not only
what policy the Committee should follow but also what techniques it
should use. His view was that further restraint had to be applied.
The pressures with us are inflationary. At the same time, he was not
clear as to what the market was trying to tell us, and his concern

8/21/56 -26
was that the situation be handled without precipitating a disorderly
market if that was possible. If a disorderly market were to develop,
the Committee might be compelled to undertake some support operations
to prevent a panic, and that might result in loss of control to effect
policy for some period of time. Mr. Bryan felt that the System should
flag down borrowing banks by telling them that borrowing is going to
cost them more, that they would have to police their loans more rigidly,
and that they would have to try to avoid making capital loans in so far
as that was possible. After borrowing banks had been flagged down by
an increase in the discount rate, the account would have to be extremely
adept if it were to avoid creating a disorderly situation in the market.
The past has demonstrated that a given level of free reserves means one
thing at one time and another thing at another time, so that policy
decisions aimed at a given level of free reserves often produce un
predictable money rate effects; and that fundamental difficulty is
compounded because the factors affecting free reserves often exhibit
erratic and unpredictable behavior from day to day, so that, regardless
of our difficulty in appraising the monetary effect of an aimed-at
level of free reserves, we are even unable in the short-run to effect
the intended level of free reserves with any substantial degree of
precision. Mr. Bryan hoped that the management of the account in
trying to estimate its actions would not have in mind any level of
free reserves but would have in mind the behavior of the market which
should be related to the interest rate. If large adjustments are indi
cated by an increase in the discount rate, action should be taken to

8/21/56 -27
supply reserves freely to avoid precipitating a panicky decline in the
Government securities market.
Mr. Johns said that in attempting to present the comments of a
businessman earlier during this meeting, he did not intend to associate
himself, at least without grave qualifications, with the position that
had been indicated. He, along with members of his staff at the St.
Louis Bank, had been greatly concerned recently about the techniques
that should be followed at this time in conducting credit policy.
Yesterday afternoon he had read an announcement in Business Week to the
effect that credit policy decisions have been taken, not only as to
content but as to timing. Mr. Johns said that on the side of timidity
this announcement generated relief, but on the side of his responsibility
as a member of the Open Market Committee he felt some resentment that
he was not to participate in the decisions. He recognized how ingenious
writers are but in this case he wondered whether there was a basis for
the story that had appeared in Business Week. Mr. Johns said that he
felt the members of the Open Market Committee were entitled to know
what, if any, basis there was for the statement.
With respect to policy, Mr. Johns said that he was inclined
to believe greater restraint was necessary. He also felt it could
best be accomplished by increasing the cost of credit rather than by
further restriction on credit availability. Restrictions on the
availability of credit in the capital markets are already well known.

8/21/56 -28.
There is an imbalance between the supply of investment funds and de
mand for such funds, he said, and he was inclined to think that if any
thing could be done to redress that imbalance, action should be taken
on the cost side calculated to dampen the increasing demand for credit,
realizing that whatever the System did about the supply side would be
a slow process.
Mr. Johns went on to say that he was concerned about the spill
over of capital demands into the banking sector. Restraint needed to
be applied on the cost side with the objective of inhibiting borrowers
rather than of inhibiting lenders. He was inclined to think that a
moderate rise in short-term interest rates would not restrict lenders
very much.
Mr. Johns said that, as indicated by Mr. Hayes, a case could be
made for increasing the discount rate by more than 1/4 per cent. How
ever, he was timid about making a greater increase at one time and would
go along with an increase of 1/4 per cent at first, although he would be
ready to take the next step without delay. He would not increase the
pressure on reserves and would not permit the net borrowed reserve
figure to go higher. If anything, he would wish to see it decline from
the $400 million level, feeling that the desired effects should be
gotten by an increase in the cost of credit.
Mr. Johns said he was interested in Mr. Robertson's suggestion
as to a penalty rate to be assessed against continuous borrowers. He

8/21/56 -29
would be reluctant at the present time, however, to apply such a rate
in the Memphis area where banks would be borrowing continuously for
legitimate reasons at this time of year.
In response to a question from Mr. Vardaman, Mr. Hayes stated
that during a transitional stage in which the market might be adjusting
to a higher discount rate, he would not contemplate using open market
operations as a means of applying additional restraint. In fact, it
might be desirable to supply additional reserves through the open market.
He would not hesitate to provide reserves, based on the feel of the
market from day to day, especially if in the transition to a 3 per cent
rate it was found that near-disorderly conditions developed.
Chairman Martin said that his views had not shifted since the
previous meeting of the Committee. What he had said at that time would
still apply, except for the recent developments in the money market
which he felt placed on the Committee some responsibility for endeavor
ing to keep conditions that are not disorderly. His personal view was
that conditions have not been disorderly up to the present time, although
he recognized that this was a matter of judgment.
Chairman Martin referred to the question whether the boom in
capital goods was coming to an end and to the fundamental point mentioned
at the preceding meeting having to do with misdirection of economic re
sources. He noted specifically a comment that Mr. Harris had made, which
confirmed his fears regarding the attitude of persons in the automobile
industry. At this time of year, business activity might be expected to

8/21/56 -30
be seasonally slow and a real push in production would not be anticipated
until mid- or late-September. Without intending to be critical of auto
mobile company managements, he was fearful that they were again mis
judging the market. We are dealing with a very difficult virus, the
Chairman said, and there are indications already of overcapacity in some
segments of the economy that have been created over a long period of
defense build-up. In the long run, this build-up of capacity in certain
lines would have important effects, and one of the problems would be to
minimize undesirable effects. The System wished to preserve employment
and prevent or minimize unemployment that would come from an excess of
capacity created indiscriminately under the impression that industry
could pass increased costs on to the public in the form of higher prices.
One of the reasons it has been impossible to keep discussions that have
gone on in this room from the public is that the public is participating
in these discussions because of what they see every day. This should be
expected when the signs of inflation are as clear as they are now. Chair
man Martin referred to letters he was receiving bearing out this fear on
the part of the public, adding the comment that the disease of inflation
was recognized by many persons and that they were frightened by it. This
included labor leaders who fear unemployment in mid-1957 or 1958, if the
present trend continues.
The System should be trying to do everything that it could to
prevent unemployment from arising in a way in which it could not be
handled, Chairman Martin said. He recalled the closing comment that

8/21/56 -31
Mr. Young had made in his economic review at the meeting two weeks
ago to the effect that the problem faced by the economy at this time
is inflation fed by the competitive spending, investing, and borrow
ing propensities of a highly optimistic business and consumer public,
and that the dangers lie partly in misdirected use of resources. The
Chairman emphasized the need for the System to use monetary and credit
policy to produce an efficient allocation of the country's resources,
including savings, as far as that reasonably could be done by market
processes. He said that he was completely familiar with the fact that
credit policy was inhibiting the lender more than the borrower, but
he did not know how to achieve the other objective.
The question of timing of a change in the discount rate was
important, Chairman Martin said, and he referred to the action taken
by the Philadelphia Reserve Bank to increase its rate to the 3 per
cent level, stating that he assumed additional Banks would soon be
taking similar action. He then asked for comments as to the timing
of an announcement by the Board of an increase in the discount rate
and whether it would be preferable for such announcement to be made
this week or a little later.
On this question, Mr. Hayes expressed the view that under the
conditions discussed at this meeting, the sooner the action was taken
the better from the standpoint of clarifying to the business community
the System's policy.
After discussion of this question, Chairman Martin referred
to Mr. Johns' comment earlier during the meeting regarding the

8/21/56 -32
statement that appeared in the current issue of Business Week, The
Chairman said that while he had not read this statement, he had been
following the press very closely for the past week or ten days and
that he had observed positive statements in several different publica
tions that the System was going to increase the discount rate. He was
particularly anxious to state for the record, he said, that he had
talked with a reporter for Business Week recently but that he did not
discuss the question of current action on the discount rate, although
he did discuss the action that had been taken last April. If the
reporter deduced from this discussion anything as to action that
might be taken at the present time he did so entirely on his own,
Chairman Martin said. However, the timing of such action was entirely
in the hands of the System. It was necessary always to keep in mind
that a large number of persons was present at these meetings when the
subject of a change in the discount rate was under discussion. It
was impossible to keep conjecture from occurring, the Chairman said,
but each of us must be extremely careful to remember that he has a
special responsibility, vis-a-vis the press.
Chairman Martin then turned to the wording of the Committee's
directive to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, inquiring whether
any members of the Committee wished to suggest a modification of that
wording at the present time. There were no suggestions for change.
The Chairman noted that there was some difference in the views as to
the volume of net borrowed reserves that should be maintained during

8/21/56 -33
the period between now and the next meeting of the Committee.. He did
not know how these different views could be resolved, but he was glad
to note that more and more the members of the Committee were moving
away from the use of a figure of net borrowed reserves as a guide. In
attempting to sum up the majority view as to policy for the immediate
future, the Chairman said that he gathered that none of the members of
the Committee wished an appreciable relaxation of pressure in the market
and that for the most part they did not wish to use open market opera
tions to increase pressure on reserves during a period of discount rate
adjustments.
At Mr. Vardaman's suggestion, Mr. Hayes reiterated his comments
as to the policy that might be followed, stating that he would favor
maintaining restraint somewhere near its present level, that he would
not have in mind increasing the restraint, and that he would be ready
to reduce pressure at least temporarily if the Account Management felt
that the tone of the market seemed to require such action during the
transitional period of an increase in the discount rate.
Mr. Shepardson stated that he would understand this to mean
that while the level of net borrowed reserves might be reduced, this
would be done as a means of maintaining about the same pressure that
existed in the market and of avoiding a further build-up in pressure,
and Mr. Hayes stated that this was correct. Mr. Hayes also stated in
response to a comment from Mr. Robertson that he would not have in
mind taking action to put reserves into the market during the next few

8/21/56 -34
days in a way that would indicate relaxation, subject to the reserva
tion that if the market seemed to be getting out of hand it might be
desirable to put in some reserves. However, on the basis of projec
tions it looked as though net borrowed reserves this week would average
around $250 million and it probably would not be necessary to take any
further action until early next week.
Chairman Martin noted that Messrs. Erickson and Irons had
emphasized the point that the Account Management should use the "feel"
of the market in its operations in this particular period. He agreed
that it was necessary to depend on the Account Management to do the
best it could within the framework of the Committee's general policy.
In the immediate future, this should be with tho understanding that
the Committee wished the Account Management to make every effort to
avoid indicating an appreciable change in policy through open market
operations, recognizing that it would be very difficult to carry out
this program. None of the members of the Committee indicated dis
agreement with Chairman Martin's statement of policy or of procedures
to be followed in carrying it out.
The Chairman then inquired of Mr. Treiber whether he would
recommend any change in the amounts specified in the directive, and
Mr. Treiber stated that he had no change to suggest.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Comittee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York until otherwise
directed by the Committee:

8/21/56 -35-
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (in
cluding replacement of maturing securities, and allowing
maturities to run off without replacement) for the System
open market account in the open market or, in the case of
maturing securities, by direct exchange with the Treasury,
as may be necessary in the light of current and prospective
economic conditions and the general credit situation of the
country, with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in
the market to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to
restraining inflationary developments in the interest of
sustainable economic growth, and (c) to the practical ad
ministration of the account; provided that the aggregate
amount of securities held in the System account (including
commitments for the purchase or sale of securities for the
account) at the close of this date, other than special short
term certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to
time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall
not be increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the ac
count of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with dis
cretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue
participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such
amounts of special short-term certificates of indebtedness
as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total
amount of such certificates held at any one time by the
Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate
$500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System
account for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury
securities maturing within one year as may be necessary
from time to time for the accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such securities so sold
shall not exceed in the aggregate $500 million face amount,
and such sales shall be made as nearly as may be practicable
at the prices currently quoted in the open market.
Chairman Martin noted that the agenda provided for a discussion
at this meeting of the proposal of the New York Bank that the System
account be authorized to engage in swaps of Treasury bills. He stated
that he would prefer that discussion of this topic be postponed until
the next meeting of the Committee, and there was no disagreement with

8/21/56 -36
this suggestion.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee should
be held on Tuesday, September 11, 1956.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary