A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Monday, December 10, 1956, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. E rickson
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Johns
Mr. Mills
Mr. Powell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Messrs. Allen, Leedy, Treiber, and Williams,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Leach, Irons, and Mangels, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Dallas,
and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Abbott, Hostetler, Parsons, Roelse,
Willis, and Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Cameron F. Cobbold, Governor of the Bank of England, was
present during the presentation of the chart review of economic and

12/10/56 -2
financial conditions. Mr. Fauver, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors, accompanied Governor Cobbold.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the mem
bers of the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York covering open market operations during the period Novem
ber 27, 1956 through December 4, 1956 and a supplementary report
covering commitments executed December 5 through December 7, 1956.
Copies of both reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.
Mr. Rouse said that, as stated in the supplementary report,
the Treasury bill market continued heavy and sluggish over the three
day period December 5 through 7 despite continued System purchases.
The announcement by the Treasury on Friday, December 7, of an addi
tional $1 billion cash offering of special March 22 tax bills, to be
auctioned December 12 and paid for December 17, came as a shock to the
market, he said, since it had appeared that the Treasury's financing
needs for the rest of this year had been taken care of. The immediate
effect in the market was precautionary, with a marking up of rates on
Treasury bills. Expectations in the market were that today's auction
of regular Treasury bills might sell at a 3.25 per cent yield or higher.
Mr. Rouse also stated that during the past two weeks the market for
municipal securities and particularly for corporate bonds seemed to
have steadied. In the light of conditions that seemed to be develop
ing on Friday afternoon, December 7, and in view of the bill auction
today, the Account Management had decided to make purchases this

12/10/56 -3
morning perhaps to the amount of $60 or $70 million.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period November 27
through December 7, 1956, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Chairman Martin said that he had placed on the agenda for
discussion at this meeting the suggestion that each Reserve Bank
President be authorized to bring an economist from his staff to
meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. He noted that the
Presidents who were members of the Committee were now accompanied
by their economists, and it was the Chairman's thought that even
though the adoption of this suggestion would increase the number of
persons attending open market meetings, it was important that each
of the Presidents be kept as fully informed of developments as
possible and that he be given the benefit of having an economist
with him if he so desired.
All who commented on this suggestion indicated that they
favored the procedure. In the discussion, the point was made that
each Reserve Bank President would be free to use his judgment as to
whether he wished to be accompanied by an economist from his staff
at any specific meeting of the Committee, and the Chairman also made
it clear that he felt it would be a mistake to have an economist
attend a meeting unless the President of his Bank also was present.
The discussion concluded with the understanding that in the future
each Reserve Bank President who was not at the time a member of the

12/10/56
-4
Federal Open Market Committee would be free to bring an economist
from his staff (not necessarily the same one each time) to meetings
of the Committee if he felt it desirable to do so.
Members of the International Finance and Research and
Statistics Divisions of the Board entered the room at this point
to assist in the presentation of an economic and credit review,
illustrated by chart slides. A copy of the script and charts used
in the review was sent to each of the members of the Committee follow
ing the meeting.
In opening the review, Mr. Young pointed out that before the
dramatic developments of the past six weeks in the Middle East and in
Western Europe, the economic situation in the United States was being
appraised very largely in terms of domestic developments. Activity
abroad was generally thought of as continuing to increase or being
maintained at existing high levels. The recent international develop
ments had had important economic effects abroad, he noted, including
a substantial drain on British monetary reserves, curtailment of the
flow of oil to Western Europe, and sharp increases in shipping rates.
Domestically, industrial production and industrial prices had advanced
further to new high levels in recent months. Increases in both pro
duction and prices had been widespread. Unemployment was low, gross
national product had continued to rise, and greater expansion in
capital equipment expenditures had taken place this year than had

12/10/56
been anticipated a year ago. In contrast, production of automobiles
had not been so high as in 1955 and starts of new housing units had
declined during 1956. Monetary and fiscal policies had operated to
restrain excessive demands in money markets and in the economy generally.
Mr. Thomas concluded the analysis of the economic situation with
a statement as follows
The review of the business and financial scene presented
here this morning indicates need for continued restraint on
credit expansion in the near future, although no additional
restraining measures would seem necessary. While not all
sectors of the economy have been at their peak rates this year,
over-all demands have been so great that many industries,
particularly some supplying basic materials, have been operat
ing close to capacity. In the period ahead, changes in demand
will differ from those evident this year, with autos and hous
ing probably not repeating their marked declines and capital
outlays probably not repeating their sharp advance, though
continuing to increase. The impact of international develop
ments is difficult to gauge, but, over all, the situation in
this country may well continue to be one of high utilization
of growing resources and continuing upward pressures on
prices. Credit demands, particularly for long-term funds,
may continue to exceed the flow of savings. It is in the
light of these circumstances that monetary and fiscal policies
and business plans need to be considered.
At its conclusion, members of the staff who had entered the room
to assist in the economic review withdrew, as did Governor Cobbold and
Mr. Fauver.
Chairman Martin next called upon Mr. Hayes for a statement of
his views on the economic and credit situation and of his suggestions
for open market operations. Mr. Hayes made a statement as follows
1. Basic economic conditions remain about as they were
two weeks ago. Despite continuing strength in current statistics

12/10/56 -6-
for production, employment, and income, we still find a
variety of indications that the upward pressure of the
boom may be diminishing and that this could easily lead
to a leveling off in production and income figures within
the next few months.
2. Among factors which point toward continued upward
pressures may be mentioned public expenditures, which are
almost sure to increase substantially next year, although
in the area of Federal expenditures the size and timing of
the increase are difficult to appraise. The upward trend
in prices of industrial products has continued and, in this
connection, the recent rise in hard coal wages and prices,
the prospect of a 3 cent per hour cost of living increase
in steel wages in January, and an increase in transportation
costs are also worth noting.
3. On the other hand we are impressed by the relative
sluggishness of consumer demand in the face of the current
high level of personal income. The implication that savings
have been increasing is, of course, all to the good for the
moment in helping to correct the present imbalance between
demands for capital and available savings. However, for the
longer run it raises a question whether larger productive
capacities, together with consumer resistance to higher prices,
may cause increasing difficulties in consumer goods industries,
which in turn could act as a deterrent to a continued high
level of capital expenditures.
4. Furthermore, there are cross currents in recent price
developments which suggest that the Suez crisis has made for a
spirit of caution on the outlook for world commodity trade, and
this has tended to offset any influence the crisis may have had
toward a speculative inventory buildup in certain types of com
modities. Raw material prices as a whole have been rather
stable.
5. Most surveys of private capital expenditures in the
coming year point to a flattening out of the current high level
rather than any new sharp gains.
6. The recent growth in business loans of banks has been
about in line with seasonal expectations. It also seems likely
that repayments of such loans will proceed in accordance with
the seasonal pattern in January and February, although there is
some question as to the timing of whatever impact on loans may
be felt in the event that automobile sales show sizable gains
over 1956 figures. It now looks as if borrowings for March tax
payments may be at least as large as in 1956, in view of reduced
corporate liquidity, so that for the first quarter as a whole
loans may fail to show the normal seasonal contraction, as was
true also in 1956.

12/10/56
7. Our hopes that the Treasury would be out of the mar
ket for some time, apart from the regular weekly bill offerings,
have of course proved to be ill-founded, in the light of the
emergency cash needs resulting from the sterling crisis. We
must again be prepared to assist in maintaining a receptive
atmosphere for the new financing.
8. We find ourselves in a puzzling and difficult situation
with respect to application of sound monetary policy. On the
one hand, there is continuing need for general credit restraint,
since the balance of economic forces is still upward. But at
the same time, we are impressed by the divergent tendencies in
the domestic business outlook, by the sensitivity of the capital
markets--even though they have shown some tendency to stabilize
at least temporarily--and also by the sensitivity of the Treas
ury bill market. Moreover, this is of course a time when
seasonal pressures are naturally great, and these pressures
themselves are generating considerable restraint. Also there
is a good deal of talk of a possible discount rate change, this
talk being encouraged by the several recent increases in ac
ceptance rates, by gossip of a possible prime loan rate rise (this
time by perhaps as much as 1/2%), and by the persistent tendency
of yields on the longer-Treasury bills to stay well above the
discount rate. This tendency has been further emphasized by
the reactions on Friday to the latest Treasury financing an
nouncement. Despite a considerable easing of the banks' re
serve position, both countrywide and in New York, as measured
by the statistics alone, a general atmosphere of tightness
still prevails, doubtless due in part to the fact that the
liquidity of banks and corporations has reached a very low
level, and also because of the seasonal need for cash for
dividend disbursements and tax payments and the continuing
demand for loans coming on top of already large commitments.
9. We feel that it would be unwise under these conditions
to add to the strains already evident in the money and capital
markets, and we would urge the use of open market operations
freely if needed to prevent any intensification of these strains,
even if sizable net free reserves should be a result. The effect
of float and other factors should reinforce our efforts and make
it possible to obtain the desired results with fewer bill pur
chases than would otherwise be required. We would not recommend
any change in discount rates at this time, in spite of the up
ward tendency of short-term market rates of interest. We be
lieve that the directive may properly be left unchanged in view
of the fact that our next meeting will presumably occur shortly
after the turn of the year, at which time it will be appropriate

12/10/56 -8.
to reconsider the clause relating to seasonal factors and to
consider whether any other change of emphasis should be made
in the light of intervening developments.
Mr. Erickson said that in the Boston District the situation on
the whole was one of strength although there were some signs of weak
ness in the economic picture. The improvement in the textile industry
that had been shown in August had not been sustained, Mr. Erickson
recalled his earlier reports of increases in the value of construction
contract awards, stating that during the first ten months of this year
they were 11 per cent higher than in the comparable period of 1955.
However, during the first 22 days of November a decline was reported.
Withdrawals from savings accounts exceeded deposits during October for
the first time since last April.
Mr. Erickson described an interesting development in banking
in the First District, stating that last week it had become known that
the First National Bank of Boston and Granite Trust Company of Quincy,
Massachusetts, were planning to consolidate. The first step would be
the conversion of Granite Trust Company, now a nonmember insured bank,
into a national bank, Mr. Erickson said that the State laws of
Massachusetts provided that a trust company may operate branches only
within the county in which its head office is located, while savings
banks may operate branches within a radius of 15 miles of their head
office. The First National Bank of Boston is located in Suffolk
County while Granite Trust Company is located in Norfolk County. Mr.
Erickson went on to say that a bill had been drafted which would propose

12/10/56 -9
that the State legislature permit trust companies to operate branches
in the same areas as were permitted to savings banks.
With respect to credit policy, Mr. Erickson said that he felt
there should be no increase in the discount rate at this time nor should
there be a change in the Committee's directive. Open market operations
should be handled during the next few weeks on the same basis as during
the past two weeks, making reserves available to meet requirements as
they develop even if this results in positive free reserves.
Mr. Irons stated that conditions in the Dallas District con
tinued at a strong high level and appeared to be on something of a
plateau. Increases in various measures recently had been comparatively
small, as might be expected when economic activities were close to full
utilization of capacities. Mr. Irons felt that small increases at this
stage might, however, result in as much pressure as would larger in
creases when the economy was using relatively less of its available
facilities. Nonresidential construction contract awards continue to
rise, he said, but the number of residential starts recently had been
down. Consumer spending had not shown an appreciable increase over a
year ago and the expected seasonal increase in spending had not yet
developed. Bank loans were increasing only slightly and the pressures
of demand recently have not been as great as they were a few months
ago. Nationally, Mr. Irons said that he concurred in the general view
indicated in the report of the staff at this meeting: there was marked

12/10/56 -10.
strength in the picture and it seemed to call for a continuation of
the general policy the Committee had been following. At the same
time, year-end factors would be with us in the market. These should
be taken care of, but Mr. Irons hoped that the Committee would retain as
much restraint as was feasible while meeting the year-end needs. He
felt that no increase should be made in discount rates at this time.
Mr. Mangels said that Twelfth District developments recently
had been much as he had reported at the past several meetings. New
peaks were being reached in various measures of activity. There had
been some rather large gains in erection of new factories and office
buildings, and construction of educational buildings had increased.
Reports from bankers indicated that the dollar volume of residential
construction during the coming year would decline somewhat below this
year's level. Christmas trade volume was down somewhat from a year ago,
but stores were not yet concerned about the total for the month as a
whole. New model automobiles seemed to have been received satisfactorily,
but there had not yet been a strong upswing in sales, and volume of cars
sold in the retail market had not yet caused retail financing to rise.
Borrowings at the Reserve Bank continued relatively small with only a
few banks discounting. Mr. Mangels said that he would concur in the
policy course suggested by Mr. Hayes, that is, renew the Committee's
directive without change, meet year-end needs as they develop, and make
no change in discount rates at present.
Mr. Powell noted that some phases of economic activity in the
Ninth District were seasonally inactive at present because of the winter

12/10/56 -11
weather. Retail trade was running at a somewhat higher level than
appeared to be the case in the rest of the country. New model auto
mobiles were not yet selling well; this did not seem to reflect lack
of acceptance of the new cars but rather seemed to be due to inventory
problems. Federal Reserve credit had continued to contract in the
Ninth District and larger city banks were extending credit on a Fed
eral funds basis to other parts of the country. Mr. Powell felt that
the Committee should continue a policy of restraint, bearing in mind
the uneasy international situation. The Account Management had been
wise in making credit as readily available as it had recently, he said
but he hoped there would not be much more need for buying of bills by
the System account since float and other factors might provide most of
the reserves necessary to meet year-end demand, Mr. Powell said that
he would not favor an increase in discount rates at present and that
he felt the policy the Committee had been following should be continued
until the picture became clearer after the turn of the year,
Mr. Allen said that there had been no developments in the
Seventh District in the 13 days since the preceding meeting that had
affected the economic outlook materially. Representatives of the auto
mobile industry indicated that it would be the middle or the end of
January before they could determine the acceptance of their new models.
Most of the corn belt had excellent crops this year and with high prices
for hogs and cattle, the leading sourcesof farm income in that area,
the financial position of farmers had improved and currently was

12/10/56 -12
probably stronger than a year ago. This had not yet had much effect
on spending attitudes, however. The number of feeder cattle purchased
this fall exceeded the large number purchased a year ago and this was
reflected in bank loans to farmers in the cattle feeder areas. The
net income and financial position of dairy farmers was about the same
as a year ago. Mr. Allen reported a good outlook for the major Mid
west live stock products, stating that further gains in farm income
were expected in 1957. The large surplus of feed grains on hand can
be expected to result in lower feed grain prices and larger supplies
of live stock products at some future time unless production is reduced
substantially by the Soil Bank program. The recent improvements in
farm income had been due largely to increased Government assistance and
to smaller supplies of hogs and choice cattle. Mr. Allen said that he
concurred with those who had spoken thus far this morning as to national
monetary policy during the next few weeks, and he noted that there
seemed to be almost unanimous agreement thus far in comments on this
point.
Mr. Leedy said that the only Tenth District development on which
he would comment was the Christmas trade situation: merchants seemed
well satisfied and department store sales, as reflected in the last
weekly report, were slightly higher than a year ago, notwithstanding
the widespread drought conditions in the District. He associated him
self completely with the views expressed by Mr. Hayes. The offering by
the Treasury of additional special bills last week, arising from the

12/10/56 -13
British crisis, had taken him completely by surprise. Mr. Leedy felt
that the program the Committee had been following during the past few
weeks should be continued over the year end,
Mr. Leach said that since the meeting two weeks ago he had seen
no changes in the economic picture, either in the Fifth District or in
the nation, warranting an increase in restraint. Rather, the condition
of the capital market seemed to be the Committee's major concern in
spite of the slight improvement that had occurred. In this period of
strong seasonal pressures, aggravated by the new Treasury financing,
Mr. Leach felt the market appeared likely to continue in an unsettled
condition. In his judgment, there would be considerable danger of ad
verse effects from any increased restrictiveness. It was clear to him
that there should be no increase in the discount rate now. The amount
of free reserves was of little significance at this time, Mr. Leach
said, and it was his view that if the market seemed to feel any tighter
at all, reserves should be added. There should also be a liberal atti
tude toward the use of repurchase agreements. Mr. Leach said he could
see no reason to change the Committee's directive at this meeting.
Mr. Mills said that he, too, would subscribe to the approach to
open market operations that Mr. Hayes had outlined and the reasons he
gave for that approach, with the qualification that the market for U. S.
Government securities continues to demand the Committee's very close at
tention at least through the remainder of this year. As he looked at
it, his position has been reinforced by events since the preceding

12/10/56 -14-
meeting. Under these circumstances, it was Mr. Mills' view that the
Committee as far as possible should anticipate relief to the U. S.
Government securities market by purchases of Treasury bills rather
than delay action until the need for relief had been unquestionably
indicated by market conditions. In further explanation of his views,
Mr. Mills made a statement as follows:
Now that the United States has indicated its willing
ness to aid Great Britain in its defense of the pound, the
eyes of the economic world will focus on this country and
the steps that it must take to fulfill its commitment for
British aid. Inasmuch as the mechanics of United States
support to the pound are known to involve U. S. Treasury
actions, including the Treasury's offering of $1 billion
of Treasury bills to be auctioned December 12 and paid for
on December 17, it would be unfortunate if the System's
monetary policy should be allowed to conflict with any
question of stability in the market for U. S. Government
securities. An unsettled market for U. S. Government
securities could cause foreigners to question the ability
of the United States to help defend the British pound
sterling this time. It is, therefore, of critical im
portance that System open market policy be conducted
through the remainder of 1956 with the primary purpose
of maintaining stability in the market for U. S. Govern
ment securities.
Accomplishment of that purpose is entirely practicable
even though the process of doing so is likely to involve
continued substantial purchases of Treasury bills by the
System Open Market Account. Under other circumstances,
purchases of Treasury bills in volume, in supplying new
reserves, would expand the availability of bank credit
which, if that were to happen at the present time to any
degree, would be contrary to the System's determination
to maintain reasonable restraint over the growth of bank
credit. However, normal and fortuitous factors present in
the money market can be expected to work on the side of the
System's policy in preventing any undesired expansion of
bank credit. The factor of seasonal pressures on the money
market is a normal influence on the side of the System's
policy objective and one which is heightened this year by

12/10/56
unusually large demands for cash on the part of corporations
arranging their dividend distributions. The year-end window
dressing activities of commercial banks and corporations are
an additional normal factor operating against an undue expan
sion of bank credit incident upon the provision of new reserves
through System action.
Of the fortuitous factors that are present to prevent new
reserves from effecting an undue increase in bank credit is,
first, the disinclination of the commercial banks further to
increase their loans in the face of their already abnormally
high loan-to-deposit ratios; secondly, the influence of the
issuance of the Treasury's special tax anticipation bills of
January 16 and February 15 maturities and, now, the offering
of its further issue of a special Treasury bill carrying a
March 22 maturity, all combine to permit and require the System
Open Market Account to purchase Treasury bills in volume, but
free of stimulating an unwise expansion of bank credit. This
is because these issues of Treasury bills were or will be
originally subscribed largely by commercial banks against their
Treasury Tax and Loan Accounts, the lives of which will have
expired or will expire prior to December 31, 1956, which will
cause a substantial volume of these instruments to come back
on the market at a time that corporations, who might normally
acquire them, will be prevented from doing so by their own
reduced liquidity and other fiscal necessities. As that is
the case, it will be incumbent upon the System Open Market
Account to acquire such surplus of the special Treasury bills
as comes into the market and cannot be absorbed at reasonable
yields, all so that the System's operations will serve to
preserve stability in the market for U. S. Government securi
ties. Even if it should develop that greater amounts of re
serves than desirable are injected into the market because of
such a program, correction of that situation should not prove
difficult in the normal course of events transpiring after
the end of the year. In fact, the projected withdrawal of
reserves intended for early January may need to be tempered
so as to assist the market over January 16 when the refunding
of the special issue of Treasury bills maturing on that date
must be handled.
A final fortuitous circumstance that will indirectly act
as an influence preventing the expansion of bank credit is the
very rise in prices which it is a purpose of System monetary
and credit policy to restrain. Considering the reduced
liquidity of both commercial banks and corporations, it is
obvious that rising prices will stand to be reflected in higher
investments by corporations in inventories and accounts receiva
ble and in some consequent demand for new bank credit in order

12/10/56 -16.
to finance such investments. Due to the liquidity factor
mentioned, it is unlikely that either corporations or com
mercial banks will seek to expand their positions of already
strained liquidity, and as that is the case, rising prices
may prove to be a restraining rather than an expansive
credit influence and should certainly tend to minimize the
use of credit for speculative inventory purposes or the like.
Mr. Robertson said that he saw no reason to vary during the next
three or four week period from the policy that the Committee had been
maintaining during the past two weeks.
Mr. Shepardson said that his views were essentially the same as
those already expressed regarding open market policy for the next three
or four weeks. However, he felt the Committee should be in position to
take up slack after the turn of the year.
Mr. Fulton said that in the Cleveland District activity was still
very high. Farmers by and large were in very good shape. The steel in
dustry was operating above capacity as it had been during 15 of the past
16 weeks, and capacity operations were expected during the first six
months of next year. Automobile manufacturers were not buying ahead as
heavily as they have at this season in previous years; along with others,
they were reducing their inventories in terms of number of days supply
because they felt that interruptions to deliveries were less likely to
occur now than in earlier years as a result of renewal of labor con
tracts during the past few months. For example, the automobile industry
was now carrying supplies of steel for about twenty days instead of for
sixty days, as had been the case in earlier years. Mr. Fulton said that
the high price of steel scrap was resulting in greater exports of scrap

12/10/56 -17
than the steel industry felt to be desirable, and was causing increases
in costs of steel production with the result that a further increase in
steel prices was considered likely soon after the first of the year. Mr.
Fulton did not favor an increase in the discount rate at this time. Free
reserves during the next few weeks would not have an important impact be
cause of the feeling of tightness that existed in the market, and because
banks and corporations have a reduced liquidity position. The present
policy has been good, Mr. Fulton said, adding that restraint could be
maintained with comparatively little effort on the part of the System,
and reserves should be supplied willingly through the end of the year.
Mr. Williams said that a survey of Christmas retail business in
the Philadelphia area last week indicated that the dollar volume was
disappointing, although retailers were anticipating they would end the
year with sales 1 or 2 per cent higher than last year and none of them
were predicting a decline. The international situation had affected
consumer attitudes toward spending, but price considerations did not
seem to be a factor in the recent disappointing showing of retail sales.
Another development of interest in the Philadelphia District was the
improvement in the anthracite coal industry around Wilkes Barre which
was the last area in the United States to come out of the high un
employment category. This was because of improved sales stemming from
the British position, Mr. Williams said. Some improvement also had
taken place in textile firms in the district. General plans for
capital expenditures indicated that they would be higher in 1957 than

12/10/56 -18
in 1956 and the highest since 1954. Mr. Williams said that his general
attitude was that there should be no change in discount rates between
now and the end of the year, that the Committee's directive should not
be changed at this time, and that a program of modest restraint was in
order.
Mr. Johns said that one of the large banks in the St. Louis
District that had been out of debt at the Reserve Bank recently had
come back to the discount window and had indicated that it would be
borrowing for the next several weeks. He had no other developments
in the Eighth District worthy of reporting at this time. With respect
to policy, he was completely in agreement with the views expressed by
Mr. Hayes, which he understood to have been supported by the others
who had commented at this meeting.
Mr. Szymczak said that he too agreed with Mr. Hayes. The
borrowing of an additional $1 billion by the Treasury had affected
the market both because it was a large amount and because it was so
unexpected. This influence together with developments in the Middle
East was all on the expansion side rather than on the other side.
However, in the circumstances, Mr. Szymczak felt there was nothing to
do but to continue the policy the Committee had been following in
recent weeks.
Mr. Balderston said he saw no fundamental change in the situa
tion during the past two weeks. The mixed nature of conditions impressed

12/10/56 -19
him. Persons close to the steel industry had indicated that there
might be another price increase of $3.50 a ton after the turn of the
year, and the Committee knew that further wage increases were in
evitable. On the other hand, Mr. Balderston said that softening spots
were emerging in the economy and these should be kept in mind lest the
leveling off might turn into something that the Committee should be off
setting. Between now and the end of the year he felt that continuance
of the current policy was indicated.
Chairman Martin said it was obvious that the international situa
tion was an overriding consideration at the present time, and he re
iterated the comment he had made at the preceding meeting that this factor
might have long-term implications that would require the Committee's care
ful study over a considerable period of time. He felt it unfortunate
that the price increases we have been and are observing were taking place,
but the forces causing them had already occurred and the Committee could
do nothing about them at this stage. These price increases probably were
working in a restraining manner at this time, Chairman Martin said, and
he thought it would become more and more difficult to pass the increases
on to consumers. Also, with the capital market in its present condition,
normal factors would be working in a restraining manner.
The Chairman went on to say that it seemed clear that the con
sensus of today's meeting indicated no change in the directive to be
issued to the New York Bank.
Mr. Shepardson referred to the Chairman's remark to the effect

12/10/56 -20
that it was too late for the Committee to do anything about the price
increases that had been or now were taking place. He recognized that
this might be the case but urged that the Committee be on its guard
against development of forces that would result in further price in
creases, in so far as it was within the Committee's power to influence
prices. International factors were of importance right now, he said,
and there was unanimity of opinion that the Committee should not apply
additional restraint over the year-end period. However, he reiterated
his earlier view that after the turn of the year the Committee should be
looking for opportunities to exercise whatever control it had to prevent
conditions developing to a point where we would have to say that it was
too late for the Committee to do anything about price increases.
Chairman Martin stated that this comment was well taken. He then
inquired whether any change in the directive to be issued to the New York
Bank was believed to be necessary and, in the absence of suggestions,
stated that the existing directive would be renewed without change.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Committee voted unanimously
to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York until otherwise directed by the Com
mittee
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (including
replacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities to
run off without replacement) for the System Open Market Account
in the open market or, in the case of maturing securities, by
direct exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary in the
light of current and prospective economic conditions and the
general credit situation of the country, with a view (a) to re
lating the supply of funds in the market to the needs of com
merce and business, (b) to restraining inflationary developments

12/10/56 -21-
in the interest of sustainable economic growth, while recogniz
ing additional pressures in the money, credit, and capital mar
kets resulting from seasonal factors and international conditions,
and (c) to the practical administration of the account; provided
that the aggregate amount of securities held in the System ac
count (including commitments for the purchase or sale of securi
ties for the account) at the close of this date, other than
special short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury,
shall not be increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one
or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time
to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; pro
vided that the total amount of such certificates held at any
one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the
aggregate $500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System account
for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury securities matur
ing within one year as may be necessary from time to time for
the accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total amount
of such securities so sold shall not exceed in the aggregate $500
million face amount, and such sales shall be made as nearly as
may be practicable at the prices currently quoted in the open
market.
Chairman Martin suggested, and it was agreed, that the next meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee would be held at 10:00 a.m. on Tuesday,
January 8, 1957. He commented that in the meantime it would be desirable
for each member of the Committee, or his alternate,to be prepared to at
tend an emergency meeting in the event of any development that seemed to
make the calling of such a meeting desirable.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary