A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, April 16, 1957, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Allen
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Williams
Messrs. Irons, Leach, and Mangels, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Erickson, Johns, and Deming, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, St. Louis,
and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Atkinson, Bopp, Marget, Roelse, and
Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Larkin, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Thompson, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland

4/16/57 -2
Messrs. Hostetler and Daane, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and
Richmond, respectively; Messrs. Holland
and Einzig, Assistant Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and San
Francisco, respectively; Mr. Parsons,
Director of Research, Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis; Mr. Willis, Financial
Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston;
and Mr. Bowsher, Economist, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on March 26, 1957, were ap
proved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
covering open market operations during the period March 26 through
April 10, 1957, as well as a supplementary report covering commitments
executed April 11 through April 15, 1957. Copies of both reports have
been placed in the files of the Committee
Mr. Larkin stated that the Treasury bill rate in yesterday's
auction averaged 3.19 per cent. There had been vigorous bidding and
the total of tenders received was $2.9 billion, a new record. Demand
for the bills this morning had driven the rate down to 3.11 per cent.
Mr. Larkin also said that the pressure on New York Banks seemed to have
lifted within the past few days, with the result that they had reduced
their aggregate borrowings.
Mr. Robertson said that he wished to compliment the New York
Bank and the Trading Desk for a very intelligent and effective handling

4/16/57 -3
of operations for the System account since the preceding meeting.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period March 26
through April 15, 1957, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Chairman Martin said that following the meeting held on
March 26, a Reserve Bank inquired whether there would be objection
to reproducing and distributing to all directors of the Bank and its
branches the paper on "The Basic Economic Problem" presented by Mr.
Young at the Committee meeting held on March 26. Chairman Martin
went on to say that it had not been the practice to distribute
material presented at Committee meetings to persons other than those
who participated regularly in the open market work. While he thought
it desirable to keep directors and others in the System as well in
formed as possible, he suggested that the question of distributing a
paper such as the one Mr. Young had presented be discussed by the
Committee before departure from the practice that had been followed
in the past.
Mr. Mangels said that he felt Mr. Young's paper was excellent.
He also thought it desirable for the Reserve Bank directors to have an
opportunity to study the views that Mr. Young had presented. However,
he questioned the advisability of distributing to a group as large as
the Reserve Bank directors material that had been presented at a Com
mittee meeting. He would be inclined not to distribute the paper un
less it could be modified in a way to eliminate identification as

6/57 -4
4/1
something presented to the Federal Open Market Committee for considera
tion in connection with determination of policy, and also unless the
paper could be changed to make its purpose more understandable to the
directors.
Chairman Martin said he thought there was a great deal to the
view expressed by Mr. Mangels. He would have no objection to the sub
stance of Mr. Young's paper being discussed or distributed widely, but
he felt the Committee should be careful not to permit the material
presented for its consideration to become public property.
Mr. Hayes stated that he, too, felt there was much to Mr.
Mangels' view. However, he thought the paper Mr. Young had presented
could be modified and distributed as something that had nothing to do
with the Open Market Committee but as a paper that represented an
expression of views by a member of the Board's staff. The paper was
a valuable contribution to general thinking on how to approach monetary
policy, Mr. Hayes said, and, if it were not identified with formulation
of policy by the Committee, he felt that a useful purpose would be
served in making it available.
Following some further discussion, it was agreed that the Com
mittee would continue the policy of not distributing to others that
those authorized to receive open market records the materials presented
for consideration at meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee.
At Chairman Martin's request Mr. Young made a statement on
the economic situation as follows:

4/16/57 -5
Economic activity generally moves on a high plateau-
a plateau marked, however, by divers surface irregularities.
Whether upward or downward tilt is to predominate next is
the question everybody asks and nobody can answer. It seems
best to assume a "watch and wait" attitude, hoping that
needed offsetting adjustments will take place under conditions
more actively competitive. As long as savings continue to be
translated promptly into spending, such hope has real founda
tion.
Total national product for the first quarter is now esti
mated at $427 billion, up $3 billion from the fourth quarter.
Most of the rise from the fourth quarter of last year represents
higher prices; the gain in real terms was nominal, a develop
ment broadly confirmed also by the index of production.
For March, the production index is currently estimated at
146, with an April "guestimate" of, say, 145. While steel out
put and auto production have been off since February, output of
minerals, (especially coal and oil) producers and military equip
ment, and textiles has been up.
At the business spending level, expenditures for inventory
have been off sharply, the accumulation rate on an annual basis
for the first quarter being under $1 billion compared with a
rate of well over $4 billion for the preceding quarter. With
cautious inventory policies reportedly the rule generally, and
with cutback of retail automobile inventories setting in earlier
this year than last, little stimulus is to be expected from the
inventory spending source for the present.
Business spending for fixed capital has been rising further,
but the evident increases had been much smaller than last year.
In recent months, new orders of durable manufacturers, weighted
heavily by metals, equipment, and machinery producers, have about
been steady and close to shipments, so that the heavy backlog of
unfilled orders has remained stable. Contract awards for in
dustrial and commercial construction, after declining some late
last year, have stabilized at a still high level and recently
have shown a rising tendency.
Government spending for goods and services has been on the
rise, and was a major factor in the GNP increase from the fourth
to the first quarter. Federal Government spending may taper off
for the second quarter, but State and local government spending
seems destined to rise further.
Consumer spending and saving both continue to advance along
with personal income. In March retail sales were off, but only
slightly. While sales of new autos lagged, sales of furniture
and appliances were again strong. Department store sales re
attained the high level of the late fall. This year, consumer

4/16/57
instalment credit has been expanding at a rate of about
$200 million a month, mainly reflecting growth of auto
mobile paper. The proportion of new cars being financed
is a little below last year, maturities and downpayment
patterns are about the same, and repossessions are higher,
but not alarmingly so. The used car market continues
fairly active, with prices stable.
Reflecting mainly the continuing impact of a small
volume of FHA and VA underwriting, low downpayment demand
for new houses seems about cut out of the market. This
appears to have been a main factor in the decline in housing
starts. Most recent mortgage market reports suggest some
easing in the availability of funds for Federally under
written mortgages and some reduction of discounts on them.
Reflecting continued high levels of spending generally,
labor market changes have been mainly seasonal. In manufactur
ing, however, employment and average hours have undergone small
further reductions, and hourly earnings have shown no change
for the fourth consecutive month.
Prices in wholesale markets have been generally stable at
levels about 4 per cent above a year ago. Recent changes in
materials prices have been largely offsetting, with prices of
finished goods more typically stable. Among farm product and
food prices, prices of livestock and meats have been strong
recently, averaging about 15 per cent above a year ago.
The consumer price index is believed to have risen further
to mid-March, with food prices and rents about steady, but
prices of other commodities and services up.
Demands abroad continue strong, as shown by U. S. export
developments in the first quarter. In Britain and Germany,
where activity leveled off earlier than in this country, there
are indications of resumed expansion. In France and Japan and
India, as well as in some other countries, inflationary condi
tions remain dominant. In France, at long last, some positive
action in the direction of monetary restraint offers modest
encouragement.
Mr. Thomas then made a statement on recent credit developments
substantially as follows
Demand for credit in the aggregate has continued large
in recent weeks. Money rates, which declined somewhat in
March, have become firmer and probably more accurately re
flect the demand-supply factors in the market than they did

4/16/57
three weeks ago. System operations have no doubt contributed
to firming of money rates by permitting member bank borrow
ings to increase to around the maximum level of the past year.
This is approximately the level that prevailed from late March
to early May last year.
Despite the continuation of a large volume of borrowing
for more than two weeks, Treasury bill yields have been slow
in rising and have not reached the levels of early March, when
member bank reserve positions were not as tight. This dif
ference no doubt reflects the willingness of banks to borrow
for particular reasons over the recent period of special de
mands in the money market. The special factors, some of which
are customary for this time of the year, include tax payments,
the Cook County tax shifts, and the Treasury financing.
With the passing of these temporary influences, pressures
are again building up in the money market, and as in April of
other recent years some further rise in money rates may be ex
pected. The situation this year, however, differs from that
of 1956 and also from that of 1955 in some respects. In the
first place, both banks and dealers hold substantial amounts
of the recent new Treasury issues in their portfolios, and
they may prefer to continue to borrow rather than liquidate
securities on a weak market. Moreover, in each of the two
previous years, Reserve Bank discount rates were increased
around mid-April; these actions were more or less anticipated
by the market and there was some endeavor to liquidate hold
ings. No discount rate increase is expected in the near future.
Another factor that may be of considerable importance is that
with Treasury bill rates, as well as rates on the recently
acquired new issues, somewhat above the discount rate, banks
find it profitable to borrow and retain their holdings rather
than liquidate them to reduce borrowings. Finally, it appears
that private credit demands are somewhat less vigorous this
year than in the two previous years. The Treasury is the
principal borrower, showing an increase in credit demands
compared with previous years. This shift from less private
borrowing to somewhat more Government borrowing is an im
portant aspect of the current situation that needs to be
taken into consideration in the determination of System
policy. It should not be considered as a reason for relaxa
tion of restraints.
The Treasury reduced its outstanding debt less in the
first quarter of this year than in any other recent year, and,
in fact, because of increased redemptions of savings bonds
and attrition on maturing issues, together with a smaller

4/16/57 -8-
surplus and drawings by the International Monetary Fund,
the Treasury has had to borrow new money, contrary to
usual practice at this season. In addition, FNMA has
issued over $600 million of its new obligations this year.
When this occurs the Treasury obtains cash to offset pre
vious expenditures, but the pressure on the money market
is equivalent to increased Treasury borrowing.
The Treasury cash position may now be large enough to
defer any further market borrowing until July, but there
remain some important uncertainties. Much will depend upon
receipts from nonwithheld personal income taxes, just be
ginning to be received in volume, because smaller earnings
from capital gains last year may reduce these returns below
estimates. Redemptions of savings bonds, further drawings
upon the International Monetary Fund, and operations of
FNMA are other possible sources of drain. Expenditures for
national security have continued to run above estimates.
If these possible drains are sufficiently large, some cash
borrowing might be needed before mid-June. An offering for
maturing F and G bonds could provide some funds in June,
but because of various delays such an offering may not be
feasible in time to cover the substantial May maturities.
It should be pointed out that the Treasury is sanguine
about the possibility of avoiding further borrowing until
July.
New capital issues continue in large volume. Although
total corporate issues in April may be somewhat less than
in March, State and local government issues are likely to
total larger than in previous months. Reports indicate that
prospective issues continue to show a large aggregate. Some
relaxation of demand pressures should be expected from the
home mortgage market in view of the lower level of home
building. Although there are a few scattered indications
of such a development, in general the mortgage market con
tinues to be characterized by tightness.
In bank credit, the principal developments have been
(1) a somewhat smaller increase in loans during the first
three weeks of March and a little more reduction in the sub
sequent three weeks compared with last year, with the net
increase much larger than in other years, and (2) a net in
crease in bank holdings of Government securities, in con
trast to the decrease that has usually occurred in the early
months of the year. Thus it appears that while private loan
demands are somewhat more moderate than last year, they are
still large and in addition the Government is becoming a
new source of borrowing demands on the banks.

4/16/57
Loan expansion during the tax period was only
moderately less than the very high record of a year
ago, and developments since have been mixed. Business
loans have declined a little more than they did last
year, and real estate loans have declined slightly further
in contrast to an increase last year. Loans on securities
increased in connection with the Treasury financing and
have subsequently declined. The sharp increase in bank
holdings of Government securities on March 28 has been
subsequently reduced somewhat.
Private demand deposits appear to have shown some
decline, after adjustment for seasonal variations. Time
deposits, on the other hand, have continued to increase
at a substantial pace. Turnover of demand deposits has
continued at a high rate. U. S. Government deposits, after
running at a relatively low level for several weeks, in
creased sharply in the last half of March, as a result of
tax receipts and ew financing. These balances are now
being reduced. It remains to be seen to what extent the
funds thus paid out are used to increase private deposits
at banks or to reduce bank credit. Little net growth in
private deposits is normally to be expected during the next
three or four months, except for a temporary build-up prior
to the June tax dates.
The principal changes in interest rates in recent weeks
were the decline in Treasury bill yields that occurred during
March and the subsequent rise in these yields, although they
are still below the 3-1/4 per cent rate that was reached early
in March. Yields on medium- and long-term Government securi
ties have shown little change since mid-February at levels
somewhat above those reached early in February, but below the
December peaks. The relative stability in money rates has
continued notwithstanding the increase in member bank borrow
ings to the largest weekly average since 1953.
In the past four weeks, bank reserves have been absorbed
largely as result of the building up of Treasury balances--the
additions to balances at the Reserve Banks reduced total re
serves and the credits to tax and loan accounts increased mem
ber bank required reserves. Float has fluctuated, as is its
wont, but not quite as much as was expected and on balance has
exerted some drain on reserves.
System open market operations supplied a moderate amount
of reserves--at first through repurchase contracts, which in
creased to a weekly average of over $200 million, and within
the past week through outright purchases of about $130 million,
while repurchases were reduced. These operations were much

4/16/57 -10-
smaller than had been thought would be necessary at the
last meeting of the Committee. The demand for reserve
funds was somewhat larger than had been expected. The
most important development of the period was that re
serves wanted by banks were largely supplied through an
increase in member bank borrowing. The surprising aspect
was that this increase occurred with so little pressure
on money rates. The practice followed in the past three
weeks of waiting for the market pressures to manifest
themselves before providing reserves proved to be well
justified. Some of the possible reasons why these pres
sures were slow in developing were mentioned at the be
ginning of my remarks. The principal one was no doubt
willing borrowing by banks to meet special temporary
needs.
Prospects for the next four weeks, on the basis of
more or less normal movements, indicate that net borrowed
reserves may range from around $400 million to somewhat
more than $600 million and then decline in the third week
of May. Estimates of the Board's staff both for the next
few weeks and for the quarter as a whole project a lower
level of required reserves than do the New York Bank
estimates, owing principally to a sharper assumed decrease
in Treasury tax and loan accounts. If these accounts are
maintained at the level assumed by the New York Bank, then
more reserves will be needed.
Continuation of the practice of awaiting market pres
sures would seem appropriate for the near future, particu
larly as long as the bill rate remains well above the dis
count rate. Under those conditions banks will borrow to
meet essential reserve needs. The System can guage its
operations on the basis of the pressures that arise, i.e.
on the behavior of the market, and the performance of the
economy.
In response to a question from Chairman Martin as to when the
next Treasury financing would be announced, Mr. Thomas stated that he
understood an offering would be made around May 1 for refunding the
Treasury 1-5/8 per cent notes maturing May 15, 1957 in the amount of
approximately $4 billion. Mr. Thomas noted that all of the maturing
securities were held outside the Federal Reserve System.

4/16/57 -11-
Chairman Martin next called upon Mr. Hayes for his comments
on the economic situation and credit policy to be pursued by the Com
mittee. Mr. Hayes' statement was as follows:
The past three week period has been a most interesting
one in the application of monetary policy. There was a
clear consensus at the last meeting that, for one reason or
another, monetary restraint had been somewhat less severe
than the Committee had intended and, by the same token, the
Account Management was instructed to increase the degree of
restraint. The means to do so lay readily at hand, since
payment for the new Treasury securities, which had been
largely underwritten by the banks, had to be made on March
28, with a resulting sharp rise in reserve requirements, and
it was the consensus that a major share of the required re
serves should be provided through greater use of the dis
count window. This in fact has been done, and there is no
question that the market is a great deal tighter than it was
three weeks ago.
I would like to raise two questions, however: (1) Would
a continuation of this substantially greater degree of tight
ness be appropriate to the present economic climate? (2) What
are our responsibilities to the Treasury in connection with
new financing? And, as a corollary of this, is it sound
practice, in general, to permit a Treasury borrowing operation
to bring about a degree of tightness which might not be con
sidered appropriate in the absence of such borrowing?
As to the first point, I am impressed by the fact that
most of the business indicators suggest a sideways movement
at best. On a seasonally adjusted basis March produced more
declines than increases in major measures of production,
sales and employment. Perhaps the phrase "rolling readjust
ment" would be a poor characterization of what we are wit
nessing, since this phrase suggests a surging forward in
some sectors of the economy while others are weakening. At
present most series are moving sideways. The changes that
are taking place seem to be in one direction-downward-
although the declines observed are small and are from record
or near-record levels.
I am also impressed by the substantially smaller nation
wide growth in business loans and the greater contraction in
total bank credit in the first quarter of 1957 than in the
early months of 1956. This is true whether we look at loan

4/16/57 -12-
experience in the past three or four weeks or at the net
change in loans since the year-end. It is true not only
of business loans, but of total loans as well, and of loans
and investments taken together (prior to the banks' under
writing of the Treasury's new offerings on March 28). In
general, it would seem that loan repayments after the tax
period are taking place more rapidly than a year ago or
that new borrowing since the tax period has become less
strong. To me this suggests that credit restraint, as ap
plied in the first three months of 1957, has been effective,
and that the banking system has not taken undue advantage
of such "inadvertent ease" as may have arisen in the early
months of this year primarily because of a rather fundamental
change of sentiment in the market place on the business out
look, and consequently on the longer prospect for interest
rates. I am in full agreement with the thesis put forward
by Mr. Young at the last meeting, that we would do well to
continue a general policy of restraint until it is quite
clear that a real downward turn has come, i.e., to encourage
competitive factors to bring some offset to the inflationary
price trend of the past eighteen months. But I think we
would be asking too much of monetary policy if we should
expect it to bring about, by itself, a complete reversal of
price increases already in effect and reflecting past wage
rises well in excess of productivity gains.
Frankly I am puzzled as to how we can adequately explain
the wisdom of a substantial tightening of credit under present
conditions with business so much less exuberant than it was six
months ago. I see no serious objection to a temporary tighten
ing comparable, if you will, to a brief tug on the reins just
to see how taut they are. The temporary appearance of net
borrowed reserves in the range of $700 million for the week
ended April 3rd, probably did no damage, partly because of their
geographical impact and the extent of "complacent borrowing"
But as the pressure has become concentrated in New York in the
last week or ten days, with aggregate borrowing at the highest
level since 1953, I have felt that there is a real danger of
our precipitating a selling wave on the part of member banks
which could lead ultimately to our having to put substantially
more reserves into the market than we would wish and sub
stantially more than would be needed now to preserve an "even
keel" and remove this overhanging threat.
The second major point I should like to cover, as I said,
is the question of our responsibility to the Treasury at times
of cash financing. I am not talking about a case where the
Treasury seeks to borrow at rates out of line with market rates;

4/16/57 -13-
I am thinking about a situation such as the most recent one
in which the Treasury is operating on an over-all budgetary
surplus and in which the Treasury has priced its securities
realistically in the light of the market. On numerous oc
casions the Committee has conceded that we have some responsi
bility. But as each occasion arises, there seems to be a good
deal of confusion as to what our attitude should be. It can,
of course, be argued that, by forcing the banks to borrow a
major part of the reserves needed to perform their task of
"underwriting", we assure adequate pressure on the banks to
force a rapid disposal of Treasury securities to nonbank buyers
and hence to prevent a greater than seasonal growth in
privately held deposits as the Treasury spends the proceeds of
the offering. However, given the present attitude of the
System and of the banks toward continuous borrowing, there is
a real risk that the Treasury securities may be forced on to
the market more rapidly than would be required to offset the
growth of privately held deposits. Certainly there is no
guarantee that the process of repayment of borrowings by the
banks and purchases of the new Treasury securities (or an
equivalent amount of other Treasuries) by nonbank buyers, can
be accomplished smoothly and without undue strains in the money
market. There is reason to think that a steadily restrictive
policy, such as we have had for the last two years, is ade
quate to prevent Treasury financing from having an inflationary
effect on the money supply. When reserves are supplied ini
tially through open market purchases to take care of the big
gest part of the need growing out of Treasury financing, the
steady pressure of a moderate restrictive policy on the banks
would cause a gradual sale of governments to nonbank interests,
thus extinguishing the privately held deposits created through
expenditures of Treasury funds. As deposits were thus ex
tinguished, sales from the System Account could be made to
absorb the surplus reserves and maintain steady reserve pressure.
The record of the past two years, during which the Treasury has
been operating on a surplus and the growth in money supply has
been nominal in spite of numerous large cash offerings by the
Treasury, would indicate that this process does happen, by and
large, and I can see no reason why it could not have been
relied upon in the present instance, instead of forcing member
bank borrowing to provide most of the needed reserves. As I
have already suggested, it would seem wise to take the "rough
edge" off the present restraint and to relieve a part of the
present pressure by replacing some of the borrowings with
open market purchases--particularly in view of the fact that
a sizable refunding operation is to be announced shortly.

4/16/57
In terms of our responsibility to the Treasury, it
seems to me that we should usually be ready to provide
reserves for bank underwriting through open market pur
chases, bearing in mind that in most instances these re
serves would be withdrawn later on as the securities were
distributed. Perhaps the System's minimum responsibility
to the Treasury is to apply the same standards in determin
ing System response to Treasury financing needs that are
applied to other borrowers. Seasonal needs are generally
not viewed as inflationary and the System does, in fact,
supply reserves through open market purchases to prevent
these needs from generating additional credit pressures.
For the System to fail to provide reserves in support of
a temporary Treasury need, in the absence of a budget
deficit, means that the System has allowed the Treasury's
financial needs to impose additional restraint on the
credit markets at a time when it would be difficult to
justify such a course on the basis of economic and credit
developments.
In conclusion, I would propose moving back to a degree
of restraint somewhere between what we have now and the
degree of restraint prevailing before the last meeting.
That would mean working toward a lower level of net borrowed
reserves than has prevailed during the past two weeks, but
it is difficult to specify just how much lower, as that will
depend upon the distribution of reserves and the incidence
of pressures, as well as upon market expectations and
attitudes. I can see no reason for a change in discount
rates or a change in the directive.
I think we are indebted to Governor Balderston for the
way in which he has pointed up the need for ever-closer con
tact between the Committee members and the Account Manage
ment. While I agree that net borrowed (or free) reserves
constitute the best single statistical measure of credit
restraint, I think that even it has many shortcomings and
that its use must be subject to major reservations. We are
operating in an area where human judgments and expectations
are most important and these are not susceptible to precise
formulation. We have made available to each member of the
Committee a copy of a memorandum just prepared on this sub
ject by the Account Management.
Mr. Erickson said that in the New England business picture
plusses and minuses added up to no specific trend either up or down in

4/16/57 -15
the present high levels of production, employment, and consumption.
Department store sales had been well up for the third and fourth weeks
before Easter and ahead for the year. Automobile sales were not good.
Registrations in January and February were 16 per cent below a year
ago, but in the last week or two dealers seemed to have a little more
optimism than earlier. Capital expenditures were running about the
same as last year, Mr. Erickson said, and he commented on a recent
survey of plant and equipment expansion plans of firms in Massachusetts
that showed 1957 programs larger than those for either 1956 or 1955.
Anticipated expenditures for the durable goods industries showed an
increase of more than 19 per cent, while the nondurable goods in
dustries showed a reduction of almost 19 per cent. Indexes of manu
facturing output in February held even with January. Shoe production
was up in February over January of this year. Construction was not
as strong as a year ago but building permits in certain areas were
higher than in February a year ago.
Mr. Erickson said that he would make no change in the discount
rate or in the Committee's directive at this time. As far as open mar
ket operations were concerned, he was happy to have attained the degree
of restraint that we had had during the past three weeks, but he would
avoid too much restraint. He was glad that there had been purchases
of bills during the past few days, and he shared with Mr. Hayes the
feeling that the Committee should not permit the situation to get
too tight.

4/16/57 -16
Mr. Irons said that conditions in the Dallas District were
not much different from those reported three weeks ago: they con
tinued strong on the high level plateau spoken of at that time. He
had an impression of greater confidence among businessmen in so far
as their own operations were concerned. Retail trade was holding well,
allowing for seasonal and weather influences. Easter trade expectations
were strong. Petroleum output was at a record level, although allow
ables had been cut back and crude output would be reduced within the
next three or four weeks. Construction had shown little change in
recent months and was 6 to 7 per cent below a year ago, with weakness
in residential building and strength in nonresidential. Automobile
sales had improved within the last month, Mr. Irons said, and during
the first quarter of this year sales were 6 to 7 per cent above the
first quarter of last year in four of the larger cities of the district.
The agricultural outlook was more favorable at this time than in some
years. Demand for credit seemed to be increasing, although statistics
of loans showed little change. Borrowing at the Federal Reserve was
light.
While the economy still seemed to be moving on a high plateau,
r. Irons said that in the Dallas District prospects of moving upward
were greater than prospects of moving downward.
Mr. Irons reported impressions obtained at a meeting that he
attended recently at which senior executives of 50 southwestern corpora
tions were present. Specific questions were put to each individual,

4/16/57 -17
Mr. Irons said, and those who commented on capital expenditures
estimated that 1957 would be 5 to 10 per cent above 1956. Those
who responded to questions on sales volume expected increases of
4 to 9 per cent. There was general optimism among the group, Mr.
Irons said, noting that insurance company executives and mortgage
representatives reported they had adequate money for real estate
loans although this money was not available for VA-guaranteed loans
at the present rate. There was no problem, however, in obtaining
funds at conventional mortgage rates.
As to credit policy, Mr. Irons said that he had been pleased
with developments during the past three weeks. The Committee had
achieved the hoped for degree of restraint without serious consequences.
While the Committee should rely on the account's sense of the feel of
the market, he hoped that it would continue over the next three weeks
essentially the same policy with essentially the same results and
degree of restraint as in the past three weeks. He would not like to
see any relaxation or any attempt to anticipate developments.
Mr. Mangels said that contrary to one of the comments Mr. Irons
had made, he had sensed a lessening of optimism in the Twelfth District
recently. This varied in degree and was most pronounced in the Pacific
Northwest where the lumber situation was a primary cause of lack of
optimism. Indications of an easing in the tempo of the economy were to
a large extent the result of the decline in construction, both residential

4/16/57 -18
and nonresidential. Nonagricultural employment declined more than
seasonally in February, and the normal seasonal rise in employment
was not realized in March. Department store sales picked up some
what in March, Automobile sales were still somewhat spotty although
not too bad in California. Agricultural conditions generally were
favorable. Twelfth District steel production was at 98 per cent of
capacity, somewhat higher than nationally.
Bank loans in the Twelfth District showed a slight increase in
the past four weeks, Mr. Mangels said, although less than he would con
sider to be normal in proportion to the U. S. total. In commenting on
individual classes of loans, Mr. Mangels pointed out steps taken by at
least one of the banks to increase its mortgage portfolio, adding that
if the trend of decreased mortgage loans persisted with repayments of
existing loans at a high rate we might look forward to a much easier
mortgage situation in months to come. Savings and time deposits of
Twelfth District banks had increased $350 million since the first of
this year, Mr. Mangels said. As to future demand for loans, differ
ences of opinion prevailed, some banks expecting fairly brisk demand
and others expecting no particular change. Mr. Mangels noted that
borrowing by individuals for income tax payments was commented on by
one of the banks and, while loans are small, in the aggregate the
amount of such credit might be substantial. He noted that last
Wednesday the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco was extending no
loans although System discounts were at a high level.

-19-
As to policy, Mr. Mangels said that our economy now seemed
to be in a rather delicate situation. He would not be inclined to
modify the pressure upward nor particularly to modify it downward.
He had in mind the $500 million level for net borrowed reserves, using
that as an approximate guide to operations during the next three weeks.
He felt that it would be ill-advised to change the discount rate at
this time.
Mr. Deming said that in the Ninth District agricultural
prospects had improved recently because of improved moisture condi
tions in much of the district. Nonagricultural employment was up
during the first quarter of this year compared with last. The only
weak side of the whole nonagricultural picture was to be found in
housing, Mr. Deming said, with residential prospects weaker this year
than last. Banks have had bigger deposit losses this year than last
during the first quarter and borrowings from the Federal Reserve Bank
have been considerably heavier this year.
In the current situation, with business sentiment generally
improving and with indications of a sidewise movement in the economy,
Mr. Deming felt it desirable for credit policy to stay about where it
is. He thought that net borrowed reserves in the $400-500 million
area would be satisfactory. He would make no change in the discount
rate at this time.
Mr. Allen said that developments since the March 26 meeting
had not changed his view of the business situation; rather, they

4/16/57 -20
appear to have confirmed the sidewise movement of the economy at a
high level of activity.
The feeling in automobile circles is currently pessimistic,
Mr. Allen said, as it was three weeks ago, but what has been con
sidered a normal seasonal upturn in the second quarter (20 per cent)
could, if it occurs this year, dispel the pessimism. Sales in the
final ten days of March were considered promising. Reports on the
first ten days of April just received have, however, again been dis
appointing.
Mr. Allen stated that net income per farm improved in 1956
in the Seventh District, as it did nationally. Production intentions
indicate some further rise in net income in 1957. Hogs, cattle, dairy
products, and soil bank payments were expected to account for the gain
even though production expenses were still edging upward and announced
support prices were the same as last year or lower.
Since the March 26 meeting, Mr. Allen noted that Chicago banks
had experienced the customary throes of the Cook County April 1 tax
date when they suffer a temporary but substantial loss of deposits.
The largest Chicago bank suffered a temporary loss of over $400
million of deposits this year, approximately the same as in each of
the two preceding years. Most of the deposit loss had been regained
by this time. In addition to the Cook County tax situation, customers
of Chicago banks did more income tax borrowing in March this year than

4/16/57 -21
last, contrary to the experience of the balance of the country.
Despite these factors, borrowing at the Chicago Reserve Bank dis
count window during the period from March 1 to April 10 showed a
slightly lower average this year than last.
Mr. Allen said that he thought that Mr. Irons was the only
one who had spoken thus far with whom he would agree as to credit
policy. He believed the Committee should maintain what Mr. Hayes
had termed the "rough edge" of restraint. He was on the telephone
wire with the Account Management during the past week and was willing
to assume whatever responsibility that implied for the program
followed. His only criticism of the program was that it had been a
little too easy in the past few days, his feeling being that the
System account had purchased more during this period than was necessary
or desirable.
Mr. Leedy said that the Tenth District had had further moisture
during the past three weeks. There were reports of severe livestock
losses in the western part of the district, but over all the added
moisture had been beneficial, and range and pasture conditions had
improved materially as had prospects for growing crops.
As to open market policy, Mr. Leedy said that it seemed to him
that the few weeks we had had with the System account remaining out of
the market may have demonstrated that heretofore the Committee had set
its sights a little too low so far as net borrowed reserves were con
cerned. Recently, we had approached more nearly the situation the

4/16/57 -22
Committee envisaged earlier. Mr. Leedy said that he would prefer to
let pressures develop before getting into the market or anticipating
such pressures. The Committee had the Treasury's refinancing to con
sider, he noted, but there seemed to be no need to intervene in the
market to make preparations for that operation. Mr. Leedy said that
he would like to see the Committee continue until the next meeting
the practice of staying out of the market as completely as possible.
This would require careful watching. He would not want pressure to
develop that would threaten a disorderly situation, but with that
qualification the Account Management might continue the same kind of
operation.
Mr. Leach said that the Fifth District continued on a high
plateau of business activity with divergent forces at work among the
major industries. Bituminous coal production had now passed last
year's output and it was expected that this year's total would show a
small increase over 1956. Shipbuilding and cigarette production con
tinued to contribute to over-all strength. Contract awards for non
residential construction during January and February point to a rising
volume of work. There were some indications of improvement in new
automobile sales and there was evidence that an increasing number of
sales were being made on the basis of a 36-month maturity and one
fourth or less down payment. Production of cotton gray goods con
tinued to be a major area of weakness in the Fifth District, with

4/16/57 -23
further reductions in output being made to prevent excessive mill
inventories. Nylon hosiery output had been cut back 25 per cent
under last year.
As to policy, Mr. Leach said that Mr. Young's fine statement
at the March 26 meeting pointed up in precise terms a problem that had
been bothering him for some time, and he hoped that there would be an
opportunity to discuss the problem fully. Meanwhile he believed that
the Committee's policy should be directed toward maintaining as much
restraint as reasonably possible without precipitating a downturn in
the economy. While it was difficult to put this objective in specific
terms, Mr. Leach said that he believed it had been attained with net
borrowed reserves around the $600-700 million level recently. He
doubted that net borrowed reserves could be maintained at that level
without causing too much restraint, however, because of their cumula
tive effects. He did not wish to ease the situation, but he felt
that a smaller volume of net borrowed reserves would maintain the
existing degree of restraint. The forecasts presented to the Com
mittee this morning indicated that net borrowed reserves during the
next three weeks would average around $500 million. If this turned
out to be correct, Mr. Leach said that he thought the existing degree
of restraint would be maintained without any action on the System's
part. If pressures should develop in the market, he would hope they
could be met through the use of repurchase agreements.

4/16/57 -24
Mr. Leach went on to say that in the last analysis open
market policy must be based on group judgment, formed after taking
many indicators into account. Translating that policy into actions
required consideration of a number of variables which measure the
degree of ease or tightness in the credit markets. This, of course,
accounted for the difficulty the Committee had experienced in con
veying to the Manager of the System Open Market Account a concrete
guide as to the degree of tightness desired by the Committee.
It was Mr. Leach's belief that if the Committee were to focus
on any single indicator as a bench mark of Committee thinking, net
borrowed reserves was preferable to the bill rate or the Federal funds
rate. The reasons had been set forth clearly in Governor Balderston's
memorandum of April 3, 1957. Mr. Leach said that he recognized fully
the limitations of any single indicator, but he was inclined to think
that it might be useful for the Committee at each meeting to agree
upon a figure of net borrowed reserves as an indicator of Committee
thinking. This, of course, would be done after the individual state
ments of views had been presented. Such a figure of net borrowed
reserves would serve as a bench mark, but Mr. Leach emphasized that
he did not have in mind that it should be a fixed goal. In fact, the
only hesitation he had in making this suggestion was the possibility
that such a figure might become a fixed target to be attained under
any and all conditions. This, he felt, would be a serious mistake
even though the goal were to be a three-week average.

4/16/57 -25
Mr. Leach concluded his comments by stating that as an indi
cator of the Committee's thinking, he would prefer a single figure
rather than a range of figures. His thought was that it would be
worth while to try this procedure, with a full realization that any
such bench mark figure was not to be a set goal and with an awareness
that net borrowed reserve figures had different meanings at different
times.
Mr. Mills expressed the belief that the economic situation
still called for a firm policy of credit restraint. It was his observa
tion that a delayed shifting of reserve pressures from the money market
banks to the country banks had been taking place and was exerting a
wholesome degree of restraint over what has been a continuous expan
sion in country bank credit. However, he believed that in keeping
pressure on the country banks, care must be taken to avoid subjecting
the larger metropolitan banks to reserve pressures which are not
warranted by the situation referred to by Mr. Hayes of a lessening
pressure of demand for bank loans in that area.
Referring to Mr. Thomas' comments, Mr. Mills felt that the
causes for this year's seasonal rise in money rates and the level of
Federal Reserve Bank discounts differed from last year in being more
the product of a tactically devised System policy of credit restraint
than the result of natural forces working themselves out in the market,
although the effects of the credit expansion occasioned by the Treasury's

4/16/57 -26
recent borrowing of course had a resemblance to the effects of the
large expansion in bank loans that occurred a year ago.
It was also Mr. Mills' belief that the recent rise in the
volume of member bank discounts at the Federal Reserve Banks from
around $700 million to around $1.2 billion to $1.5 billion may have
introduced an undesired element of rigidity into the reserve picture
in view of the potential difficulty of withdrawing the reserves sup
plied through the discount windows as borrowings tend to become
continuous. He foresaw such a possibility if the banks had to rely
increasingly on discounting for their main source of reserves and he
also was fearful that remedial actions taken by the Federal Reserve
Banks to discourage continuous borrowings induced at the System's
initiative could prove to be disturbing to the confidence of the
banking community. All told, Mr. Mills felt that there were definite
limitations to the usefulness of a high volume of Federal Reserve
Bank discounts as an instrument for restricting the expansion of bank
credit. To recover what he considered to be an appropriate posture of
System policy flexibility, Mr. Mills recommended that the System open
market account should buy Treasury bills in some variable proportion
to whatever reduction could be brought about in the volume of member
bank discounts but without the System's relaxing from its objective
of general credit restraint. In carrying out such a policy, he con
templated that the degree of pressure exerted should be such as to
compel divestment by the banks of the securities acquired at the

4/1 6/57 -27
Treasury's recent financing and in the short time before the Treasury
returned to the market to refund the notes maturing on May 15.
Mr. Robertson said that against the background of comments
made at this meeting, including those of Messrs. Young and Thomas, he
would align himself squarely with Messrs. Irons, Allen, and Leedy. He
was pleased with the actions taken by the System account in the past
three weeks; these had shown what the System could do without un
desirable repercussions. He would continue the same policy in the im
mediate future and would not anticipate pressures but would meet pres
sures as they arose. Mr. Robertson said he did not think the Com
mittee should do anything in the nature of easing in connection with
the forthcoming Treasury refunding operation. He felt it would be un
fair to set a low-rate pattern for the refinancing operation and to
move in the opposite direction later. He was hopeful that operations
would be conducted during the next three weeks exactly as they had
been during the past three weeks.
Mr. Shepardson indicated that he would express the same
attitude Mr. Robertson had expressed. He too had been gratified at
what he considered to have been progress in the Committee's opera
tions during the period since the preceding meeting. He then referred
to the comments by Mr. Young at the March 26 meeting, stating that
there seemed to be some indication that competitive pressures that
might have an effect on the price situation were taking hold. He

4/16/57 -28
hoped the Committee could maintain pressure to a point that might
retrieve some of the price loss that had taken place over a period
of months.
Mr. Thompson said that demand for credit in the Fourth District
continued heavy, the increase in business loans during the first half
of March exceeding that of a year earlier. Business loans had con
tinued to expand since tax payment date, but at a slower rate than a
year ago. This sustained demand for credit reinforced Mr. Thompson's
belief that liquidation of inventories in the Cleveland area had not
yet begun, although the slower rate of expansion in loans indicated
that there was some decrease in rate of inventory accumulation. Mr.
Thompson said that he anticipated a noticeable liquidation of inven
tories later in the current quarter and in the third quarter of this
year. Reserve pressures this month had been heavy and borrowing at
the Federal Reserve Bank had increased substantially.
Mr. Thompson went on to say that businessmen with whom he had
been in contact appeared confident. A group of 25 business economists
met in Cleveland recently and their consensus seemed to be that the
Board's industrial production index would be two percentage points
lower at the end of this year than at its beginning. The automobile
situation did not seem to be too bad, and it was expected that output
for the year would run about 6.3 million units. One of the bullish
factors in production for this year was the anticipation of difficult

4/16/57 -29
labor negotiations next year which might cause the automobile manu
facturers to build up large inventories of cars late in 1957. In
Mr. Thompson's opinion, basic pressures on the price structure were
still upward.
With respect to credit policy, Mr. Thompson said that the
Cleveland Bank felt that the discount rate was too low now and had
been too low for some time but that this was no time to increase it.
With regard to adjustments in the open market, Mr. Thompson felt that
there was more to be feared from the System's own built-in inflationary
bias than from the possibility of being too tight during the Treasury
financing period in a period of fairly stable business. Personally,
he felt (as did Mr. Fulton) that the Committee should not ease the
situation. The present degree of restraint might be adequate; it
certainly should not be eased at this time.
Mr. Williams said that business activity in the Third District
was being maintained at a steady level with no definite signs of moving
either up or down.
He then reported on a survey of automobile sales, stating that
during March sales in Philadelphia were a third below those a year ago,
and during the first quarter of the year they were off about 25 per
cent. Outside Philadelphia, sales in the Third District were 15 per
cent below last year. Interviews with forty automobile dealers had
indicated that they were generally disappointed because the usual
March upsurge had failed to materialize this year. One of the factors

4/16/57 -30
cited was the lack of equity in cars to be traded in, reflecting the
low down payments that had been made on cars in recent years. Another
factor was buyer resistance to the higher prices of new automobiles.
Thus far, Mr. Williams said, the higher prices on 1957 model automobiles
had not been offset by discounts equivalent to those in 1956. There was
some movement toward purchase of lower priced cars. Mr. Williams stated
that about half the dealers interviewed were of the opinion that tighter
credit conditions had not affected their sales; about 30 per cent felt
that there had been an effect; while the other 20 per cent indicated
that probably the credit situation had had some effect on sales.
Several dealers were in favor of tight credit conditions in order to
keep out risky deals. They also had commented that relations with
manufacturers were better and that manufacturers were not pressing
cars on them. Despite the poor sales of automobiles, Mr. Williams
stated that there were some bright spots in the picture. Few dealers
now have excessive stocks of new cars, and there is the possibility of
a rise in sales in new cars during this spring.
On consumption generally, Mr. Williams noted that department
store sales during the most recent four-week period were 9 per cent
above a year ago. Factory employment continued steady and average
hours of work had risen. Unemployment in the Lancaster area had been
increasing and was 25 per cent above a year ago, this unemployment
being centered in the electrical machinery industry. Construction

4/16/57 -31
activity continued to lag and contracts during the first two months
of this year were 10 per cent below 1956. Residential contracts were
off a third. Business loans had shown little change recently.
Mr. Williams said that he found himself in sympathy with the
comments that Governor Mills had made concerning the administration
of the discount window. As far as credit policy was concerned, nothing
in the Philadelphia District or in the national picture would suggest
a change at this time. Mr. Williams felt there should be no change in
the discount rate, and the same degree of restraint should be maintained
during the coming three weeks.
Mr. Bryan said that there had been a series of small changes in
the Sixth District economy, some up and some down, that the economy
seemed to be operating at a high level, and that he would hesitate to
say that it was moving either up or down. One weak situation was the
textile industry, and this was probably to be with us for a long time,
since there was an overinvestment of capital in nearly every branch of
the industry. Banks of the Sixth District had been in funds recently
and had reduced borrowings from the Reserve Bank. Nationally, the
picture seemed to Mr. Bryan also to be one of a series of small changes
which it was difficult to evaluate as showing either a downturn or an
upturn.
Mr. Bryan went on to say that he would hesitate to change policy
on intuition with regard to what was going to happen at the national

4/16/57 -32
level. He referred to the record of policy actions of the Open
Market Committee covering the year 1956, stating that it seemed
to him that the Committee had made a couple of changes in policy
during the year that did not prove to be well supported by the
statistical changes in the economy when they were plotted for the
whole year. The Committee thought it saw something but the picture
turned out to be different.
Mr. Bryan said that he would like to maintain the present
posture of restraint. He was in sympathy with those members of the
group who had expressed the feeling that the Committee had done a
good job in getting back to a posture of restraint that he believed
was needed, How to measure the restraint that the Committee should
have during the next three weeks was another problem. It was Mr.
Bryan's inclination to "keep hands off" so long as the bill rate
fluctuated between 3.10 per cent and 3.25 per cent. He would modify
this judgment only if there should develop a panicky situation in the
long-term capital market. He thought it much too early to ease sub
stantially, and he based that judgment in part upon the thought that
at the present time and for a considerable period of time the Com
mittee was going to need an increased supply of savings in this
country. It would be a mistake to do anything to reduce the rewards
apparently necessary to produce those savings or to reduce the borrow
ing costs that will aid in the allocation of funds to their most
productive uses.

4/16/57 -33
Mr. Johns said that the Eighth District economy was not among
the most ebullient of all the districts. However, the Eighth District
situation should not argue for easing credit policy. Mr. Johns was
unable to agree with Mr. Hayes that the cutting edge of policy was too
rough. Its impact had not been apparent in the Eighth District, if
measured by Federal Reserve borrowings which for some weeks had been
at low levels. Banks were selling Federal funds. They also had indi
cated some lessening of demand for loans from borrowers or potential
borrowers. Mr. Johns stated that he liked the present degree of re
straint and would like to continue it. He would not change the dis
count rate but would attempt through open market operations to keep
the same degree of pressure on reserve positions.
Mr. Szymczak said that he thought that what the Committee had
done during the last three weeks had been excellent; however, in the
next three weeks the Committee might tend toward somewhat lower net
borrowed reserves and, if necessary, purchase some securities. This
was because of the Treasury's forthcoming refunding operation in which
securities totaling something over $4 billion were held outside the
Federal Reserve. He did not have any specific figure in mind but
would not be unhappy with negative free reserves around $400 million.
Chairman Martin said that there seemed to be agreement that
there should be no change in the Committee's directive or in the dis
count rate. The degrees the Committee was dealing with were very

4/16/57 -34
fine, he said, but could become important. Personally, the Chairman
said that he was satisfied with present policy, provided it did not
become overtly sharper or overtly easier. This was easy to say, he
noted, but almost impossible to administer, and the Committee should
have great sympathy with the Management of the Account under this type
of operation.
In illustrating his views, the Chairman called attention to
the recent increase in net borrowed reserves. This had not seemed to
take hold until last Friday, when it suddenly affected several issues
in the market. He did not feel that the Committee should favor the
Treasury, nor should it hamper the Treasury, but if the figure of net
borrowed reserves continued to rise it would be necessary for the
Committee to be extremely careful in order to avoid pushing on one
side or the other. This was an especially difficult problem for the
Account Management. The Committee should not mislead the market.
The estimates of reserves during the next few weeks showed great varia
tion, which added to the problem. The Chairman recalled that at the
March 26 meeting the Committee decided to resolve errors on the tight
side, and this had been done quite appropriately. Now the Committee
was facing a Treasury financing. This did not mean that it should
resolve errors on the side of ease, the Chairman said, but he would
not like to see a billion dollars of net borrowed reserves and heavy
discounting at the time of the Treasury announcement. The market could
misconstrue such a situation.

4/16/57 -35
Chairman Martin said that while he did not think the Com
mittee's discussion today could be particularly helpful in dealing
with operations at the time of the Treasury financing, he thought
it clear from the comments this morning that the Committee wished
to maintain a stable situation during the period of the next two
or three weeks. This would have to be done against a day-to-day
changing level of projections and a changing level of currents that
are coming into the market. He then called upon Mr. Larkin for comment.
Mr. Larkin said that he thought the intentions of the Committee
were quite clear--to stay where we are, or where we had been for the
past three weeks. To achieve this position would be difficult, to say
the least, although the Account would hope to do so. To say where we
are was fraught with some danger, Mr. Larkin said, although thus far
the Account Management had been able to avoid any disruption in market
values. Mr. Larkin pointed out that if the present table of events
was realized and if the next meeting of the Committee were to be held
in three weeks, that meeting would be in the midst of a Treasury re
funding operation. At that time the Account Management should be in
a position to place a measure on the success or lack of success of
the Treasury refunding. Mr. Larkin said he believed the Treasury
expected to have the subscription books open for the refunding on
May 6, 7, and 8. It was difficult to measure the cumulative forces
in the market, he said. Day-to-day forces could be observed, but the
emergence of cumulative forces was difficult to measure. Last Thursday

-36.
4/16/57
and Friday there had emerged the cumulative effects of what had tran
spired over the preceding two weeks. The operation of the System ac
count would give special attention to these cumulative forces during
the course of the next three weeks.
In response to Chairman Martin's request for comments, Mr. Hayes
said that he was slightly at variance with the consensus but he was per
fectly happy to try to make the majority views work out,
Mr. Shepardson said that be would like to report a conversation
he had had with a lumberman in the Pacific Northwest a few days ago,
the gist of which was that market pressures were causing the operator
to "face up" to the problem of dealing with excesses that had crept into
the business in recent years. Mr. Shepardson said that this seemed to
him to represent a start of the kind of thinking the Committee would
like to achieve in industry.
Chairman Martin said that he concurred heartily in the desira
bility of adjustments of prices, but he thought all members of the Com
mittee should keep in front of them constantly the problem the Treasury
was facing and the relationship of the Committee's operations to that
problem. The Committee would be making a very serious mistake if it
minimized this problem and this relationship at any time, he said,
noting the comment Mr. Larkin had made when he mentioned the cumulative
forces which might work on the wrong side. Now that the Committee had
reasserted a position in the market, the Chairman said, it must be
aware of these cumulative forces that can do just as much harm on the

4/16/57 -37
"other" side as they did before on the side of ease. He reiterated a
view that he had expressed in an earlier meeting that the country did
not have a satisfactory Government securities market to work with to
day and that eventually something would have to be done to get a
market with more adjustability than the present market. However, the
Committee should be extremely careful on swings such as it had seen
recently. It should never overlook the Treasury needs. Members of
the Committee might or might not approve the way in which the Treasury
was running its affairs, but the Committee should not attempt to
operate the Treasury. There was a real obligation that the Committee
must fulfill without in any way subordinating itself to the Treasury.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Committee voted unanimously
to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York until otherwise directed by the Com
mittes:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (in
cluding replacement of maturing securities, and allowing
maturities to run off without replacement) for the System
open market account in the open market or, in the case of
maturing securities, by direct exchange with the Treasury,
as may be necessary in the light of current and prospective
economic conditions and the general credit situation of the
country, with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in
the market to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to
restraining inflationary developments in the interest of
sustainable economic growth while recognizing uncertainties
in the business outlook, the financial markets, and the
international situation, and (c) to the practical administra
tion of the account; provided that the aggregate amount of
securities held in the System account (including commitments
for the purchase or sale of securities for the account) at
the close of this date, other than special short-term
certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time

4/16/57 -38-
for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not
be increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the ac
count of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discre
tion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue participa
tions to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of
special short-term certificates of indebtedness as may be
necessary from time to time for the temporary accommodation
of the Treasury; provided that the total amount of such
certificates held at any one time by the Federal Reserve
Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate $500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System ac
count for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury securi
ties maturing within one year as may be necessary from time
to time for the accommodation of the Treasury; provided that
the total amount of such securities so sold shall not exceed
in the aggregate $500 million face amount, and such sales
shall be made as nearly as may be practicable at the prices
currently quoted in the open market.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would
be held at 10:00 a.m. on Tuesday, May 7, 197.
Chairman Martin mentioned the memorandum that Mr. Balderston
had distributed under date of April 3, 1957 concerning the problem of
guides that would indicate to the Trading Desk the program that the
Committee desired to have followed. He stated that he had also re
ceived a letter from Mr. Bryan expressing his interest in the discus
sion. He suggested that discussion of this subject be deferred until
the next meeting of the Committee.
Chairman Martin stated that the suggestion had been made that
the Record of Policy Actions taken by the Federal Open Market Committee
be prepared from meeting to meeting rather than on an annual basis,
and at his request Mr. Riefler commented in somewhat greater detail
as to the reasons for this decision.

4/16/57 -39
TShecerreeutaproyn the meeting adjourned.