A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, May 28, 1957, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Allen
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Williams
Messrs. Fulton, Irons, Leach, and Mangels,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Erickson, Johns, and Deming, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, St.
Louis, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Atkinson, Bopp, Mitchell, Tow, and
Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Koch, Assistant Director, Division of Re
search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Roosa, Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Hostetler and Wheeler, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and San
Francisco, respectively; Mr. Parsons, Di
rector of Research, Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis; Messrs. Willis and Meigs,

5/28/57
Financial Economists, Federal Reserve
Banks of Boston and St. Louis, re
spectively; and Mr. Walker, Economic
Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on May 7, 1957, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York covering open market operations during the period May 7 through
May 22, 1957, as well as a supplementary report covering commitments
executed May 23 through May 27, 1957. Copies of both reports have
been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Mr. Rouse stated that Mr. Erickson recently suggested that
some elaboration of the report of open market operations at the meet
ings of the Committee would be helpful. He went on to comment on the
money market during the past three weeks, stating that in this period
developments had worked out about as had been expected. The principal
problem was the Treasury financing, which had been an unhappy experi
ence for the Treasury and had resulted in attrition of $1,167 million.
Float had climbed to its usual monthly peak during the past week and
had been only partly offset by System account sales, but the effect
of the reserves released by float had been confined to day-to-daymoney
market rates. Basic rates remained unchanged, and investors did
not want to follow the bill rate under 3 per cent. Reinvestment of
the $1,167 million attrition didn ot generate the expected demand

5/28/57 -3
for bills, Mr. Rouse said, and the bill rate yesterday had climbed
back to 3-1/4 per cent. He added that the easier situation that
had developed in the money market a few days earlier might not have
been entirely the result of the rise in float but could have re
flected the distribution of reserves in the banking system. For
the first time in some period, the New York banks had found them
selves in a somewhat easier position.
Looking ahead for the next three weeks, Mr. Rouse said that
the projections of reserves prepared at the New York Bank and by the
Board's staff were substantially in line with each other. He did
not anticipate any material change in the present situation until
the tax period and the rise in float in June.
Mr. Rouse also said that he had been asked about the sale
of $300 million of gold by the International Monetary Fund to the
Treasury, which transaction was taking place today. When he first
heard of this transaction, he requested the Treasury to arrange that
it take place on the day on which the effect on member bank reserves
of the payment for the Treasury tax anticipation bills would take
place. In this manner, the System account could avoid the problem
of putting in a large amount of reserves for a brief period and with
drawing them a few days later. He noted that the Treasury would make
large payments for redemptions of F and G bonds next Monday.
Mr. Rouse stated that the major problem during tphaes t week
had not been directly related to the reserve situation but had been

5/28/57
the fact that capital markets had been under extreme pressure.
New financing issues had been in record volume in the first quarter
of the year, and the calendar ahead was increasing so that the back
log was being maintained. This had resulted in a rate situation in
the market which had been attributable in part to delays by the
Treasury in offering refunding securities to holders of F and G
series savings bonds. Perhaps a more fundamental factor was the
basic supply and demand situation. The 3 and 3-1/4 per cent Treasury
bonds had remained where they had been for some time, while yields on
new corporate offerings had risen to as much as 5-1/4 per cent. This
suggested, Mr. Rouse said, that there would have to be a rather sub
stantial adjustment in Treasury bond yields if they were to go along
with the rest of the market. We were dealing with a very delicate
situation, he said, one that would require the Trading Desk to be
constantly alert. A serious situation could develop although Mr.
Rouse said he thought it more : kely that the present situation
would continue. However, if a large offering should be pressed
for sale on the market by investors, there could be a sudden and
marked effect.
Mr. Vardaman entered the room during the course of Mr.
Rouse's comments.
Mr. Robertson said that he wished to compliment the Manage
ment of the System Account on the way in which it had handled opera
tions during the past three weeks. He still had a little doubt about

5/28/57 -5
the tendency to offset such a matter as float on the tight side
and not to do so when it tended to ease the market.
Mr. Leach noted that the report of open market operations
that had been prepared at the New York Bank comented on purchases
and sales of Treasury bills during the past three weeks and made
the statement that these purchases and sales were achieved without
any overt intervention in the market. Mr. Leach expressed the view
that any sale of securities by the System account would represent
an overt action.
Mr. Rouse responded that the securities were not sold ith
any splash, that purchases were being made at substantially the same
time, and that it appeared that the net effect of whatever was being
done was substantially a wash operation.
Upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the open market transactions
during the period May 7 through
May 27, 1957, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
A staff memorandum on recent economic and financial develop
ments in the United Stater and abroad had been distributed to all
members of the Committee under date of May 24, 1957. This memorandum
stated that business indexes continued to show mixed tendencies, with
some measures edging up and others drifting down. The industrial
production index seemed likely to be off another point in May but to
continue above a year ago. Inventory adjustments were continuing in

5/28/57 .6.
consumer durable goods industries and in some other industries
such as steel. Wholesale prices had been showing little change
while retail prices advanced somewhat further in April. Consumer
buying appeared fairly strong, particularly for nondurable goods
and services. Private housing starts rose in April from the re
duced rate in March. Labor market demands and supplies seemed in
reasonable balance, with no strong uptrend or downtrend in employ
ment and with fluctuations in unemployment reflecting mainly seasonal
changes. Demand for credit continued heavy and interest rates had
risen again recently. The review indicated that concern about a
cyclical decline in business apparently had diminished, and stock
market prices had been advancing. Abroad, demand pressures remained
generally dominant and new anti-inflationary measures had been an
nounced this month in several important countries.
Chairman Martin called upon Mr. Young at this point, and Mr.
Young stated that the staff would make a chart presentation at this
meeting giving background material on recent Federal Reserve policy
problems. This presentation had been prepared, Mr. Young said, with
the thought that it might be used in furnishing information to the
Senate Finance Committee in its forthcoming inquiry into monetary
policy and other matters, Members of the staff then entered the
room to assist in the presentation, after which they withdrew.
The presentation pointed out that for two years, since
recovery from the minor recession of 1953-54, economic activity in

5/28/57 -7
the United States had been at record levels with resources
generally being used intensively. Thus, the recent economic
policy problems of Government had been the problems of a period
of high production and employment, not those of a period of
curtailed production and widespread unemployment. Widespread
price increases over a considerable period of time had been
disturbing. Greatly increased demands for short-term credit
and also for long-term credit had been reflected in an increase
during the past two years of $18 billion, or about one-fourth, in
the volume of loans outstanding at commercial banks. Banks had
obtained more than half the funds needed to increase their loans
by reducing holdings of Government securities, however, and the
growth in total bank credit had thus been much less than the growth
in loans. Savings as well as demands for funds had increased over
the past two years, but even with some growth in total bank credit
demands for funds had been so strong relative to the amount avail
able that interest rates had risen substantially. Even with this
substantial rise, the level of rates now prevailing was not high by
historical standards or by comparison with rates prevailing in other
countries. The review also pointed out that gross national product
had risen from an annual rate of $387 billion in the second quarter
of 1955 to a rate of $427 billion in the first quarter of 1957.
About half of this increase of 10 per cent represented a rise in
prices and half a rise in volume of output. In concluding this

5/28/57 -8
presentation, it was stated that one of the possibilities in the
period ahead was a situation characterized by growing capacity
and high production, with credit expansion restrained and price
changes held within relatively narrow limits. A period of "rolling
readjustments," with fairly stable prices, could be expected to last
much longer than a speculative boom based in any substantial part on
hope of gain from perpetually rising values.
A copy of the script of the foregoing presentation was sent
to each member of the Committee following the meeting, and a copy
has been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Chairman Martin stated that since the preceding meeting of
the Committee, Senator Byrd had called him on the telephone and out
lined to him the course of the proposed hearings before the Senate
Finance Committee on Governmental financial and monetary policies.
It was contemplated that, if Senator Bryd agreed, the presentation
that had been made by the staff this morning would be used at the
hearing. The current plan, Chairman Martin said, was that Secretary
of the Treasury Humphrey would appear as a witness at the hearings
in mid-June, that Under Secretary of the Treasury Burgess would ap
pear after the Secretary, and that he (Chairman Martin) would appear
following testimony by the Secretary and Under Secretary.
Chairman Martin noted that the Committee had been trying to
find a better procedure for communication with the Treasury in the
hope of being more certain that each understood the problems of the

5/28/57 -9.
other. Along this line, he and Mr. Balderston met with Secretary
Humphrey, Under Secretary Burgess, and Mr. Wren, Assistant to the
Secretary, last Thursday, May 23, to discuss problems of mutual
interest. The Treasury representatives were anxious that the Fed
eral Open Market Committee understand the nature of their problems.
They recognized that they would have to pay the market rate for any
financing that the Treasury might do, but at the same time they
emphasized the difficulty of their position and the delicate problems
that were being caused by the higher interest rates, including the
increase in rates on series E and H savings bonds. They pointed out
that the Treasury had secured the maximum increase in the savings
bond rate that could be gotten from the Congress at this time, and
it was out of the question as a practical matter to secure any
further increase in that area. This meant that, with a large volume
of series F and G savings bonds outstanding in the form of demand
obligations, the Treasury officials were apprehensive regarding
possible developments. They desired that the Committee be fully
aware of these problems and of their apprehensions. Chairman Martin
expressed his feeling that the Committee had a delicate problem with
respect to the underpinning of the Government securities market
generally.
Mr. Balderston added the comment that Secretary Humphrey had
referred in this discussion to the expectations of businessmen as a
factor creating some of the current difficulties confronting the
country.

5/28/57 -10-
Chairman Martin then called upon Mr. Hayes for a state
ment on the economic situation and open market policy, in response
to which Mr. Hayes made a statement substantially as follows:
The economic situation continues fundamentally strong
and essentially unchanged since the last meeting. Business
optimism seems to have increased perceptibly, even though
most current indices of physical production and distribution
indicate a sidewise movement at best, and perhaps a slight
downward tilt.
Instead of enumerating all the major elements of
strength and weakness, which are well known to all of you,
I should like to stress a few rather confusing elements in
the picture. For example, it is difficult to reconcile the
failure of retail sales (seasonally adjusted) to record any
progress since November with the rising trend of consumer
income and of the consumers expenditure component of gross
national product. Another surprising development has been
the upward revision in estimated corporate profits for the
last quarter of 1956 to an annual rate of 46.7 billion
dollars and the maintenance of about this level in the first
quarter of 1957. Apparently the widely held view that busi
ness generally has been subjected to a profits squeeze is
not based on a firm statistical foundation, although such a
squeeze may yet develop, and some industries have no doubt
experienced it. The profit trend suggests greater gains in
productivity than had been generally expected. It may ac
count in part for the growing business optimism and for the
maintenance of capital spending programs at very high levels
despite the loss of momentum in consumption.
In the area of prices we also find rather mixed trends.
On balance the upward pressures on prices may have subsided
somewhat, with some basic material prices again tending
downward after a period of hesitation. Wholesale prices in
the aggregate are no higher than a month ago, but consumer
prices rose again in April and will probably increase further
in May. In sharp contrast with the recent trend of basic
material prices is the widely expected increase in steel
prices in July which could have pervasive effects in the
economy, and upward wage pressures also are still certainly
in evidence, in part as a result of provisions for automatic
increases embodied in existing contracts.
A good deal of comfort is to be found in the latest
figures on bank credit. In the first place, the growth in
business loans in the four weeks through May 15 was much

5/28/57 -11
less than a year ago, and there was an actual decline in
total loans as compared with a sizable increase in 1956.
Even with a substantial allowance for June tax borrowing
it seems likely that the rise in bank loans for the second
quarter may be only about half as great as last year.
Secondly, the last four weeks have witnessed a sharp drop
in bank holdings of Government securities, following the
large gain occasioned by the bank underwriting of the cash
offering late in March. As a result, whereas privately
held demand deposits had expanded by some $1.2 billion in
the four weeks ended April 24, this rise was more than
wiped out by a drop of $1.6 billion in the following three
weeks. Thus it would appear that maintenance of steady
pressure on bank reserves has succeeded in preventing any
lasting addition to the money supply in connection with
the recent bank underwriting of the new Treasury issues.
This is particularly gratifying in view of the fact that
Treasury cash borrowing has been so much larger in 1957
to date than in any spring period of recent years.
In contrast with this modest easing of demand for
bank credit, the demand for long-term capital remains
extremely high and apparently well in excess of available
savings. Personal savings are reported to have turned
downward in the first quarter, reversing the trend of the
preceding year, although these statistics are admittedly
none too reliable. There is some circumstantial evidence
to confirm this result, however, in the reduced rateo f
deposit expansion at mutual savings banks in the first
quarter. If the rate of savings has actually fallen, this
is still another confusing element in view of the failure
of retail sales to expand as personal incomes have risen.
Even after the past month's substantial upward adjustment
of yields on new corporate and municipal issues, there
are still signs of indigestion in this area, and the feel
ing of uncertainty in the capital markets is enhanced by
the prospect of a new Treasury cash offering of $3 to $
billion within the next month or two, together with the
large refunding required in connection with the Treasury's
August maturities.
The very fact that the economic indicators are some
what mixed and confusing suggests that it should not be
too difficult to determine sound credit policy at this
juncture. Until the business outlook is further clarified,
I would think it unwise to make any overt change in policy,
and I would therefore favor maintenance of about the same
degree of pressure on the money market as has obtained for

5/28/57 -12-
the past several weeks, with no change in the discount
rate or in the directive. Additional justification for
a policy of cautious steadiness in applying restraint
may be found in the recurrent waves ofuneasiness that
have characterized the capital markets, as each new rate
plateau has proved too low for a sustained equilibrium
between supply and demand. The demand pressures will
soon produce even greater stresses as repeated Treasury
refunding operations are interspersed with cash borrow
ing of $8 to $9 billion over the summer and autumn, while
the usual seasonal demands of business will be crowding
upon the banks. Indeed, expectations of that coincidence
of heavy demands may already be exerting new unstabilizing
influences in the capital markets. Subject to the usual
reservations as to our trying to set any specific statis
tical target, I would think that net borrowed reserves of
somewhere around $500 million and member bank borrowings
around $1 billion, would be entirely reasonable. If our
present projections for the next three weeks turn out to
be at all accurate, this would mean that a minimum of
open market operations would be required to accomplish
our objectives, although it is conceivable that a moderate
volume of repurchase agreements and outright bill purchases
might be called for during the coming week, especially if
the atmosphere in the capital markets should show any
further deterioration.
Mr. Erickson said that during the last three weeks there had
been no significant changes in the economy of New England. Employ
ment was still high. April 30 figures of purchasing agents indicated
that expansionary forces were not now as strong as they were earlier
but they were still present. It was expected that expenditures for
research and development would be 20 per cent greater in 1957 than
in 1956. Figures covering mutual savings banks as of the end of
April indicated the same tendency that Mr. Hayes had reported, namely
a continuing decline in the rate of growth of deposits at such banks.
Mr. Erickson said that he would recommend no change in the discount

5/28/57 -13
rate or in the Open Market Committee's directive at this time. He
would suggest a continuation of the same policies and operations that
had been followed during the past three weeks.
Referring to the comments that Mr. Rouse had made concerning
recent open market operations, Mr. Erickson stated that he suggested
such a report by Mr. Rouse with the thought that it would be helpful
to the Committee in reaching its judgments to have a brief oral resume
of salient factors at the beginning of each open market meeting. This
would be in addition to the excellent written reports that each mem
ber of the Committee received from the New York Bank each week and
before each meeting.
Mr. Erickson also referred to the daily wire that was sent to
each member of the Committee and each Reserve Bank President before
lunch, immediately following the morning telephone conference. He
suggested that if, after reading the wire, any of the members of the
Committee had questions as to what the desk should do, they discuss
them with the Trading Desk at the New York Bank to see if the situa
tion could be clarified. They should also talk with the Chairman of
the Committee and in that way attempt to have a continuous understand
ing of what was going on.
Chairman Martin said that these were excellent suggestions,
adding that having Mr. Rouse comment on the general situation at the
beginning of each meeting would be helpful to all of those present.
He then called upon Mr. Irons.

5/28/57 -14
Mr. Irons said that there had been no new developments of
significance in the Dallas District during the past three weeks.
The district was moving along at a high level of activity with
tendencies similar to those in the national picture. The outlook
and confidence were strong. Department store sales had not come
up to expectations, and petroleum production was down a little,
although it was still high. These were about the only indicators
showing declines in the area at the present time. Employment was
up; construction was up. Residential awards had been larger during
the first quarter of this year than a year ago while nonresidential
construction was very strong. New automobile sales during the first
four months of 1957 were 10 per cent above the comparable period last
year. The agricultural situation had been favored with ample moisture
but the rains had delayed planting of some crops. Reserve city banks
were in a moderately comfortable reserve position and country banks
had excess reserves. Borrowings had not been heavy although there
were three or four continuous borrowers with whom the Dallas Bank
was keeping in touch.
Mr. Irons said that Mr. Hayes had expressed his view as to
credit policy: to try to maintain during the next three weeks about
the degree of restraint that had been maintained recently. This was
called for by the economic situation, but at the same time the very
delicate situation in the capital markets meant that the details of
the operation must be left to the judgment of the Management of the

5/28/57 -15
System Account. Mr. Irons would not favor a discount rate change
at this time or any overt action to alter conditions in the money
market.
Mr. Mangels said that West Coast conditions paralleled
closely those described thus far. There had been a little improve
ment from the situation reported at the preceding meeting. Non
agricultural employment had increased slightly. Contrary to the
pattern of the past two years, residential building permits were
higher in April than in March, and they were also higher than in
April of either 1956 or 1955. Requests for VA and FHA appraisals
had risen, indicating that building conditions might improve in
future months. Steel furnaces of the district were operating at
100 per cent of capacity, and finished steel was being produced
at 95 per cent of capacity, rates somewhat better than the national
figures. Automobile sales during the first quarter of 1957 were
5 per cent above the first quarter of 1956, improved sales in
Arizona and California having more than offset slower sales in
other parts of the district. Twelfth District bank loans increased
during the latest four-week period by more than the national in
crease. Borrowings at the Reserve Bank were nominal, and Twelfth
District banks were still net sellers of Federal funds.
As to policy, Mr. Mangels said that he would go along with
what had been said thus far, believing that the Committee should
continue about the same policy that it had had in recent weeks.

5/28/57 -16
There should be no change in the discount rate. Mr. Mangels said
that he would have no objection to modification of clause (b) of
the Committee's directive so as to eliminate the reference to the
international situation; he did not believe that a change was neces
sary at this time although the Committee might wish to consider a
change in the directive soon.
Mr. Deming said that the situation in the Minneapolis District
was about the same as in the districts for which comments had been
made. Agricultural prospects were better than in the past two or
three years, with producers of both crops and livestock feeling that
the outlook was very good. Farmers generally were optimistic. Iron
ore shipments had risen in April. Credit demand continued strong.
With respect to the national picture, Mr. Deming said that he would
not disagree with the comments made at this meeting. There should
be no overt action taken at this time to change policy and there
should be no change in the degree of restraint.
Mr. Allen reported that Seventh District business sentiment
had made a further swing in the direction of greater optimism. The
over-all situation was still one of high level stability. Retail
sales revealed reasonably aggressive consumer demand, with department
stores reporting a sales gain of 5 per cent in the four weeks ending
May 18 compared with a year earlier, and a 4 per cent gain for the
year to date. Total employment was slightly higher than last year
in most district centers. Salaries and wage payments were up 5 or

5/28/57 -17
6 per cent as in the nation and were expected to show further gains.
Mr. Allen said that residential construction in the Seventh District
was slow and gave no evidence of a pickup. However, employment in
construction was higher than last year in all large Seventh District
cities and in many smaller commnities. Hiring plans in most cities
of the district were fairly optimistic, with shortages of engineers,
machinists, draftsmen, clerical workers, stenographers, and typists
continuing. The Chicago Reserve Bank currently had 250 unfilled
requisitions.
Commercial banks reported a continued strong demand for loans.
The smaller rise in business loans thus far in 1957 than in correspond
ing months of 1956 had been caused primarily by a larger volume of re
payments. The volume of new loans had been either higher or virtually
the same as last year for all industries except construction. Auto
mobile credit terms had been easing, Mr. Allen said, and the proportion
of loans on new cars written for more than 30 months to maturity had
been rising in recent months. In April, 29 per cent of such loans in
Indiana were for more than 30 months maturity; in Southwest Michigan
the proportion was 19 per cent, and in other areas 43 per cent. Farm
income in the Seventh District had been gaining, Mr. Allen stated,
and cash receipts in March were 8.6 per cent ahead of a year earlier,
compared with a gain of 4.5 per cent for the country as a whole. It
was not expected that this margin of gain would continue for the
entire year of 1957, but it was expected that enlarged Government

5/28/57 -18
payments would more than offset any decline in income from marketings,
with the result that total cash farm income and net farm income as
well would show modest gains over 1956. Farm spending apparently had
increased in recent months, with gains at country stores greater than
at city stores. Farm machinery manufacturers reported improved sales.
Another evidence of optimism on the part of farmers was provided by
the continued advance in farm real estate prices, Mr. Allen said.
There was a very strong demand for farm land to be added to existing
farms, very little land was being offered for sale, and country
bankers reported a substantial amount of funds awaiting opportunity
for investment in farm land. Mr. Allen summed up the Seventh District
farm situation by stating that agriculture had shifted position from
that where it provided some drag on the over-all level of economic
activity to one where it was now providing a mild expansionary force.
Mr. Allen stated that he was in agreement with what had been
suggested by others regarding monetary policies to be followed during
the next few weeks.
Mr. Leedy said that the Tenth District had had continuing
improvement in moisture conditions since the preceding meeting. Sur
face moisture was more than adequate in some sections and there had
been a very material improvement in subsoil moisture. Rains had
delayed planting of corn in parts of the district. Excessive moisture
in some areas and cool weather had affected the wheat crop, but it was
estimated that yield per acre would be up from last year even though

5/28/57 -19
the total crop would be down because of a 20 per cent reduction
in the acreage planted in the district. Mr. Leedy referred to
the recent severe tornado in Kansas City which had destroyed about
750 small houses. It was expected that these would be rebuilt by
workers who had been on strike, but who were returning to work to
help in alleviating the situation in the stricken area. Employment,
which usually increased in the spring, had not shown a rise this year,
reflecting to some extent cutbacks in automobile assemblies. There
also had been some lessening in production of oil. Retail trade in
the past three weeks showed that the Tenth District was doing less
well than the balance of the country. Borrowings from the Reserve
Bank had increased sharply in the past several weeks. Mr. Leedy said
that the rise had come from city banks which had experienced a drain
from interbank deposits. Country banks were expanding their loans
seasonally, and correspondent banks were coming to the Reserve Bank
to help meet the added demands.
Mr. Leedy said that he concurred in the comments already ex
pressed as to credit policy. He believed that the Committee should
continue to apply about the same pressure as had been exerted in the
past three weeks.
Mr. Leedy concluded his remarks by referring to the delicate
situation with which the Treasury was faced. If we were moving toward
a higher level of interest rates, he suggested that the so-called new
plateau might raise the question whether the Treasury Department had

5/28/57 -20
made a mistake in attempting through the savings bond device to
encourage the public to place their savings in that form. In view
of the large volume of savings bonds outstanding, further indications
of a higher level of interest rates might make it necessary for the
Treasury to consider whether this whole program should be revised.
Mr. Leach said that divergent trends continued in the Fifth
District economy. Shipbuilding, aircraft manufacturing, and non
residential construction were strong. On the weak side were auto
mobile sales and residential building. Businessmen and bankers in
the Baltimore area were optimistic, but sentiment in the tobacco
growing districts of eastern North and South Carolina were slightly
pessimistic.
In reviewing industries in more detail, Mr. Leach said that
textile mills were still maintaining curtailed schedules of operations,
although there had been recent indications of a more favorable out
look. There had been selected improvements in orders and firming of
some prices. Production of bituminous coal was above a year ago,
reflecting particularly foreign shipments from January 1 to May 4 of
this year, which had been 37 per cent above the same period in 1956.
Prospects for that industry were somewhat less promising than earlier,
partly because steel mill requirements were lower, foreign orders had
receded, and the April price increase was not sticking.
Mr. Leach said that the most striking recent change in the

5/28/57 -21
Fifth District was in the outlook for the furniture industry. The
Southern Furniture Market was disappointing; attendance was poor,
business written was small and the influx of orders usually received
after the market did not materialize. Industry expectations were
that the situation would get worse before it gets better.
Member bank borrowing at the Richmond Bank had averaged $43
million thus far this month, Mr. Leach said. Approximately half of
this amount was concentrated in a few large North Carolina banks which
had been forced to absorb the impact of a gradual withdrawal from
banks throughout the State of $90 million in State funds.
In view of the continued crosscurrents in the Fifth District
and in the country as a whole, Mr. Leach said that he would favor
continuing as the Committee goal the same degree of tightness that
it had been attempting to achieve. As far as he could see now, this
would be reflected in net borrowed reserves of around $500 million.
Mr. Leach added the comment that he thought the New York Bank was
right in not offsetting the temporary ease during the last statement
week which was caused by an increase in float. He would not recommend
a change in the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Vardaman said that in the circumstances, he would make no
change in the present policy of the Committee.
Mr. Mills next made a statement substantially as follows:
The most pressing problem in my judgment that confronts
the Federal Reserve System today is the condition of the

5/28/57 -22
capital markets where financial developments have brought
the capital markets almost out of contact with the markets
for bank credit. This is a situation which might deserve
radical and bold Federal Reserve System action by way of
bringing our influence to bear on the capital markets so
as to hasten adjustments that appear to be in the making
and to be imminent. Obviously what I refer to would be
an increase in the discount rate by the Federal Reserve
Banks, the thought being that the adjustment of the capital
markets to an increase in the discount rate would clear the
general atmosphere in the capital markets and in doing so
also facilitate the Treasury's financing operations. In
theory, an increase in the discount rate through the in
terest-cost factor, should tend to ration the supply of in
vestment funds only to those prospective borrowers who are
able and willing to pay the going market rate of interest.
In that process, less credit-worthy borrowers or borrowers
who could postpone their claims for the time being would
fall out of line and some degree-of pressure on the capital
market would be relieved.
Under such circumstances, the Treasury might then be
in a position to come to the market with a long-term offer
ing at an interest rate conforming to whatever structural
interest rate adjustment had been reflected by the higher
discount rate. This kind of policy would be a departure
from general Federal Reserve System thinking and action,
in that we would direct our influence to the capital mar
kets and recognize a responsibility in that area as well
as our fundamental responsibility for assuring the commercial
and banking community that credit will be available in
adequate supply for legitimate needs. Along with an in
crease in the discount rate, it would of course ben eces
sary for the System also to determine its policy in the
general area of the availability of bank credit. In that
connection, we know that an increase in the demand for bank
credit is in prospect over the middle-June tax period and
that some uncertainty has already been voiced as to whether
the System will provide the reserves to carry that situation
over without undue restrictiveness.
The discussions thus far around the table have reached
the conclusion that the general scheme of policy that has
been in effect over the last three weeks should be continued.
The question can be raised whether we should press our
restrictive credit policy to the same degree that has been
in effect recently if a structural interest rate adjustment

5/28/57 -23
in the capital markets is imminent and, especially, if
the adjustment should be induced by a Federal Reserve
discount rate action. In the light of the last two weeks,
I would judge that a level of negative free reserves of
around $400 million and a level of Federal Reserve Bank
discounts ranging from $700-800 million had effected about
the right degree of pressure. If so, a level of discounts
of a billion dollars and of negative free reserves of $500
million could subject the market to heavier pressures than
would be desirable at the present time, Again, I would
feel that the Manager of the Account and the Desk should
have very wide latitude in their operations and in the feel
of the market to prevent kinks and unnecessary pressures.
In concluding his remarks, Mr. Mills said the subject he had
presented was very broad. If the type of policy he had suggested
could be rationalized, it not only would forward the objectives of
the Treasury but would also be conducive to the appropriate objectives
of credit restraint on the part of the Federal Reserve System.
Mr. Robertson said that he was concerned with the inflationary
pressures that existed, and he thought similar concern was implied in
the remarks of those who had preceded him this morning. He was more
concerned for the long run than for the short run but felt that the
pressures were very real now. Mr. Robertson asserted that the Com
mittee had not taken into account sufficiently the increased velocity
of money in adjusting the volume of money; if he could do it over, he
would be in favor of reducing the volume. In that connection, he
stated that he too had been thinking of the discount rate, principally
because it seemed to him that the only feasible time for an early in
crease would be in June; if action were not taken them, the next
opportunity would be in August. Mr. Robertson said that he had come

5/28/57 -24
to the conclusion that such action in June would probably be too
much of a jolt. He hoped that the System would continue to think
about the discount rate and be in a position to act when feasible
and desirable. In the meantime, he hoped the Committee would strive
toward a degree of tightness no less than had been achieved at the
moment. He wished to think of the suggested $500 million of net
borrowed reserves for the next few weeks not as the top but as the
bottom, on an average basis. Mr. Robertson said he hoped the Com
mittee and the Manager of the Account would be no more concerned
about offsetting temporary tightness than about offsetting excessive
ease that might arise, for example, through float. If we are to take
offsetting action on one side, we should act on the other side as
well. He hoped that the tightness to be achieved over the next three
weeks would be as restrictive as that achieved up to now and, if any
thing, he would prefer to be on the tighter side.
Mr. Shepardson said that he was in substantial agreement with
the comments made thus far to the effect that the economy was generally
in a sidewise movement. He was in accord with Messrs. Mills and
Robertson in feeling concern about the latent pressures that might
break out with the change to a greater feeling of optimism on the
part of the public that had been reported this morning. Even though
at the moment the economy might be static, it seemed to him that
there was considerable danger of an outbreak of further upward
pressures. The question in Mr. Shepardson's mind was when the

5/28/57 -25
System should move to do something about such pressures. He
realized that, with the Treasury activities in prospect during
the next few months, the Committee might be more or less precluded
from taking action at certain times. However, he felt that the
System should be thinking very definitely of the possibility that
additional upward pressures might develop and it should be consider
ing when it could best move to check them. Mr. Shepardson said that
he was not certain that now was the time for a discount rate change,
but some little time might be required to get ready for such a change
and in his opinion the present was not too early to begin this
process. Mr. Shepardson said that he would not favor any easing in
the situation and if there were any deviation from the present situa
tion, it should be toward tightness rather than toward ease.
Mr. Fulton described Cleveland District employment as high
with a diminishing number of unemployed. The steel operating rate
was down but the industry expected that inventories would be worked
off and that the operating rate would improve rather shortly. Mr.
Fulton felt there was no doubt that steel prices would rise. There
had been some reduction in manufacture of appliances. The wage cost
problem was facing industry but profits were quite substantial. The
business community was optimistic. There was a consensus that infla
tion was actively with us and that it must be controlled.
Mr. Fulton said that he had come to the conclusion that there
was no reason for easing the reserve situation now despite the reduced

5/28/57 -26
steel rate. Rather, the System should maintain the posture it now
had. New capital offerings in June were expected to be large and
demand for credit was growing. He would go along with the comments
of Messrs. Mills and Robertson regarding the possibility of an in
crease in the discount rate in the somewhat near future, Mr. Fulton
said, adding that if the System did not take action prior to the
Treasury's refunding it would be hemmed in again as it had been on
other occasions. He felt that we could not live indefinitely with
a constantly increasing short-term interest rate, with the bill rate
constantly above the discount rate. If the market was thus reflect
ing a demand for funds, the System should recognize it through the
discount rate. Mr. Fulton expressed the feeling that at least by
July closer consideration should be given to an increase in the dis
count rate.
Mr. Williams said that business activity in the Third District
continued to move sidewise. Department store sales were just about
equal to a year ago. Automobile sales were slow. New housing starts
were running well below last year. The Third District situation was
comparable to that outlined by others. Loans and investments of
reporting member banks increased in the three weeks ending in mid
May but by a smaller amount than last year. Business loans were up
somewhat less than a year ago. Total deposits were off about $75
million in the three-week period. Banks met this drain of deposits

5/28/57 -27
by liquidation of Government securities, substantial net purchases
of Federal funds, and borrowings from the Federal Reserve Bank.
Preliminary approaches to the persistent borrowers from the Reserve
Bank had been made and they had indicated that demands on them would
be quite heavy in the period ahead. Mr. Williams remarked that
several months ago the statistics were outrunning sentiment, whereas
now the attitude of the business public was outrunning the statistics.
As to credit policy, Mr. Williams said that he would suggest
no change in either the objectives or the procedures being followed.
The Philadelphia Bank had not taken into consideration the suggestion
made by Mr. Mills of a possible change of the discount rate in
anticipation of developments in the capital market. Personally, Mr.
Williams said,he felt that the System would need more evidence on
this suggestion before it was ready to move on the rate.
Mr. Bryan said that Sixth District employment was staying
steady or moving slightly upward. In the financial field, there had
been a rather sharp drop in deposits at some of the larger banks with
the result that borrowing had increased. The district seemed to be
again in a movement in which it was losing funds to other parts of
the country.
Mr. Bryan noted that Mr. Allen had commented on farm land
prices. He said that he sensed a very substantial speculative fever

5/28/57 -28
in all States of the Sixth District with regard to land and
property transfers.
On the national picture, Mr. Bryan stated that he had
come to this meeting with a greater sense of alarm than had been
generally expressed. The country had had another increase in the
price level. The persistent and large increases that had been
occurring for a good many months had been exceeded in amount in
recent years only by the increases during the Korean period. Mr.
Bryan felt that the Committee must face certain facts. One was
that the depreciation of 4 per cent in the value of the dollar
during the past year, if not a galloping inflation, was certainly
more than a creeping inflation. Secondly, Mr. Bryan felt that we
were still confronted with a rip-roaring capital goods boom, and
he could see no reason for this boom stopping either in the immediate
future or in the fairly long run. The System was confronted with the
problem of what to do about both the near term and the longer run
prospects. It could decide that it would fight it out with the
present level of rates, or it could try to exercise further restraint
on the situation.
Mr. Bryan said that he was belatedly convinced that the
System had a moral responsibility to exercise further restraint in
this situation. In the second half of the year the volume of bank
credit was almost certain to go up. This would also be a period of
a major Treasury problem. Mr. Bryan said that it seemed a foregone

5/28/57 -29
conclusion that the System would supply reserves in the second half
of the year, and in considerable amount. The sole question that the
System had to decide was whether it was to supply these reserves at
the present level of interest rates or at a higher level. Mr. Bryan
felt that the Committee would do better to supply the reserves at a
higher level of interest rates. The present level had not stopped
the inflation, and he did not believe that we had yet reached an
equilibrium in the demand and supply of money savings for the economy.
He believed, therefore, that the System should increase the discount
rate, and he followed the line of reasoning that had been set forth
by Mr. Mills. This increase should be made fairly promptly. If we
were to go far into the second half of the year without doing some
thing, the System would be frozen with the present rate. Mr. Bryan
said he shared to some extent the thinking that Mr. Robertson had
expressed that an increase in the rate might be a shock to the market
if it were to come suddenly. He had the idea that the System might
approach this problem advertently as it had another time inadvertently,
namely with one Bank raising its discount rate and thus warning the
market that the System was fundamentally concerned with this problem
and that it was not committed to the existing level of discount rates.
To that end, Mr. Bryan said that he had asked his staff to examine
the situation in the Sixth District in order to determine the validity
of some of the signs that indicated that the Atlanta Bank might be
justified in having at this time a differentially higher discount rate.

5/28/57 -30
Mr. Johns said that he was not ready to take a position
with respect to the matter that had been raised by Mr. Mills. He
had come to this meeting believing that inevitably the System was
going to supply some reserves in the coming months and that perhaps
it would have to take into account in that process the desirability
of maintaining the structure of interest rates at about the present
level, believing that to be a good level and where the System wanted
to keep it. That would have implications for open market policy in
coming weeks. Mr. Johns said that he still had some slight fear that
for the System to tolerate or even encourage an increase in the level
of interest rates might entail more restriction than it wanted, He
was not so sure of that as to argue vigorously for it, however. He
had come here prepared to say that he thought the System should main
tain about the degree of restraint it had recently had. That would
have involved supplying reserves in such quantities and at such times
as needed.
Mr. Szymczak said that normally he would favor an increase in
the discount rate, perhaps now or sooner than now. Under the circum
stances, however, he was afraid that any increase in discount rate
would hurt the very markets we were talking about, that is, the
capital market and the market for Government securities. One could
not tell how such action would be interpreted, but Mr. Szymczak said
that he had the feeling that the market would interpret it to mean
that the System not only intended to be as restrictive as it had been

5/28/57 -31
but more restrictive. An announcement of an increase in discount
rate by one Bank or by twelve of the Reserve Banks could be con
strued to mean that the System felt that the rate generally should
be higher and that the System would not make available reserves.
Mr. Szymczak felt that the System would have to provide some reserves,
perhaps beginning early in the second half of the year. Therefore,
he would favor negative free reserves between $400 and $500 million
and borrowings by member banks below $1 billion. He would also give
the Manager of the System Account as much latitude as required to
meet the situation that might arise. Mr. Szymczak commented that
the Treasury's problem was our problem because it must go to the
market and the capital market is a part of our problem. Whatever
happens to either affects the reactions of the public and of members
of the Congress to System actions regarding monetary policy.
Mr. Balderston then made a statement substantially as follows:
I share much of the concern that Mr. Szymczak has ex
pressed about the need for not unsettling the capital mar
kets right now. On the other hand, I have a continuing
concern about what is happening not only in this country,
but throughout the world. We had the news last week of
certain wage contracts in California that will run for
five years and give a raise of 18 cents per hour each year
to laborers in the construction industry. Such develop
ments increase the tendency for people to want to buy now
rather than later. The wage price spiral is about to re
ceive another twist of built-in escalator clauses. As a
result, steel prices will apparently increase, and perhaps
freight rates as well. I mention steel and freight rates
because they are such pervasive influences.
Utilities and local governmental units will have to
come to the capital market to an increasing extent. The

5/28/57 -32-
margin between the present discount rate and the rate
on Government securities seems to me likely to widen.
Already it is wide enough to present some technical
difficulties. This means that I now regret our dis
count rate was not raised earlier this year. In
cidentally, our rate is the second lowest among the
developed nations of the world, the Swiss alone having
a lower one at 2-1/2 per cent. The French have a
per cent rate and the British 5 per cent. Ours remains
at 3 per cent.
In the face of the world-wide inflationary tendency,
I am not too comfortable with this rate. But if and when
we do move up our discount rate, the timing would require
very careful attention so that the market could be gotten
into a steady state before the Treasury's August refinanc
ing. That will be a difficult financing: $8 billion out
side of the Federal Reserve System, of which only $3 bil
lion is in the banks and $5 billion in the hands of
nonbank holders. We not only have the big August financing
ahead, but we also have the real risk that too much turbu
lence in the capital markets may cause the more rapid
redemption of F and G bonds. If these are redeemed at a
faster rate, enough of these are outstanding to accentuate
the Treasury's problem.
In short, I think that discount rate action may need
to be taken even at this late date; but any action taken
ought to be so timed as not to make the Treasury's financ
ing problem more difficult. That means that unless taken
right away, it would have to wait until fall.
Mr. Bryan commented that one of the difficulties that was be
ginning to appear and that would continue to be present in the capital
markets arose from the fact that, as short-term interest rates moved
well above the discount rate, there was speculation as to the future
of the discount rate; and in consequence of this many persons would
not make commitments because they believed that the present level of
rates had no stability. Thus, the System would either have to adjust
the discount rate or give assurance to the market that it would not

5/28/57 -33
increase the rate. Mr. Bryan said that his preference would be to
adjust the discount rate.
Chairman Martin said that he was alarmed about the picture;
and "alarmed" was the correct word to use. At the same time, he did
not know the answer. He had been mulling the situation over for the
last couple of weeks and still did not see the answer clearly. The
Committee had been dealing with some psychological aspects of the
situation for a couple of years and it might well be that there had
been miscalculations. It might have been wiser if the System had
raised the discount rate earlier. The Committee had been uncertain
as to what the business situation would be earlier this year. As Mr.
Williams had said, the statistics were then outrunning sentiment,
whereas now sentiment seemed to be outrunning the statistics.
The Chairman said that he was inclined to think that the System
must supply reserves and supply them quite actively during the second
half of this year. Regardless of Mr. Robertson's point that the System
may have miscalculated as to the velocity of money, it had restrained
the volume of credit and the velocity had been taken into consideration.
In terms of the growth of the economy, additional reserves would be
needed and needed actively in the second half of this year. As he had
said before, in this situation the System must have a posture of re
ducing spending and increasing savings. If what Mr. Hayes had said
about the reduced rate of growth in savings in the first quarter of

5/28/57 -34
this year was correct, this made the picture even more alarming.
The Chairman said that the only thing he knew of that was seriously
short in supply was savings. After errors have been made, he said,
it becomes very easy in retrospect to see them. Without stating
that errors had been made, Chairman Martin said that all of us
would have done many things differently if we had been able to know
how the situation would develop.
Chairman Martin went on to say that the System had a very
real obligation to consider the Treasury's problem, as Mr. Szymczak
had pointed out. While he would not go as far as Mr. Johns bad
indicated in saying that the System would have to supply the reserves
to maintain the interest rate structure, the Chairman said that he
had not changed the judgment that he held when he came to the meeting
this morning. Perhaps we should consider an increase in the discount
rate, but to take such action immediately would, in his opinion,
compound the System's and the Treasury's difficulties. It was diffi
cult to gauge what were legitimate fears and apprehensions, and what
was just idle speculation. However, anyone looking at the capital
markets today and seeing the volume of issues and the sort of situa
tion mentioned during the meeting this morning with new issues selling
as high as 5-1/4 per cent yield--anyone observing that situation must
realize that we were faced with a delicate operation. The Treasury
too had a problem with the large volume of demand debt in the form
of savings bonds.

5/28/57 -35
Chairman Martin said that we were talking in this room
and that we must be extremely careful about comments on the subject.
However, we were dealing with what could amount to a run on a bank.
Runs on banks can start for no good reason, he noted, adding that
the Treasury could be faced with that sort of a problem because of
the large volume of savings bonds outstanding. While he was not
suggesting that this would happen or that this was the Committee's
controlling obligation, nevertheless, if the Treasury should have
a "run on the bank" the System would be faced with a very difficult
problem. In order to achieve the maximum pressure against credit
expansion, it was necessary for the System to handle its market
operations very carefully.
Chairman Martin said that he would lean in the direction
that Mr. Mills had suggested because he believed that if the System
could raise the discount rate and supply the reserves that it was
going to have to supply at a little higher level of interest rates,
this would be the most effective action that the System could take.
However, he was inclined to think that the present would be a little
too early to raise the discount rate in view of the psychology that
was swinging around. The suggestion for an increase in the rate was
something all of those present should study very carefully in terms
of the most effective timing. If the action were misinterpreted, it
could result in widespread misunderstanding throughout the country.
By and large, the Chairman said he was convinced that in may small

5/28/57 -36
communities the discount rate change was a major item. Many of
the E and H savings bonds were held in areas where that attitude
existed.
The Chairman expressed the view that this was a most critical
juncture in the battle against inflation and that anyone who minimized
the alarm he had indicated as to the possibility of an ultimate flight
from the dollar was making a serious mistake. On the other hand, if
there were anything that tended toward a run on the Treasury, such a
development could become one of the elements in a flight from the
dollar. Chairman Martin did not see how we could fail to recognize
the elements in the picture. His own feeling was that the Committee
should maintain the present degree of restraint, taking overt action
in neither direction, and letting the Manager of the Account have the
maximum latitude to feel his way in this market. All of the members
of the Committee should bear in mind the problem of reserves and of
levels of interest rates and the possibility of a change in the dis
count rate at some time in the near future. We should also bear in
mind the problem of the Treasury: the Treasury may have taken the
wrong course, as Mr. Leedy had suggested, but the fact was that at
the present time the Treasury had $55 billion of demand obligations
outstanding in the form of savings bonds. Considering the entire
picture, Chairman Martin said that he came out at the point that
the Committee should maintain the directive without change. He did
not feel that the change in the international situation had been

5/28/57 -37
such as to warrant deleting the reference to it in clause (b) of
the directive. The aim of the Committee during the next few weeks
should be to maintain as even a keel as possible and to let this
psychology work itself out. Perhaps the advertent method which Mr.
Bryan had suggested could be used, but at the present juncture
Chairman Martin said that he would not wish to take a positive posi
tion as to that suggestion.
Mr. Shepardson inquired whether the Chairman's comments
implied that June might be a month when the System could put reserves
into the market and at the same time increase the discount rate with
out undesirable consequences.
The Chairman responded that this could be the case but that
he was not taking a position at the moment.
Mr. Hayes commented that he understood on the strength of the
projections that float would probably take care of most of the addi
tional reserve needs in June. Thus the System would not be in the
position of having to put reserves into the market at that time.
On the larger question, Mr. Hayes said that if there were to
be an increase in the discount rate the System should be very clear
as to why the increase was being made. He noted that two reasons had
been given for such an increase, and he was not sure that the two were
consistent. One of these was the obvious reason that there were
serious inflationary threats and that the System should increase the
discount rate to combat these threats. This, he felt, was the essence

5/28/57 -38
of the statement made by Messrs. Robertson and Shepardson. The
other was the suggestion he understood to be implied in Mr. Mills'
comment, that is, a rise in the discount rate would provide greater
settlement and stability in the capital markets on the theory that
the existing uncertainty as to rates was a drawback in the capital
markets and that perhaps elimination of that uncertainty would help
provide a better equilibrium. With respect to the second objective,
Mr. Hayes said that he had very grave misgivings as to whether an
increase in the discount rate now would produce an equilibrium, be
cause of the whole atmosphere in the securities market. It was very
much open to question, he said, whether dealing with such a delicate
problem ratewise might not have an effect just the opposite of that
desired. Personally, Mr. Hayes said that he had misgivings as to
whether such a move was needed strictly as a monetary measure. He
had not reached a conclusion that the inflationary forces were very
definitely and strongly in the ascendency. He stressed the confused
and mixed character of the picture, as he and some of his colleagues
saw it. It was true that sentiment had improved, Mr. Hayes said,
but he was impressed by the statement Mr. Williams had made that
sentiment has improved but statistics have worsened. He thought it
very questionable whether this was a desirable time to make an overt
move toward greater restraint. He did not believe such action was
called for, with the business picture looking the way it does, There
was wide room for judgment on that, of course.

5/28/57 -39
Mr. Erickson said that it seemed to him that business
sentiment in the spring of each year following a good year was
always tending down early in the year, and later on it improved.
He would like to be sure that we did not overemphasize such de
velopments this year.
Mr. Vardaman said that he was wholly in agreement with the
comments Mr. Hayes had made. Without meaning to be presumptuous, he
noted that there were some forty persons in the room, and he suggested
that if word of this discussion got outside the room it would have
almost as disturbing an effect on the market as though the discount
rate were raised.
Chairman Martin said that he had already commented on the
latter point and that he was glad that Mr. Vardaman had reiterated
the need for not commenting about discussions in this room On the
other hand, it was essential that the Committee discuss these prob
lems, and it must rely on the intelligence and discretion of the
persons attending the meetings.
As to policy, the Chairman said that he would gather that
the consensus was that the Committee should maintain the status quo
and that it should continue to study the problems that had been
discussed at this meeting.
Mr. Shepardson said that he had no objection to that state
ment. However, the comment Mr. Hayes had just made regarding the

5/28/57 -40.
difficulty of judging the business situation was one that always
faced us; the Committee would always be behind the figures, and
it was part of the Committee's job to reach a judgment before the
figures reached it.
Chairman Martin inquired of Mr. Rouse whether he had any sug
gestions regarding the directive, and he responded that he had none.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York until otherwise
directed by the Committee
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges
(including replacement of maturing securities, and allow
ing maturities to run off without replacement) for the
System open market account in the open market or, in the
case of maturing securities, by direct exchange wi;h the
Treasury, as may be necessary in the light of current and
prospective economic conditions and the general credit
situation of the country, with a view (a) to relating the
supply of funds in the market to the needs of commerce
and business, (b) to restraining inflationary developments
in the interest of sustainable economic growth while
recognizing uncertainties in the business outlook, the
financial markets, and the international situation, and
(c) to the practical administration of the account; pro
vided that the aggregate amount of securities held in the
System account (including commitments for the purchase or
sale of securities for the account) at the close of this
date, other than special short-term certificates of in
debtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be increased or
decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with
discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue
participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such
amounts of special short-term certificates of indebtedness
as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary

5/28/57 -41
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the
total amount of such certificates held at any one
time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed
in the aggregate $500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the
System account for gold certificates such amounts
of Treasury securities maturing within one year as
may be necessary from time to time for the accommoda
tion of the Treasury; provided that the total amount
of such securities so sold shall not exceed in the
aggregate 500 million face amount, and such sales
shall be made as nearly as may be practicable at the
prices currently quoted in the open market.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held at 10:00 a.m. on Tuesday, June 18, 1957.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary