A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Monday, February 18, 1957, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Johns
Mr. Mills
Mr. Powell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Messrs. Allen, Bryan, Leedy, and Williams, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Leach and Mangels, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Abbott, Hostetler, Parsons, Roelse,
Willis, and Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Bopp, Daane, Mitchell, and Tow, Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Philadelphia, Richmond, Chicago, and Kansas
City, respectively; and Mr. Atkinson,
Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta

2/18/57 -2
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on January 28, 1957, were ap
proved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
covering open market operations during the period January 28 through
February 11, 1957, as well as a supplementary report covering commitments
executed February 13 through February 15, 1957. Copies of both reports
have been placed in the files of the Committee.
Mr. Rouse noted that the report of open market operations during
the past three weeks was longer than usual, partly because of his belief
that the Committee would be interested in a detailed description of the
System account sales of certificates of indebtedness and Treasury notes
and the market's response to these sales. Sales of certificates and notes
had not commenced until Friday, February 8, when System holdings of bills
declined below $250 million, Mr. Rouse said, adding that as of Friday,
February 15, System bill holdings were down to $178.3 million.
Mr. Mills inquired whether as a matter of policy it would be de
sirable in the future to make an immediate and complete explanation of
the purpose of a departure from an established practice where the trans
actions involved represented a change in technique and not a change in
policy (in this case, departure from the practice of limiting transactions
for the System account to Treasury bills) as a means of making certain
that the market was fully informed.

2/18/57
Mr. Rouse said that the transactions in certificates and notes
had been handled in a manner (which he described) intended to make
certain that dealers would know that the transactions were for the
System account. Although he felt certain that there had been very
little misunderstanding, he agreed that, looking backward, there would
have been no harm in indicating even more clearly what was being done.
Mr. Robertson said that he had the same feeling as Mr. Mills
the System might benefit by making even plainer in the future any changes
of this character. He suggested the possibility of utilizing the morn
ing conference with dealers as a means of spelling out such changes so
as to avoid any possible confusion. He then inquired whether Mr. Rouse
felt that, in hindsight, it was appropriate to sell certificates and
notes at a time when the System account still held almost $250 million
in Treasury bills.
Mr. Rouse responded that at the time he had felt such sales were
appropriate and desirable, and it still seemed to him that was the case.
He reiterated that since February 8 sales of bills had brought holdings
down to $178 million.
Mr. Hayes suggested that whether the figure was $200 million or
some other figure, it was clear that there was some level of System
holdings of bills below which the System would ordinarily not wish to go
in order to maintain a supply of bills in the event it became desirable
to withdraw a relatively large amount of reserves from the market very

2/18/57
rapidly. He said that he had accepted Mr. Rouse's judgment on the
point under discussion.
Mr. Erickson inquired whether, if it announced a change in pro
cedure of this type, the Committee might set a precedent which would
make it necessary to explain every future change in operating procedure.
Mr. Rouse stated that there might be some such feeling, although
he did not think it would be necessary to make explanations of all
changes of this type.
After some further discussion, upon
motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the open market trans
actions during the period January 28
through February 15, 1957, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Young's statement on the economic situation, made at Chairman
Martin's request and as a supplement to the staff memorandum distributed
under date of February 15, 1957, was as follows:
Towards the end of 1956, business and financial observers
were in unusual agreement that further advances in business
activity and further creeping inflation were to be expected for
the year 1957. Subsequent reappraisal has given rise to doubts.
Indeed, views in the direction of a topping-out of the infla
tionary advance have come to be expressed more frequently, with
the implication that a phase of downward deflationary adjustment
may be predestined for later in the year. It seems appropriate
at this meeting to inventory briefly these elements that the
doubters are pointing to as casting their shadows before.
Industrial production has hesitated in January and slipped
back one index point. Of the 24 major industrial groups enter
ing into the make-up of the index, some 14 have shown declines
in output since October of last year and 3 no change in output.
Absence of strength of indications of weakness were especially
characteristic of consumer goods industries. Gains in industrial
consumption of coal and electric power over a year ago have been
narrowing, and freight car loadings have been moderately under
year-ago levels.

2/18/57
While the general level of commodity prices at wholesale
has continued to rise--rising 1/2 per cent from mid-December
to mid-January and probably further to mid-February--the ad
vance in industrial commodity prices has slackened since late
autumn and, among commodity groups, the frequency of price
advance has been reduced. Prices of a number of industrial
materials and scrap, furthermore, have been declining, and
since early December average prices of basic commodities have
receded 4 per cent to about the level obtaining prior to the
closing of the Suez Canal. Caution in forward buying has come
to be a feature of basic material and scrap markets, of markets
for some steel and metal products such as copper, and of markets
for textiles and for paper.
For some months now, industrial construction.has been below
a year ago and, since last spring, residential contract awards
in millions of square feet have been falling. Nonresidential
construction awards for business purposes have also been declin
ing, with contract awards dropping from spring through the year
end. Available evidence, moreover, suggests that plant and
equipment expenditures by manufacturing industries are in the
process of leveling off; some observers would say already declin
ing, because for several months, some indexes of machinery orders
have been showing downdrift. Unfilled orders in durable goods
industries have been little changed since August in contrast to
the earlier situation of a mounting order backlog.
While employment over-all has held up well in recent months,
it can be argued that some weakening in manufacturing employment
has recently occurred. Since October, small, steady, month-to
month declines in durable goods employment have been evident and
declines have also been registered over this period in employment
in some nondurable goods lines. The number of industries repre
sented in the declines has been growing. Manhours worked per week
have also declined in about half of the major industry groups since
October, with other industries mainly stable, In January there was
a general decline in manhours worked in durable goods industries
and also a decline in some major nondurable industries.
Business inventories have risen through 1956 at about the
same rate as in 1955. The increase in manufacturing inventories
has been more than sales, so that inventory-sales ratios in
manufacturing are higher than a year ago. With substantially
increased capacity to produce and to distribute finished product
than two years ago, total business inventories of $88.5 billion
and $6 billion higher than a year earlier may well be on the
high side.
Corporate internal funds have been lower in relation to
their plant and equipment expenditures in 1956, resulting in
heavier reliance on external sources of funds and lowered

2/18/57 -6-
corporate liquidity. While the fourth quarter bulge in business
sales and profits relieved corporate financial pressure and
facilitated the pay-off of bank loans in January, many recent
annual reports of corporations indicate that 1956 was a year of
reduction in corporate financial fat.
In Western Europe, industrial production has been relatively
level now for the past three quarters, and for several weeks the
drift in world commodity markets has been downward, with some raw
material prices declining well below pre-Suez levels.
The foregoing inventory of slackening momentum elements is
clearly impressive enough to occasion caution and to prompt some
bears to come out of hibernation to test feeding grounds. It is
not yet impressive enough, however, to justify a firm conclusion
that rolling adjustment at rising levels of total activity, and
with inflationary pressures, is close to an end and that general
deflationary adjustment is now a greater prospective likelihood.
Before any such conclusion is reached the inventory of elements
to be weighed needs to be extended. For instance:
Industrial production, while not rising, continues at about
record levels. Small declines in some industries have about been
offset by gains in others. Important types of steel remain in
short supply and are a limiting factor in further expansion of
some lines of output. Declines in durable goods output, especially
in output of machinery, reflect reduced production of mechanical
parts for consumer durable goods. Unfilled orders for durable
goods industries, while not rising since August, remain about an
eighth larger than a year ago, and are particularly heavy in
producer's equipment and machinery lines.
In December, work on architects' drafting boards other than
factory buildings, after declining gradually for several months,
rose sharply. In January, contract awards for construction of
manufacturing and commercial facilities were also up sharply.
Awards for industrial building were up more than half of the
average for the fourth quarter and commercial contract awards
were up about a third. Capital expenditure appropriations of
large corporations, after a marked reduction in the third quarter,
are reported to have shown an appreciable reversal in the fourth
quarter.
While residential construction activity is down, recent month
to-month declines in starts and awards have been smaller than
earlier, and careful review of reports on the housing market indi
cates considerable strength, and not weakness. Prices of old and
new houses are reported to be firm; vacancies are low; vacant houses
for sale have been declining; rents on rental housing are still
rising; a large volume of home sales transactions continue to find
financing; and the current rate of mortgage lending is high by any
standard, except 1955. Mortgage commitment funds continue tight

2/18/57
and market demand for Government underwritten mortgages is
slack.
Altogether the labor market is still strong and not weak.
Nonfarm employment is at a record level; demands for nonmanu
facturing employees continue active, after allowing for seasonal
factors; no large lay-offs of manufacturing employees have been
reported; and total employment, seasonally adjusted, is still
low--about the same as a year ago and the average for 1956.
Government spending for goods and services--Federal and
State and local government combined--has been rising steadily
and further steady rise seems to be in prospect.
Consumer incomes have risen further this year and con
sumer spending at retail in January was about the record level
of December--5 per cent ahead of last year. In contrast to
1955, consumers in 1956 increased their holdings of financial
assets more than their total debt, thus strengthening their
aggregate financial position. New automobile sales in January
and the first part of February have been on the strong side,
all things considered, even if below some highly optimistic
expectations. Used car sales have been especially strong and
used car prices, after allowance for depreciation, continue stable.
Business financial pressures seem to have eased some early
this year; the upward trend in business failure liabilities ap
pears to have leveled off; market reception to new corporate
issues has been generally favorable; and business optimism, as
reflected in the latest Dun and Bradstreet survey of sales and
profits expectations, taken in early January, ran higher than
was shown by the preceding survey, taken in the third quarter
of 1956, and the increase in optimistic expectations was shared
by most manufacturing and retail groups. Demands for long-term
business funds continue very strong.
As to agriculture, income of farm proprietors holds at about
year-ago levels, and farm prices recently have been fairly stable
at about 5 per cent above last year.
In Western Europe, productive resources have been intensively
utilized all through the past year, so that further gains could
be registered slowly. The fact that the post-Suez fuel shortage
had little visible impact on total industrial production through
December is at least suggestive of underlying strength, especially
in the face of declines in raw materials prices. Indeed, these
declines in some cases reflect more ample supply conditions from
expanded output rather than any appreciable curtailment of demands.
Recent downward adjustments of discount rates in Britain and
Germany seem to be special adaptations to domestic financial
problems rather than early indications of a general economic and
credit easing in Western Europe.

2/18/57
We may conclude this point and counterpoint inventory
of the current economic situation in this way. There is
evidence of some slackening in the momentum of inflationary
advance, but there is as yet no clear-cut evidence of a
conjuncture of forces that would indicate a halting of the
advance in the foreseeable future with a greater than even
possibility that downward deflationary correction will
follow. If or as such evidence develops in ensuing weeks,
your staff will place it before you promptly. The financial
problem of the economy, in my judgment, continues to be that
of demands in the aggregate pressing against aggregate re
source supply. Basically, the situation is still infla
tionary, though with moderate abatement of inflationary
tendencies.
Mr. Vardaman said that he happened to be one of those who felt
that the rise in economic activity had topped off. He inquired of Mr.
Young as to what clear-cut evidences of a downward trend in economic de
velopments would have to appear before the staff indicated to the Com
mittee that a downward trend was developing.
Mr. Young responded that one of the points that had been empha
sized particularly by those who felt that we may have topped out was
that business expenditures for plant and equipment were leveling off
and even declining. There has been a supercolossal rise in such expendi
tures, he said, and at some point it was inevitable that they would top
out and turn down. Although such a topping out appeared to be taking
place in that particular field, Mr. Young said that this did not mean
that a downward turn in the economy generally was developing, particu
larly since demands for additional plant facilities even now were at
an extremely high level and still rising. Outside the capital expendi
tures field, a number of indicators continued to show great strength

2/18/57 -9
and advance, Mr. Young said, noting that plans on architects' drafting
boards and construction awards during January had risen sharply. The
economy was at a point of very intensive utilization of resources and
if plans for expansion were to continue to rise, the problem presented
would be even more difficult. Mr. Young concluded by saying between
this and the next meeting evidences might appear to indicate a general
topping off in the economy and, if so, these would be brought to the
attention of the Committee at once.
Chairman Martin next called on Mr. Thomas for a statement on
the credit situation.
In opening his remarks, Mr. Thomas stated that last week he
attended a conference of business economists in Washington at which
the consensus was that business expenditures were high and not declining,
although there was some indication that they might be leveling off. A
careful analysis of the situation indicated that business capital expendi
tures would continue at a high level through 1957 on the basis of business
already booked.
Mr. Thomas then made a statement on recent financial develop
ments as follows:
Credit developments in recent weeks continue to indicate
a relaxation of pressures. The rate of bank loan liquidation
has been well-nigh unprecedented; bank reserve positions have
been less strained, despite heavy absorption by System open
market operations; money rates have declined sharply; and the
tone of the bond market has changed so much as to permit the
sale of a very large volume of new issues of securities at
declining yields, while the stock market has been weak.

2/18/57 -10-
This easing, however, does not lead to a conclusion that
a general downturn in economic activity has begun or is immi
nent. Some relaxation is customary for this time of the year.
While the readjustment in money rates, for example, has been
somewhat sharper this year than usual, it followed a more pre
cipitous rise, that was probably overdone. Bond yields, par
ticularly on corporate issues, are still high by any previous
postwar standards. Stock prices, while near or below the lows
of 1956, are still not far below the highs of 1955. Bank loans
outstanding are larger than they were a year ago and two years
ago by amounts of growth that could not be indefinitely sustain
able. The large volume of new corporate issues provides a basis
for continued heavy investment expenditures by businesses and by
State and local governments.
Federal Government expenditures have been increasing and
its excess outlays, for various reasons, have been larger and
have extended longer than is usual at this season. In fact,the
reduction in Treasury cash balances has been a most important
factor in the easing of the money markets.
Although there are indications of a lower level of housing
construction and financing and the prospects for automobile
sales are still uncertain, consumer spending has generally con
tinued at a high and rising level. The mixed movements of
commodity prices indicate a moderating of upward pressures but
no general downturn. Wage increases continue to create cost
profit squeezes.
At the best, current developments may be considered as
the relaxation of inflationary pressures which has been de
sired and toward which monetary policies have been directed.
Whether this is but a temporary lull in the inflationary
pressures, or the beginning of a downturn, small or large,
or the attainment of high-level stability only time can tell.
There are no strong indications that either of the first two
possibilities is more likely than the last more desirable
course of events.
Treasury difficulty in building up a cash balance to a
more workable level has been due to a combination of factors.
Payments, particularly for defense purposes, have been larger
than were expected; redemptions of savings bonds have con
tinued rather large; and receipts have fallen somewhat short
of estimates. To what extent the short-fall in receipts is
an unexplained lag in tax payments or a lower level of tax
liabilities than expected cannot yet be determined. It seems
evident that the Treasury will need new financing of perhaps
$3 billion in the next two months. One of the decisions to

2/18/57 -11-
be made is whether to continue to raise $200 million a week
through additional sales of bills or whether to make a special
cash offering and curtail the new weekly borrowing.
Corporate security issues for new capital in February
promise to be close to the near record January volume, and
schedules indicate no let-up in March. While there is a feel
ing that business expenditures for plant and equipment may be
leveling off, available evidence indicates that they are likely
to continue at a high level through this year. Business borrow
ing demands are expected to remain large. Flotations of State
and local government securities will evidently be larger than
were expected earlier. Growing acquiescence by issuers in the
higher level of rates, together with the large volume of public
works expenditures being planned, indicates continued absorption
by this sector of any funds that may be available.
Bond yields, both on new and on outstanding issues, have
declined in recent weeks, but the decrease in corporate yields
has been moderate, compared both with the previous rise and with
the declines in governmental issues. Yields on outstanding high
grade corporate bonds are still higher than at any time before
November, while those on Treasury bonds are close to the levels
of last August. State and local government issues, which showed
a more precipitate rise in yields, are in an intermediate posi
tion with respect to the decline. Last fall's rise in yields
on medium-term Treasury bonds to well above those on long-term
bonds has been largely eliminated, and the yield structure is
again comparatively flat. Both the strength in bond prices
and the weaknesses in stock prices can be explained by the
relation between yields on stocks and bonds, together with the
apparent leveling out of corporate profits. Investors are
evidently shifting from stocks to bonds.
Treasury bill yields, while fluctuating considerably, are
at a higher level relative to bond yields than was the case
prior to November. Although banks and dealers have initially
absorbed a large portion of recent new bill issues, there has
been a strong secondary market from nonbank buyers. These
demands reflect in part reinvestment of funds obtained from
maturing Treasury issues, in part temporary investment of the
proceeds of new security issues, and perhaps in part some cash
flow to corporation.
Reasons for the probably unprecedented liquidation of bank
loans since the beginning of this year are as yet difficult to
determine. Much of the reduction is seasonal--as in food,
liquor, and tobacco manufacturing, trade lines, commodity
dealers, sales finance companies, and construction--and in some
cases reflects a reaction from more than seasonal increases that

2/18/57 -12-
preceded. The preceding temporary needs were either larger
than usual or were overestimated. Some of the decline in
loans may have been made possible by the new capital issues,
but little of it can be related directly to this source.
Perhaps more will come as the proceeds of recent new issues
become available. Indirect evidence indicates that the de
cline in loans occurred entirely at banks in leading cities.
The decline in bank investments has been less than in the
same period last year, reflecting substantially smaller reduc
tions in securities other than Treasury bills. This may be an
indication of the lowered liquidity position of banks and the
lower level of bond prices, as well as of the larger decline
in loans.
Much of the decrease in bank credit this year has been
counterbalanced by larger declines than a year ago in U. S.
Government and interbank deposits. The decrease in demand
deposits adjusted at banks in leading cities in the past six
weeks has been smaller than in the same period last year.
Time deposits have increased compared with a decrease last
year. The decline in demand deposits has been close to the
usual seasonal amount. Following a large increase in Decem
ber, the return flow of currency in January was exceptionally
large and exceeded seasonal expectations by over $400 million.
It appears that the total money supply showed a greater than
seasonal decline in January.
Member bank reserve needs in recent weeks have declined
more than usual for this period, owing largely to the sharp
decline in money in circulation and to a somewhat larger
than expected drop in required reserves. The latter was due
principally to the low level reached by Treasury tax and loan
accounts. The increase in the gold stock, resulting from the
IMF sale of $300 million of gold to the U. S. Treasury, also
added to reserve availabilities. Movements of float, though
at a high level, have conformed fairly closely to the seasonal
pattern.
The increased availability of reserves has been fully
offset, with some lag, by reduction in the System Open Market
Account. This decline by the end of this statement week will
have amounted to nearly $2 billion since the last week of
December. Consequently net borrowed reserves have returned
to around the quarter billion dollar level for the first
time since early October, after showing a net free reserve
position during most of January.
In the current statement week, as shown in the table of
projections, a further decline in Treasury balances at the
Reserve Banks below the recent low level and the usual mid
month high level of float are expected to provide an abundance

2/18/57 -13-
of reserves, notwithstanding a continued substantial re
duction in System holdings. Next week, however, this
situation should change sharply and, in the absence of
System purchases to supply reserves, net borrowed reserves
might rise to around $400 million. In the following two
weeks they might be in the neighborhood of $500 million.
Any System purchases to moderate this increase should
probably be offset by sales in some subsequent weeks,
particularly when float rises. Hence repurchase con
tracts would be an appropriate medium for covering some
of these variations.
From the standpoint of policy objectives, the ques
tion is how much restraint in credit should be applied in
the existing and prospective situations. Evidently any
more stringent restraints at this time would be unnecessary
and inappropriate. On the other hand, no occasion for
relaxation is evident. In view of the changed attitude
of banks, net borrowed reserves might be kept around $250
million, or about half the level prevailing in March and
April last year. If, however, there is a pronounced
reversal in the trend of credit demands with a sharp
increase in bank loans, borrowings should be permitted
or made to increase above that level. On the other hand,
if credit liquidation continues beyond the usual seasonal
pace, a somewhat lower level of reserve needs would de
velop and member bank borrowings might be permitted to
decline.
The final answer lies, as always, in the course of
production and prices, credit demands and interest rates,
rather than in the level of member bank borrowings. The
forces for rises in costs and prices are apparently still
in operation.
Chairman Martin said that as a prelude to the discussion of the
situation this morning, he wished to report that he had talked with
Secretary of the Treasury Humphrey and Under Secretary Burgess during
the past few days. He had assured both the Secretary and the Under
Secretary that he would see to it that the Open Market Committee was in
formed as to the problem the Treasury was facing, and he said that he
felt Mr. Thomas had pointed up the problem of the Treasury's cash
position very well. The Secretary was concerned about the Treasury's

2/18/57 -14-
balance, Chairman Martin said, noting the attrition that had taken place
on the Treasury's latest issue. Mr. Burgess wanted the Committee to
know that the Treasury might have to come to the Federal Reserve for
direct borrowing, since it did not know whether it would be feasible to
go to the market for funds in an amount such as Mr. Thomas had suggested
might be needed during the next two months. The Treasury was also at a
crossroad on the savings bond program and some time might elapse before
it knew how the program would work out.
The Chairman then called upon Mr. Hayes, who made a statement
with respect to economic activity and open market policy as follows:
1. We continue to find evidence that the country's economic
activity as a whole may be flattening out--admittedly at a
high level, but with nothing in sight to provide upward mo
mentum on the scale witnessed last fall. At the same time
there was no clear evidence of serious weakness in the economy.
2. There are some fragmentary signs that inventories may no
longer be growing as rapidly as in 1956, and there is further
confirmation of a leveling out of capital expenditures. For
example, machinery orders and industrial construction con
tracts in December were appreciably lower than a year earlier.
Some industries are reported to have decided to stretch out
their plant expansion programs.
3. The outlook in the automobile, steel, and residential
construction industries remains substantially as it was at
the time of our last meeting. In our view it is still too
early to say whether automobile sales for 1957 will come up
to early expectations of a gain of perhaps 10%o ver 1956.
Housing starts will probably be lower than last year, and
lower steel operating rates in relation to capacity are
expected soon.
4. Divergent price tendencies for finished goods and
sensitive scrap and waste materials have now continued for
a good many weeks. It would be unusual for this condition
to persist for an extended period, and it is at least pos
sible that the weakness in scrap prices portends a more

2/18/57
general easing in demand-supply relationships which may
ultimately be reflected in lower prices for finished goods.
5. The most recent figures on bank loans at all weekly
reporting member banks showed a continuation of the pro
nounced January decline, although the pace of the decline
had slackened, and the February 13 data show an increase
in business loans at the central reserve city banks. The
decline in the first six weeks of this year was the largest
in recent years. To a considerable extent this is doubt
less merely a reversal of the sharp seasonal upswing of
November and December, but the size of the drop suggests
that it has gone beyond this point. Bankers seem to look
for somewhat less of a bulge in borrowing for March taxes
than had previously been expected. The trend toward sharply
lower corporate liquidity which was so prominent a feature
of last year's financial developments appears to have slowed
or even to have been reversed, temporarily at least--due
doubtless in part to the recent heavy volume of successful
corporate capital flotations, and perhaps also due to the
temporary sharp drop in Treasury balances, as well as a
possible shrinkage in inventories.
6. While the Treasury's first major refunding problem of
the year is now out of the way, we must reckon with sub
stantially larger Treasury cash needs than were looked for
at the beginning of the year or even at our last meeting.
The Treasury's present cash problem, together with the
facts that dealers still hold sizable positions in the
securities offered in the refunding, and that our holdings
of bills are now minimal, have created some difficulty in
maintaining net borrowed reserves in the current week. We
are not unduly concerned over this development, however,
since the market will doubtless recognize this situation
as a reflection of temporary influences, notably the diffi
culty with Treasury's balance and the bulge in float.
7. We feel that this is clearly a time when we should make
no overt change, in either direction, from the policy of
restraint which we have been following. However, if some
moderate easing of the banks' reserve position should be
caused by further declines in total bank loans and invest
ments, we question whether the System should counteract it.
We can see no reason to consider a change in the discount
rate under present conditions.
8. While there is no longer the degree of unsettlement in
the financial markets that prevailed some weeks ago, there
are some continued uncertainties and irregularities in the
capital markets and continued unsettlement in the international

2/18/57 -16.
situation. There is some question in my mind as to whether
the directive might appropriately be modified at this time.
Perhaps it would be well to defer discussing this point till
we have heard the views of the others present as to general
policy.
Mr. Johns said that he found no reason to disagree with the views
expressed by Mr. Young in appraising the current situation. After review
ing the situation with his staff last Friday, he failed to see any con
vincing evidence that what was going on amounted to a beginning of reces
sion. He was rather inclined to like what he saw; perhaps there was some
leveling off of the boom and of inflationary pressures, and, if so, this
was all to the good and what the System had been striving for for many
months. Rather than deflation, he was inclined to feel that current
developments indicated a somewhat better allocation of resources, and he
liked this development. Aside from this, Mr. Johns said that there were
some forces that might produce a resurgence of inflation and he felt the
Committee should keep on guard against these. Therefore, his view was
that there should be no overt change of policy at this time. He would
favor maintaining about the same degree of restraint that had been the
Committee's target for the last two meetings. He would favor no change
in discount rate at this time, would like to see net borrowed reserves
somewhere in the neighborhood of $200-250 million, and since he did not
like to tinker with the Committee's directive any oftener than necessary,
he would prefer not to amend the directive at this meeting.
Mr. Bryan said that there was nothing in the Sixth District that
would warrant a detailed report to the Committee this morning. The

2/18/57 -17
tendencies, as in the national picture, were somewhat more mixed than
they had been previously but generally speaking he could deduce no
convincing signs that the momentum of expansion had shifted. On the
national picture, Mr. Bryan said that he saw no reason to differ from
the conclusions expressed thus far this morning. The picture was more
mixed than it had been, but it did not seem clearly to portray an ebbing
of the tide at present. A difference in emphasis that he would make was
his belief that the Committee's policy had not been recently one of re
straint but one of rather definite ease. This may have been the correct
policy but in any event it was now time for the Committee to abandon at
least for the moment all talk of getting back to the tightness of last
November and early December. There was some danger that we could get
an even greater ease than we have had, Mr. Bryan said. The bill rate
could go temporarily well below the discount rate and this would be a
blunder in his opinion. He felt the System should make constantly such
sales into the market as to try to keep the bill rate somewhat above
the discount rate. He would like to have a greater posture of restraint
than the Committee has had recently.
In response to Chairman Martin's question as to whether he felt
the recent ease had been "overt" or whether it had been "inadvertent,"
Mr. Bryan said that the ease to which he referred had arisen to some
extent out of the free reserve concept. He would commend the desk in
having gotten net borrowed reserves between the $200-300 million mark,

2/18/57 -18
which had been suggested as a desirable objective at the preceding
meeting. In his opinion, Mr. Bryan said, the recent ease had been
inadvertent ease.
Mr. Williams stated that in preparation for this meeting repre
sentatives of the Philadelphia Bank had talked with a number of economists
for industrial concerns in the Third District during the past few days,
and he reported the results of these discussions, particularly whether the
industrial firms had modified their plans for capital expenditures during
1957. A number of the concerns interviewed were smaller ones while some
of them were large national organizations. The substance of Mr. Williams'
report was that in most cases the companies had made no move to cut back
or postpone their capital expenditure programs but were planning to go
ahead with projects that had been announced. In some cases, firms re
ported that orders had fallen off early this year, but in a number of
cases the most recent data indicated a resumption of orders. In general,
the inventory situation was not causing concern. However, Mr. Williams
noted that the prospects for 1957 were not now being viewed with as much
exuberance as they had been at the turn of the year, representing a more
conservative appraisal of business prospects. This seemed to reflect
primarily a shift in psychology rather than any fundamental weakening in
the business and financial situation. Mr. Williams suggested that per
haps as far as capital expenditures were concerned, the evidence he had
presented indicated that there might be a distinction between large and

2/18/57 -19
small corporations and that some of the announcements of postponement
of plans that had appeared in the press received undue attention because
they came from large firms.
Continuing, Mr. Williams reported that demand for bank loans in
the Philadelphia District continued strong, with some easing having ap
peared within the past few weeks. Various other indicators of economic
activity continued generally strong, although Mr. Williams noted that
new automobile registrations in January of this year were 13 per cent
below January a year ago. Summing up, Mr. Williams said that the out
look seemed to run counter to the psychology as indicated by press re
ports. His attitude was that the Federal Reserve should make no signifi
cant change in policy at this time.
Mr. Fulton said that businessmen in the Cleveland District were
optimistic. They talked caution but were going right ahead with their
plans. Operations of the steel industry seemed satisfactory to manage
ment, he said, and one member of the industry had commented that the
newspapers were doing the worrying for the steel companies. Takings of
automobile steel had been about as expected in recent weeks, but some
letdown in appliance takings had been noted. Demand for construction
steel continued good. Industry was going ahead with plans for con
struction, and the higher cost of credit was not deterring such programs.
Some bankers expected a fairly substantial rise in tax borrowings during

2/18/57 -20
March because of the reduced liquidity position of corporations. Con
sumers were calling more frequently for terms of 36 months in purchas
ing automobiles than had been the case earlier.
Mr. Fulton said that he believed no change should be made in
the Committee's present policy and that net borrowed reserves should
be held about the $250 million level. During March, banks should be
permitted to come to the discount window to take care of their needs
in meeting the prospective rise in loan demand. He referred to clause
(b) of the Committee's directive, stating that he felt the unsettled
conditions in the money and capital markets that the Committee had in
mind when it added the second part of the clause had changed, and he
suggested that this part of the directive might be modified so that it
would indicate that transactions should be with a view "to restraining
inflationary developments in the interest of sustainable economic growth,
while recognizing that activity in some segments of the economy has
receded from peak levels. Mr. Fulton said that he would not change the
discount rate at this time.
Mr. Shepardson said that he felt Mr. Young had done an exception
ally good job in pointing up the divergent trends in the economy. While
there were some indications of leveling off, he felt these were all to
the good and were in the direction toward which the Committee had been
working. There were still very strong inflationary pressures that the
Committee should bear in mind and this was no time to make any change

2/18/57 -21-
toward slackening off restraint on credit expansion. Mr. Shepardson
said that he had felt restraint had not been quite up to the mark that
the Committee had in mind for the last few weeks, and he hoped operations
would show no tendency to ease off at this time. Some of the comments
appearing in the press might indicate a more widespread feeling on the
down side than was warranted, and it would be a mistake for the Committee
to take an action that would indicate a belief that a downward movement
had started in the economy.
Mr. Robertson said that he had prepared a statement for this
meeting which he now found was generally in agreement with views that
had been expressed by others. He then read the statement as follows:
The present situation is reported to be one of stable to
slightly rising total output, with utilization of resources
generally high and output close to capacity in some areas.
Demands on capital markets continue to be very large. In
dustrial production is holding about level at the rate that
has prevailed since October. However, total expenditures for
gross national product apparently will be up in the current
quarter, reflecting more largely price increases than growth
in real output. In the immediate future, Federal Government
spending is scheduled to go up; State and local construction
and other outlays are likely to rise at least as rapidly as
last year; consumer spending for nondurable goods and services
will probably continue to grow. These add up to an impressive
total of plusses.
The behavior of some other components of expenditures is
more problematical, but there is no evidence at present that
any of them is behaving as an important contractive force, or
is likely to do so in the next month or so. Plant and equip
ment spending may rise more slowly, or perhaps level off, in
the immediate future, but is unlikely to decline. There are
no signs of any substantial shift in business inventory
policies that might involve the start of a liquidation move
ment. Any further declines in residential construction that
might occur would undoubtedly not be large enough to be an

2/18/57 -22-
important factor affecting the course of over-all activity.
Auto sales, after rough allowance for seasonal influences,
have been rising somewhat since the introduction of 1957
models.
What this seems to add up to is that output and employ
ment are not changing much at the moment. The pressure of
prices is still upward, although more selectivity has been
shown lately. No one knows how long this period of relative
stability will last. When it ends, no one knows whether the
subsequent movement will be gradual or sharp, or which direction
it will take. But we do know that supply conditions generally
are tight enough that any considerable upsurge in spending
would result in aggravated inflationary pressures.
It should be remembered that although GNP has continued to
rise over the past year, half of this rise has not represented
an increase in real output but rather an increase of prices. It
should also be recalled that the upward pressure from wage in
creases stems in part from general price rises which have been
automatically entered into the wage scale for more and more
workers under cost of living contracts. Consumer and wholesale
prices now are at an all-time high.
Any easing of monetary policy now would be a mistake. The
present situation is different from that of the second half of
1956 in that expenditures are not rising rapidly, but what is
called for is to hold the line on policy until events make it
clear which way the wind is blowing. A brief period of relative
stability in total output under the present circumstances does
not call for adoption of an easier or expansionist policy.
Indeed, such a period is what we need to permit increases in the
supply of goods to take pressures off prices and to permit
tendencies toward excessive exuberance to be gradually replaced
with more realistic planning.
If output continues level over a considerable period, up
ward pressure is removed from prices, and an appreciable margin
of unused resources begins to develop, then an easing of policy
will be appropriate; but that situation has not yet arrived.
If the economy again breaks out on the upside from a period of
stability, further tightening will be called for.
The direction in which the economy is tending will become
clearer in the next few weeks as we move out of the confusing
early period of the year. Many of the bearish predictions now
voiced are reminiscent of those that were prevalent in early
1956. In early March we will have the results of another survey
of expected business spending for plant and equipment that will
include data on expenditures expected in the second quarter of
the year and for the year as a whole. This will give an

2/18/57
indication whether such spending is or is not leveling off.
Preliminary findings of the survey of consumer finances will
be available near the middle of March. Borrowing from banks
around the March tax date is an important piece of information.
Whether the economic situation calls for a change in monetary
policy should be considerably clarified by the developments of
the next feweeks.
Our experience last year, it seems to me, illustrates the
dangers involved in assuming that we ought to hasten to ease
policy when there is a temporary letup in expansion or a bearish
period in market psychology. With the advantage of hindsight,
it is clear that we should not have eased in January or May.
Rather, if we had maintained a steady and tight policy through
those short periods of uncertainty, we would have made a more
adequate contribution to limiting inflation last year. I
think that the same considerations apply now. We cannot
effectively curb inflationary developments if we adopt a
policy of easing every time there is a temporary lull in an
expansion or every time expectations of expansion in future
months become something less than unanimous. Furthermore,
in view of the degree of inflation already accomplished,
every effort should be made to hold the line now against
further inroads.
Therefore, it seems to me that we ought to aim at holding
to about the degree of restraint that we had last fall, and
that we have been aiming for recently but not achieving. Net
borrowed reserves should be held to between $200 and $400 mil
lion, in the absence of market developments which definitely
indicate the need for a departure from this target.
In the same breath I should add that errors should be made
on the restrictive side of the range for the next two weeks in
order to permit an easing of our policy somewhat in early and
mid-March if a potential credit squeeze develops. There are
varying opinions on the size of corporate demand for credit for
tax purposes on March 15, but it appears that such demand will
be substantial and exert pressure on money markets. Consider
able liquidation of Government securities by corporations can
also be expected then. On top of this demand for funds, the
Treasury may have to borrow more new money, or to borrow earlier
than had been expected. Even with the addition of $200 million
per week through increases in the bill offering, the Treasury
may still need additional funds to get through early March, and,
in any case, will probably have to borrow in early April.
System action cannot completely offset or guard against the
development of such a squeeze but the effects can be spread out
somewhat by maintaining a tighter policy now; we would be better

2/18/57 -24
able to ease up in March, if necessary to alleviate any
credit squeeze that might develop and provide any needed
aid to the Treasury, without creating conditions that
might contribute to renewed inflation.
Mr. Mills said that the evidence before the Committee had not
revealed any clearly defined trend in the economy that would warrant a
change from a policy of credit restraint. As usual, there was the ques
tion as to what degree of restraint should be applied through the System
account. Even more than usual, it was his opinion that the members of
the Committee should confine their thinking and their recommendations to
the short interval between today and the next meeting of the Committee
and not attempt to project their thinking on policy beyond that period.
There was with the Committee again the question what bench mark
should be chosen on which to tie policy action, Mr. Mills noted, adding
that the general trend of thought expressed seemed to lodge on a level
of negative free reserves of $250 million more or less. He had been
impressed with Mr. Hayes' statement regarding the desirability of
following closely the trend in commercial and industrial loans of banks,
and he suggested that the trend of these loans might be a prime bench
mark around which to develop the Committee's thinking during this next
period. Mr. Mills' thought was that if there was a definite further
contraction in the volume of commercial and industrial bank loans, that
contraction might be fixed upon as the clearest straw in the wind for
indicating policy actions. If commercial and industrial loans tended
to contract further, doubt would be raised whether in the face of such

2/18/57 -25
contraction it would be advisable to offset the easing effects of the
contraction which could happen if the objective of policy was to main
tain some fixed level of negative free reserves. Continued contraction
in these loans would suggest a change in the economy against which it
would be illogical to assert an aggressive policy of credit restraint.
On the contrary, such a trend might suggest as Mr. Hayes had indicated
that the Committee should allow natural easing forces deriving from
the changes in loans to assert their influence on reserves.
Mr. Mills said he did not believe a change in the discount rate
should be considered at this time, and he doubted that the situation
called for any change in the Committee's directive. The Committee should
not be overly influenced by market conditions that might bring the yield
on Treasury bills continuously below the discount rate where that fall
ing off in yields might be a market phenomenon and not a phenomenon
associated with the availability of bank reserves. In fact, a good
case might be made that the softening in bill yields was a reflection
of the absorption of bills into hands that would not be of a permanent
character and, in consequence, a supply of bills might come back into
the market at a later date. However, that might not transpire if new
securities issues continued to receive a good market reception and their
proceeds were then invested in Treasury bills that came out of the hold
ings of previous borrowers on the capital market who were then finding
a need for cash expenditures on their projects. In that event, no great
change in the demand for Treasury bills might occur.

2/18/57 -26
Mr. Vardaman made a statement in which he said that he was
largely in agreement with the general views that had been expressed
this morning. He felt that it might be necessary to observe the
situation for a period of several weeks, perhaps for two or three
months, before the Committee could be sure which way activity would
move from its present level. Under the circumstances he suggested
that the Committee make no change in policy at this time.
Mr. Leach reported that a meeting of the branch and head office
directors of the Richmond Bank had been held last week at Charlotte and
while he had been unable to attend because of illness he had received a
report of the views expressed at that meeting. These views revealed no
new elements of strength in the Fifth District economy and pointed to a
possible slackening in the rate of advance in aggregate activity with
some narrowing of profit margins. The textile industry now seemed un
able to escape far-reaching adjustments which appeared to be due in
1950 but which were postponed by Korea. Specifically, capacity in
that industry must be reduced by the elimination of marginal producers.
The furniture industry was reported to be running below a year ago and
cutting into order backlogs. On the other hand, shipbuilding and bi
tuminous coal continued to enjoy a favorable outlook.
Such limited information as had come to his attention regard
ing sales of new model automobiles indicated to Mr. Leach that dealers
were willing to give substantial price discounts as a means of main
taining sales at the current rate. He reported specific instances,

2/18/57 -27
stating that while the discounts were not uniform they ranged as high
as $600 to $700 on medium priced automobiles, at least as high as the
discounts being given a year ago when sales competition was very sharp.
As to credit policy, Mr. Leach felt that economic developments
clearly did not call for any increase in restraint at this time. The
only question seemed to be whether the System might appropriately de
crease the degree of restraint. Despite the growing weakness in certain
sectors, Mr. Leach did not believe the System should relax its restraint.
This would mean, of course, no change in the discount rate. He went on
to say that he believed now, as he had indicated at the preceding meet
ing, that the latter part of clause (b) of the first paragraph of the
Committee's directive calling for recognition of unsettled conditions
in the money, credit, and capital markets and in the international situa
tion might well be deleted. It had been inserted in the directive for a
special purpose and that situation seemed to have passed.
Mr. Leedy said that his conclusions were much-the same as those
expressed by others. He felt that we were still in a period when it was
particularly difficult to appraise the current situation and prospects.
Since the next meeting would take place only two weeks hence, he would
continue during that period the policy that had been followed during the
past three weeks. Mr. Leedy said that he would be apprehensive regard
ing Mr. Hayes' suggestion that it might be wise not to take action to
counteract a moderate easing of the banks' reserve position should that
be caused by further declines in total loans and investments. A

2/18/57 -28
sufficient level of net borrowed reserves should be maintained to make
clear that present policy was being continued. After commenting on
projected reserve figures, Mr. Leedy said that he would not wish to
have too much tightness develop in the next two weeks. He would suggest
no change in discount rate. At the preceding meeting he had noted a
change in atmosphere in the capital markets, and he had then suggested
a change in the wording of clause (b) of the directive that called for
recognition of unsettled conditions. He still felt some change might
be desirable to recognize that conditions had changed since the words
were placed in the directive.
Mr. Allen said that Seventh District capital goods lines such
as industrial and construction machinery and railroad equipment con
tinued to operate at peak levels. Automobiles and trucks, farm machinery,
and consumer durables such as televeision and certain appliances, were
well below previous highs. Material "shortages" appeared to be confined
to the heavy steel products used in capital goods, that is, structurals,
pipe, and plate.
Mr. Allen reported in some detail on current views of leaders in
the automobile industry, stating that sales of the 1957 models were now
estimated at 6.2 million by the optimists, at 6 million by the realists,
and 5.8 million by the pessimists. One leader in the industry had
expressed the belief that the used car situation was deteriorating and
currently was in worse condition than in many years. He had described

2/18/57 -29
his feeling as representing "an informed sense." This leader's standing
was such that Mr. Allen felt his sense of things automotive was worth
noting.
In view of the importance in the Seventh District of the auto
mobile, farm machinery, and consumer durable goods industries, Mr. Allen
said it was understandable why non-farm employment in that area had not
shown the rise recorded nationally: 14 of the 24 major labor markets in
the area had moderate or substantial labor surpluses with unemployment of
3 per cent or more in January, compared with 7 areas in January a year
ago. Consumer demand remained strong and January sales of department
stores, retail chains, and mail order firms topped year ago figures com
mensurate with the increase shown nationally. Their inventory situations
were reported as good to excellent. Business loans at leading banks in
the district increased slightly in the week ending February 6 after five
weeks of decline, but were 4 per cent below January 1. A year ago the
decline in the corresponding period was 2 per cent.
In Mr. Allen's opinion, the continued strong consumer demand
provided a bulwark against contractive forces and it could provide a
basis for expansive forces as the year developed. Although an increas
ing segment of business sentiment was mildly pessimistic, he did not
feel that recession was yet evident or on the way. It was in order to
mark time from the standpoint of monetary policy and to remain alert
to developments. This would apply to the discount rate, to the degree
of restraint at which the Committee had aimed, and to the wording of
the directive.

2/18/57 -30
After noting that outdoor activity was at a seasonal low in
the Ninth District, Mr. Powell reported on the agricultural situation,
which he described as quite satisfactory. Farm land prices had con
tinued to rise during the second half of 1956. Moisture conditions had
been improved recently by heavy snows in the western part of the district,
and the outlook for spring crops from that standpoint was fairly satis
factory. Prices of farm products in the Ninth District averaged about
6 per cent above a year ago, he said, reflecting particularly a 40
per cent rise in prices of hogs, with prices for none of the major
Ninth District products showing a reduction over the past year. In
urban areas the economy was in a healthy condition generally with bank
deposits in January about 7 per cent higher than a year ago. Depart
ment store sales were continuing to increase although at a slower rate
than somewhat earlier. Employment in manufacturing industries was
running 6 to 7 per cent ahead of a year ago and average earnings of
factory workers were higher than in January of last year. Mr. Powell
noted a less favorable factor in the recent increase in borrowings of
city banks from the Reserve Bank during the past few weeks. This was
not a result of increased loans but rather a sharp loss of deposits
by those particular banks. The banks were making adjustments to this
situation but would continue to borrow from the Reserve Bank for
several weeks. Nationally, Mr. Powell agreed with the apparent con
sensus as to the economic situation and credit policy called for, stating

2/18/57 -31
that he could see no reason for reducing the degree of restraint at
the present time although he felt the System must watch economic
trends closely and be prepared to move whichever way seemed to be
called for. At the moment he would make no change in either the
directive of the Committee or in the general objectives for net borrowed
reserves.
Mr. Mangels stated that reports covering January indicated that
Twelfth District economic activity was continuing about as he had re
ported at recent meetings. Employment in the apparel industry had de
clined rather sharply, with a larger decline reported in the number of
hours worked. A further decline had also occurred in employment in the
lumber industry. Aluminum plants were receiving less electric power
because of reduced supplies of water for generating electricity in the
Pacific Northwest, and output of aluminum was being reduced somewhat,
tending to bring a better balance between demand and supply. Automobile
sales in California during January were about 10 per cent below a year
ago. Over-all construction continued at fairly high levels with no
recent changes in either residential or non-residential activity. Bank
loans had declined during the past three weeks and borrowings at the
Reserve Bank were very nominal. Twelfth District banks continue to be
net lenders in the Federal funds market.
Mr. Mangels reported on further checks that had been made on
the expected demand for tax borrowings in the Twelfth District, stating

2/18/57 -32
that most of the banks do not anticipate any large increase in corporate
demand for credit for that purpose this year.
As to credit policy, Mr. Mangels said that even though available
data did not indicate significant changes in activity during the past
few weeks, there was some indication that the economy might currently be
moving toward better equilibrium. He would not suggest a change in
policy at this time but would aim for negative free reserves somewhere
around $200 million, and would not go much over that figure; he would
not change the discount rate; and he would be inclined to leave the
directive unchanged at this time.
Mr. Erickson said that economic conditions in the First District
did not differ from the excellent presentation that had been given by Mr.
Young. Nonmanufacturing nonfarm employment was up in December over Novem
ber. Most manufacturing industries were up except for textiles, where
the situation was not good. Production of shoes in 1956 had been of
record proportions but was now "in between" seasons, and this period of
reduced output was running a little longer than usual because of the
late date of Easter this year. Department store trade was good.
Mr. Erickson said that he would make no change in the discount
rate at this time and he would not change the directive of the Committee
even though the unsettled conditions in the money, credit, and capital
markets that had been discussed in December might not be quite as un
settled as at the time the directive was last modified. He would con
tinue the policy of restraint through open market operations.

2/18/57 -33
Mr. Szymczak said that the next two weeks might offer a good
period in which to spot check the situation in various districts to
the extent possible. He did not think it a time for any change in
policy: any change at this time might hurt rather than help the
economy, and any easing might indicate that the System felt activity
was about to turn down. The System should be mindful of Treasury
needs and should go along with those needs. Mr. Szymczak suggested
that a negative free reserves position in the $200-00 million range
would seem appropriate between now and the next meeting of the Com
mittee.
Mr. Balderston said that the rolling adjustments that had
characterized the economy in recent years seemed to be. continuing at
this time. On the one hand, he sensed less ebullience, some consumer
price resistance, and the probability of a leveling off in factory
construction and in manufacturing inventories. He noted that some
insurance companies had experienced a drop since November in applica
tions for conventional mortgages. On the other hand, Government
spending at both national and local levels was certainly on the in
crease, and fiscal policy would probably not lend as much support to
monetary policy in the future as it had in the recent past. Mr.
Balderston said that he would like to see the Committee regain the
restraint it had attained last fall until the situation became more
clear. As to the Committee's directive, he felt there had been a
reason at the time for inserting the instruction in clause (b) to

2/18/57 -34
recognize unsettled conditions, and he raised the question when the
clause would be removed if it were not taken out at this time.
Chairman Martin stated that he had just completed ten days of
travel during which he had talked before groups in Florida, Texas, and
Iowa and while he recognized that impressions gained on these "travelogues"
were not in any sense conclusive he felt it might be worth while to com
ment on those he had gotten during this period. There was no question,
he said, but that business sentiment had changed and that there was not
the optimism that existed six weeks or two months ago. This was fairly
general. In Florida, he had noted less optimism even in areas where
new hotels were going up, despite the fact that the tourist season had
only begun. Persons in that business in whom he had some confidence had
commented, nevertheless, that they expected a "whale of a season" later
on. The Chairman said that his over-all feeling as a result of observa
tions in the areas he had visited was one of more confidence of the
vitality of the economy than he had had before he started the trip. He
felt the Committee should be very wary about permitting monetary policy
to get into the position of helping to promote a new bulge. There have
been sharp increases in prices in some areas which may well have created
a situation that had to be corrected. This condition and some practices
that were recognized as unsound by many of those who were engaging in
them would not be corrected by an easing of monetary restraints.
Chairman Martin went on to say that the consensus at this meet
ing seemed clear in calling for continuation of the status quo. On the

2/18/57 -35
directive, while he had no strong feeling about it one way or the
other, he felt that the international situation to which reference
was now made in clause (b) was no better than at the time the refer
ence was inserted in the directive, and it might be worse. There had
also been generated some talk of depression by remarks of the Secretary
of the Treasury and former President Hoover as well as by others. Cur
rently the Treasury's balance was low and the outlook for receipts was
very uncertain at this time. It might well become necessary for the
Treasury to borrow directly from the System, although he hoped this
would not develop. In view of these developments and of the many cross
currents in the situation, it did not seem to him necessary to eliminate
the reference to unsettled conditions in the directive at this time.
On the whole, his feeling was that it might be continued in its present
form since the next meeting would be held only two weeks away. Specifi
cally, he suggested that the Committee maintain the status quo with the
understanding that the minutes would reflect the different degrees of
emphasis that different individuals had suggested this morning, and
that these be used by Mr. Rouse as a guide in carrying on operations
during the next two weeks. He then called upon Mr. Rouse for comments.
Mr. Rouse said that he felt he understood the various views
expressed this morning. He commented on the projections of reserve
funds during the next few days and stated that the System account might
be in a position of buying securities shortly.
Mr. Hayes noted that if the System's maturing bills were
permitted to run off, its bill portfolio would decline to approximately

2/18/57 -36
$100 million. Mr. Robertson inquired whether Mr. Hayes felt this would
be undesirable, and Mr. Hayes responded that it would be undesirable
only in the sense that if the System had only $100 million of bills, and
if it wished to make sizable sales of securities for the purpose of ab
sorbing reserves quickly, such a move would be more difficult to accomplish
than if the System had larger bill holdings.
Mr. Rouse agreed with this comment. He then raised the question
whether the Committee felt that transactions in short-term securities
other than bills should be made only on the sell side, or whether in the
event the System wished to put funds into the market it might purchase
short-term securities other than bills. He added that System account
operations might help to broaden the market for these short-term securi
ties if transactions were entered into on both sides of the market.
Mr. Mills stated that he felt purchases of securities other than
bills would raise a very fundamental question. Such action would cause
very serious misgivings on his part, and it might lead to confusion in
the market. Mr. Mills hoped there was a clear understanding that the
selling of certificates and notes was for the purpose of absorbing re
serves and that when it became necessary to supply additional reserves
and Treasury bills were available, there would be no move to buy back
certificates or notes that had been disposed of.
Mr. Robertson said that he had the same views as those expressed
by Mr. Mills.
Mr. Hayes commented that his off-hand thought was that the System
might wish to rebuild its bill holdings.

2/18/57 -37
Chairman Martin said that he did not think the Committee at
any time had intended to put reserves into the market by purchasing
Treasury notes or securities other than bills.
Mr. Hayes then stated that he would also like to make an
observation for the purpose of keeping the record straight as to the
references made earlier in this meeting to lack of tightness in the
market in recent weeks. The fact is, he said, that in the three weeks
ending February 13 there was an average net borrowed reserve figure of
$236 million, which was in the $200-300 million average that had been
suggested at the preceding meeting. It was true that in the first
three weeks of January positive free reserves existed. The tone of
the market recently may not have confirmed the figure of negative free
reserves, but Mr. Hayes said that he wished to call attention to the
fact that operations had attained the figures that the Committee seemed
to have in mind.
Chairman Martin stated that he was glad Mr. Hayes had brought
out this point, adding that this was the thought back of his comment
when he asked Mr. Bryan earlier in the meeting whether the ease he
(Mr. Bryan) had referred to recently was in his judgment "inadvertent"
or "overt." Chairman Martin said that it seemed clear that the ease
that had been referred to was not overt.
Mr. Vardaman said that he had understood the selling of
certificates and notes recently was brought about because bills were
in short supply, and he inquired whether it was clearly understood

2/18/57 -38
that the System was not going to buy back any certificates or notes
if any bills were available for purchase when funds were to be put
into the market.
Chairman Martin stated that he assumed this was clearly under
stood, and none of the Committee indicated a different view.
Mr. Rouse stated that he had raised the question because he
wished to clarify the matter, and the Chairman said he thought it im
portant to have that point clarified.
Mr. Shepardson returned to the Chairman's comments on the con
sensus, stating that he hoped that errors in carrying on operations
during the next two weeks would be on the side of tightness rather than
of ease.
Chairman Martin replied that he did not think any purpose would
be served in taking a vote on this question and that this was why he
felt the record of the discussion should be used by the Management of
the Account as a guide to carrying out its operations during the next
period.
Mr. Thomas noted that during January credit was being liquidated
very rapidly during the period when "ease" was indicated in the market,
in terms of some positive free reserves. He pointed out that it was
not necessary to add to tightness in order to carry out the Committee's
objectives when the liquidation of bank loans was accomplishing what the
Committee desired. The ease referred to in January, he said, was not

2/18/57 -39-
because the System was not carrying out a restrictive policy but re
sulted entirely because credit was being liquidated very rapidly.
Chairman Martin stated that this was correct and that he was
glad this point had been brought out. There was no point in trying
to pursue a more restrictive policy if the objectives were being carried
out.
Chairman Martin then turned to the directive to be issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, stating that if there was no objection
the directive would be renewed without change in the wording. In re
sponse to the Chairman's question, Mr. Rouse stated that he would suggest
no change in the limitations contained in the directive and that if
anything developed to make it necessary he would come to the Committee
for additional authority.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York until otherwise
directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (in
cluding replacement of maturing securities, and allowing
maturities to run off without replacement) for the System
open market account in the open market or, in the case of
maturing securities, by direct exchange with the Treasury,
as may be necessary in the light of current and prospective
economic conditions and the general credit situation of the
country, with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in
the market to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to
restraining inflationary developments in the interest of
sustainable economic growth, while recognizing unsettled
conditions in the money, credit, and capital markets and
in the international situation, and (c) to the practical
administration of the account; provided that the aggregate
amount of securities held in the System account (including
commitments for the purchase or sale of securities for the

Secretary
2/18/57 -40-
account) at the close of this date, other than special short
term certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time
for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be
increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one
or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time
to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; pro
vided that the total amount of such certificates held at any
one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the
aggregate $500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System account
for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury securities maturing
within one year as may be necessary from time to time for the
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total amount of
such securities so sold shall not exceed in the aggregate $500
million face amount, and such sales shall be made as nearly as
may be practicable at the prices currently quoted in the open
market.
Chairman Martin stated that the next meeting of the Committee would
be held at the time tentatively agreed upon, that is, at 10:00 a.m. on
Tuesday, March 5, 1957, noting that this would be the annual organization
meeting of the Committee.
The Chairman also stated that he had received word from Mr. Sproul
that he would be in Washington on March 4, 5, and 6, and that he hoped all
of the Presidents and others who knew Mr. Sproul would plan to attend a
luncheon to be given for him in the Board's dining rooms on March 5.
Chairman Martin also noted that the Special Committee that had been
appointed for the purpose of studying the questions raised by the suggestion
made by Mr. Mills at the meeting on January 8 would hold a meeting today.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.