A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, October 22, 1957, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman (Presiding)
Mr. Allen
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Williams
Messrs. Fulton, Irons, Leach, and Mangels, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Erickson and Deming, Presidents of the Fed
eral Reserve Banks of Boston and Minneapolis,
respectively
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Atkinson, Bopp, Mitchell, Tow, and
Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Koch, Assistant Director, Division of Re
search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Daane, Hostetler, Rice, and Roosa, Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Richmond, Cleveland, Dallas, and New York,
respectively; Mr. Einzig, Assistant Vice
President, Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco; and Mr. Litterer, Business Econo
mist, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

10/22/57 -2
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on October 1, 1957, were
approved.
Under date of October 1, 1957, there had been sent to each
member and alternate member of the Federal Open Market Committee,
and to each President not currently a member of the Committee, a
report of an audit of the System Open Market Account made by the
Division of Examinations of the Board of Governors as at the close
of business August 16, 1957, which report had been submitted to the
Secretary of the Committee under date of September 18, 1957 in accord
ance with the action of the Federal Open Market Committee at its meet
ing on June 21, 1939. Vice Chairman Hayes inquired whether any of the
members of the Committee wished to comment on the report.
Without objection, the audit report
was noted and accepted.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York covering open market operations during the period October 1
through October 16, 1957, and a supplementary report covering commit
ments executed October 17 through October 21, 1957. Copies of both
reports have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
Mr. Rouse noted that he had been away during the past two weeks.
During that period, the market had had a case of jitters related to the

10/22/57 -3
Russian earth satellite and what it might mean for defense spending
in this country, to the Middle East disturbance, to the rapid run-down
of prices in the stock market, and to the unexpectedly large offering
of FNMA securities. The uncertainty had become rather disturbing on
the previous Thursday, and it became necessary to supply some money
to the market through open market operations. Government securities
had shaken off their jitters in the last few days and prices had been
moving higher, but the market was still under pressure. Market
sentiment on the business outlook was still generally bearish, Mr.
Rouse observed, although many recent earnings reports had been good.
Looking ahead to the problems that might arise in the next
few weeks, Mr. Rouse pointed out that both the New York projections
and the Board staff's projections expect net borrowed reserves to
rise substantially during the next three weeks unless open market
operations offset the loss of reserves. Also during this period
there would continue to be a strong corporate demand for capital funds,
on both debt and equity securities. Good performance of the municipal
market in recent weeks had acted to bring out an increased supply of
new issues.
Turning to current matters, Mr. Rouse reported that Treasury
bills had been auctioned the previous day at an average rate of 3.62
per cent, somewhat below the previous week. FNMA apparently just got
by in its offering of $750 million Management and Liquidation notes,
with current guessing that allotments might be 45 per cent of sub
scriptions.

10/22/57
Mr. Rouse then referred to the request received by Chairman
Martin from Congressman Patman dated October 7, 1957, that arrange
ments be made for certain individuals working for Mr. Patman to visit
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in order to study open market
operations. Mr. Patman vouched for the integrity and discretion of
these individuals and gave assurances that they would make no public
statements concerning their visit or otherwise reveal confidences to
any unauthorized source. Chairman Martin in turn had assured Mr.
Patman in his letter of October 8, 1957 that the New York Bank would
be glad to receive these people under the conditions stated.
Mr. Rouse went on to say that after arrangements were agreed
upon, two men came to New York and spent three days there, mostly at
the Trading Desk. They did not sit in on dealer meetings or listen
in on conversations with dealers. However, Mr. Rouse understood that
many questions were asked and were answered fully and frankly. He had
not had an opportunity for a full report but the principal, a Mr.
William Johnson, wrote President Hayes a thank you note which he
closed as follows: "Not only were the operations of the Open Market
Account explained to us in understandable terms, but all of the
questions we raised were, I believe, fully answered excepting a few
of a statistical nature which Mr. Roosa kindly consented to answer
by mail." Although he had not yet seen these questions, Mr. Rouse
said that he understood they were handed to Mr. Roosa as Mr. Johnson
was leaving the Bank and that they involved data received from dealers

10/22/57 -5
on a confidential basis. If that proved to be the case the Bank
would have difficulty in giving Mr. Johnson the answers in a form
which would fully meet his request.
Mr. Rouse then stated that early in 1958 the Account Manage
ment planned to begin the next lap of the program of training for
emergency purposes that was in effect during 1957 and in which repre
sentatives from all Reserve Banks both at the policy level and at the
operating level visited the New York Bank for the purpose of studying
open market operations. He suggested that each Reserve Bank President
and the Board furnish the Secretary of the Committee with a list of
persons whom they wished to propose for participation in the training
program during 1958 in order that a satisfactory schedule could be
worked out.
Responding to a request from Mr. Balderston for a review of
the day-to-day problems with float that the Desk had encountered
during the previous week, Mr. Rouse said that the period around
Columbus Day was always a difficult one for forecasting float. This
year, open market operations were conducted on the expectation that
float would rise immediately after the holiday. When it did not,
the money market turned tighter for a few days in the first half of
last week than the Committee had intended. Finally, it became
necessary for the System account to buy Treasury bills on Thursday.
Mr. Balderston said that his question was not intended to
voice criticism as to operations of the Desk last week. He fully

10/22/57 -6
understood the difficult situation. He raised the question because
he thought the Committee as a whole had never faced up to the problem
of whether it wished the Desk to proceed on the basis of actual figures
that applied to changes already effected or whether it should base
operations on the projections, especially when the projections of
necessity were uncertain and unreliable.
Mr. Rouse said that he thought further discussion of this
question might be helpful. His understanding of the Desk's respon.
bilities was that operations should depend upon the judgment of the
Manager of the Account based not only on the figures but also on the
feel of the market. He pointed out that the latest data available
to the Desk are two days late. In managing the Account, the actual
figures for two days earlier and the projections are used in evaluating
the influences that are at work in the market. Sometimes he felt the
Desk relied too much on the projections and reserve statistics. He
suggested that the most important factor in regulating credit condi
tions in accordance with Committee policy was the Desk's judgment of
the market on a particular day, that is, its judgment as to the nature
of the demand and supply influences shaping the market at any particular
time.
Mr. Hayes said that he thought this was an interesting point.
Mr. Rouse had correctly indicated that many factors should be con
sidered, but there was the question how much weight to give to pro
jections, to past performance, and to other factors. He suggested

10/22/57 -7
that there was a need for each member of the Committee to direct his
thoughts to this question.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the open market transactions during
the period October 1 through October 21,
1957, were approved, ratified, and con
firmed.
Mr. Hayes said that in addition to the visits to the New York
Bank of persons working for Mr. Patman, to which Mr. Rouse had referred,
arrangements had been made by Chairman Martin for Senator Wallace
Bennett, a member of the Banking and Currency Committee, to come to the
Desk tomorrow, October 23, for the purpose of observing operations and
asking questions concerning the transactions for the System open market
account.
Members of the Board's staff entered the room at this point to
assist Messrs. Young and Thomas in the presentation of an economic and
credit review, illustrated by chart slides. A copy of the script of the
review was sent to each member of the Committee following the meeting.
The review stated that recent developments at home and abroad
called for searching re-examination of the economic situation. In this
country the latest declines in market values of common stocks and sensi
tive industrial commodities had been of sufficient magnitude to bring
into question continued dominance of inflationary forces On the other
hand, demonstrations of Russian scientific prowess necessitated an
intensive review of projected reduction in national security outlays

10/22/57 -8
and of possible new outlays. Abroad, sharp speculative attacks on
sterling and some other currencies apparently had been met success
fully by strong policies, including an increase in the Bank of
England rate to 7 per cent. Foreign influences on the United States
economy, to the extent that they are felt through our export trade,
had not been expansionary in recent months as they were at the
beginning of the year. Monetary policies in most European countries
were still determined by the need to maintain external stability as
well as internal balance, and the general situation in Europe was
still one of strong, though not necessarily rising, demand.
Within the United States, the latest quarterly and monthly
figures showed continuation through the third quarter of 1957 of
many features prevailing earlier in the year, with production steady
at a high level, price movements in wholesale markets mixed but the
average up, and consumer prices generally continuing upward. September
industrial production was at 144, down a point from August but within
the narrow 143 to 146 range prevailing so far this year.
In analyzing the implications of recent business and credit
developments for monetary and fiscal policy, it was pointed out that
the review showed short-run abatement in inflationary pressures and
raised questions about potential declines in important sectors of
activity. The economy as a whole showed basic strength but there
was uncertainty as to what combination of demands would prevent

10/22/57 -9
recession in activity or, better, make for advance in total output
and employment at present price levels. Business sentiment had
turned more pessimistic than the current indicator figures, and
attitudes of common stock investors appeared to reflect a growing
disbelief in the extension of inflationary trends.
While bank credit and the money supply had leveled off in
recent months and demand for Federal Reserve credit had shown less
than the seasonally projected increase during the past few weeks,
developments did not signify that credit policy had been unduly
restrictive. Time deposits at commercial banks had increased sharply,
and turnover of existing demand deposits had continued to increase.
New securities flotations by business corporations and State and
local governments had been in record volume and the Treasury deficit
had also created a demand for credit. Projections of reserve needs
during the remainder of 1957, which indicated a substantial rise in
net borrowed reserves in the absence of action by the System, were
based on the assumption of a more than seasonal increase in deposits
for the rest of the year in order to show no decline in deposits for
the year as a whole. These projections indicated an increase in re
serve needs of close to a billion dollars between the date of this
meeting and the last week of December, most of which would come
during December.
It would seem appropriate for the System to meet seasonal
reserve requirements freely, the review suggested, and if such

10/22/57 -10
requirements did not develop as much as would normally be expected
their absence should be allowed to be reflected in some easing of
the reserve positions of member banks. Thus, an immediate target
of net borrowed reserves moderately below the average recently
maintained would seem appropriate. Should demands exceed usual
seasonal requirements, a volume of borrowing by member banks similar
to that prevailing recently would be in order.
The review concluded with the statement that developments
in business and economic conditions would have to be watched par
ticularly closely in coming weeks in order to make policy adjust
ments that might be suitable. If current readjustments gather
momentum, some further easing in member bank reserve positions and
possibly even a decrease in rediscount rates might be appropriate.
On the other hand, a recapture of any restraint that might be lost
in the immediate future might be required if unexpected economic
strength developed--something that had happened a number of times
in our dynamic postwar economy.
Mr. Hayes said that, while he was serving as Chairman of
this meeting, he would proceed in the customary manner to express
at the outset his views on the general situation and on the credit
policies that seemed appropriate for the Committee to follow, after
which he would revert to the neutral role of a chairman awaiting
the emergence of a consensus. Following his initial statement he
would call upon all others for their views, beginning with Mr. Bryan.

10/22/57 -11-
He then made a statement as follows:
Doubts as to the business outlook have been very con
siderably strengthened by developments since we met three
weeks ago. To some extent these doubts reflect additional
evidence of "soft spots" in the economy. But they also have
been fed by the persistent weakness of the stock market, the
slowdown in defense contract payments, the worsening of the
political situation in the Middle East, and above all by
concern over our whole national future in the light of the
Soviet's successful satellite launching. So far as stock
prices are concerned, they are providing the first evidence
of the kind of deterioration that feeds on itself. It is
possible that the current wave of pessimism is being over
done like the excessive optimism of a few months ago, and
may soon give way to a new wave of optimism--but we would
be foolish to ignore it as it could become a factor having
significant influence on business decisions.
Statistical data for September and early October sug
gest that the business plateau which we have recognized for
many months is beginning to tilt downward. I have in mind
especially that personal income declined slightly in Septem
ber for the first time since the beginning of 1956 (except
for one month affected by the steel strike); that corporate
profits figures for the second quarter turned out less
favorably than expected and were below those of the first
quarter; that retail sales, which many economists have been
stressing as the strongest element in the economy, receded
last month to the June level and appear to be doing no
better in October; that nonagricultural employment declined
in September, erasing the entire gain since May (and while
the labor force also declined, there have been threats of
serious unemployment among large defense contractors); and
that industrial production dropped slightly last month and,
in the durable goods area, was below last year's level-
with freight carloadings and electric power output also
making a relatively weak showing.
Furthermore, the principal price indices suggest that
inflationary pressures are a good deal less strong than
they have been even in recent months--and of course much
less strong than early in the year. Not only wholesale
prices as a whole, but also industrial prices were lower
in September than in August. Price cuts occurred in areas
generally thought to be dominated by so-called "administered"
prices. Further weakness in the basic commodity price index
brought it to a seven-year low. Perhaps most significant of

10/22/57 -12
all is the likelihood that the consumer price index may
show a slight decline for October.
Many analysts look upon private plant and equipment
expenditures and Federal expenditures for defense as key
influences on the state of business during the coming year.
While most surveys confirm the likelihood of a drop in private
capital outlays in 1958, they suggest that the drop will
be moderate. Private discussions we have had with a number
of industrial leaders point to the same conclusion-
although there is some risk that the spirit of pessimism
already pronounced in the financial markets may spread to
business executives in general and cause some sharper
downward revision of spending plans. As for defense ex
penditures, it now seems less likely that the aim of
cutting the fiscal-year total to $38 billion will be
attained. For the longer term, some expansion seems
probable, but for the next few months any such prospect
would influence primarily business sentiment and busi
ness policies with respect to inventories and manpower,
with actual Federal expenditures largely unaffected.
In the credit and capital markets we have seen some
confusing and divergent tendencies in the last few weeks.
Business loans have continued to run behind last year,
but security loans have recently shown a greater increase.
The growth in total loans and investments has exceeded
that of a year ago, because of sizeable Treasury financing
around the end of September. Banks have felt apprehensive
about the burden of financing which may fall on them as a
result of the slowdown in government payments on defense
contracts. It is clear that the Treasury will have to
resort to other devices to cope with the debt limit, in
cluding agency financing such as the sale of F.N.M.A.
notes, and perhaps the sale of free gold. The bond market,
after getting some encouragement from signs of reduced
inflationary pressures and a leveling of business activity,
has received a setback from the Treasury's current and
prospective use of large agency issues to get around the
debt limit--and also from the continuing pressure of a
heavy calendar of prospective issues and from the general
loss of confidence caused by Sputnik and its implications
for heavier defense needs in the future. A new upward
rate adjustment may possibly be in process, which would
undermine the rate plateau established by the 4 per cent
coupon the Treasury placed on its recent security offer
ings.

10/22/57 -13-
The environment for monetary policy has begun to look
quite different from the boom conditions which initially
justified the current restrictive policy. During our last
two Directors' meeting, various members of our Board have
expressed concern that Federal Reserve policy may be perhaps
a little too tight to fit present circumstances and that we
might be too late in recognizing the need for a change in
policy. While they do not feel that it is time as yet to
think of a lower discount rate, they are wondering if a
somewhat less restrictive policy should be cautiously ex
plored. I am concerned by the tendency for various in
fluences, in combination with restrictive Federal Reserve
policy, to drive interest rates higher at a time when a
higher rate pattern seems inconsistent with broader and
longer-range objectives of credit policy. I think we
should not only be careful to avoid any unintended tight
ness such as we witnessed a week ago, but we might also
give serious consideration to a very modest relaxation of
our restrictive policy. I am not proposing, as yet, any
overt action to signal to the public a major change of
policy, but we could appropriately start moving gradually
and tentatively in that direction, while being prepared
to tighten up again if it develops that we have misread
the many signs of reduced inflationary pressures and
augmented danger of recession. We should certainly provide
reserves willingly through open market operations to meet
seasonal needs. We have generally considered reserve
requirements for bank underwriting of direct Treasury offer
ings and CCC financing as falling within this category of
seasonal needs, and we would now include also the reserve
needs for bank financing of defense contractors and the
underwriting of Government agency issues. Because of the
unusual uncertainties that have been injected into the
always uncertain fall season, principal reliance should
be placed upon the atmosphere in the market and public
reactions to the stream of events rather than upon net
borrowed reserve targets. If a figure for net borrowed
reserves is necessary, I would think that $300 million
might be used as a rough guide, subject to the major
qualification noted above as to the feel of the market.
Whether or not we agree today to a slight lessening
of this kind in the intensity of reserve pressure, there
is enough stirring to justify some consideration of the
steps the System might take, along with open market opera
tions, as part of an orderly relaxation of pressures--if
and when we do decide to make scohmaen ge. Muwchil l

10/22/57
depend, of course, upon whether current or future develop
ments seem to call for gradual, or for decisive, System
action. One first step in a gradual approach might well
be for the Board of Governors to lower margin requirements.
Another, somewhat greater step would be for the Board to
reduce reserve requirements in the central reserve cities.
Both of these have already been urged by a number of people
(not all of them self-serving) as specific remedies for strain
at particular pressure points--changes of a structural nature
that ought to be made as soon as the peak of general pressure
has passed, but which need not signal a turn toward decided
ease.
If more decisive action is called for, the Board might
lower reserve requirements on a wider front, and the Reserve
Banks might initiate reductions in discount rates. If the
former, it will be well for the System to reach some con
sensus as among the various reserve proposals, before we move
very far. If the latter, we might be reconsidering again the
old question as to whether, or when, a discount rate change
may usefully precede or lead changes in market rates.
Returning from this look ahead and concentrating again
on the present, in regard to the directive, my only suggestion
woula be that we might add the word "increased" in front of the
word "uncertainties" in the phrase "recognizing uncertainties
in the business outlook, the financial markets, and the inter
national situation.,
I should close with a word on the discount window. It
might be well on this occasion to seek a measure of uniformity
among the Reserve Banks in our approach with respect to the
requests for special discount privileges that have arisen or
may arise from banks extending credit to defense contractors
whose payments from the government have been reduced. The
policy we propose to adopt in the New York Bank would be to
assure borrowing banks that these defense loans would be viewed
in the same way as normal seasonal demands for credit, and that
reserves will be supplied in the same way and to the same ex
tent to support the deposits arising from them. That is,
individual banks might borrow temporarily from the Reserve Bank
to provide for the immediate drain on their resources when the
loans are made. However, it would be inappropriate for the
banks to believe that they will have access to the discount
window in a dollar-for-dollar offset to the loans that they
make. Their borrowing from the Reserve Bank should be repaid
promptly, as they are able to round up, through sale of other
assets if necessary, their share of the reserves which the
System is supplying to the banks to support the over-all
expansion of credit resulting from the stretchout in disbuse
ments by the Defense Department and from all other seasonal
needs.

10/22/57 -15
With respect to the last point, Mr. Hayes noted that the
Treasury had been talking with some of the members of the Committee
about the System's attitude toward the problem of financing defense
contracts in the light of recent changes in the practice of making
progress payments to defense contractors. He suggested that any
member of the Committee or any other Reserve Bank President feel free
to comment on this problem. He then called upon Mr. Bryan.
Mr. Bryan said that statistics for the Sixth District did not
show an alarming situation or a major change in activity recently. Non
farm employment had increased, offsetting a slight drop in manufacturing
employment. Lumber employment had declined somewhat but textile employ
ment had gone up. Construction contract awards were up and continued
stronger than in the nation as a whole. On the financial front, there
was apparently some weakness in the demand for loans, Mr. Bryan said.
The economy of the Sixth District was still on a very high plateau but,
if anything, the tilt was ever so slightly downward as against what
seemed a few weeks ago to be an upward tilt.
With respect to credit policy, Mr. Bryan said that he would
associate himself almost completely with what Mr. Hayes had said. He
doubted seriously if this was the time to take dramatic or overt action
with regard to discount rates or reserve requirements. At the same time,
in view of the uncertainties in the situation, he would avoid further
tightening in the rate structure and, if anything, would favor a
moderate easing in the rate structure. With regard to use of net

10/22/57 -16
borrowed reserves as a criterion for operations, Mr. Bryan commented
on why, at least at present, such figures might not only not offer a
very good criterion for operations but why they might actually lead
to operations that would conflict with the Committee's policy. Per
sonally, Mr. Bryan said he would refer to arrive at an understanding
that the Desk pursue a policy of freely supplying reserves to meet
seasonal and such other requirements as would hold the bill rate at
or close to the discount rate. As for the Committee's directive, while
he was not entirely happy with it, he had no suggestion for change
although he thought the Committee should consider Mr. Hayes' suggestion.
Mr. Williams presented preliminary data of capital expenditures
planned for the Philadelphia metropolitan area which indicated an over
all decrease in 1958 of 4 per cent compared with 1957. He noted that
this 4 per cent decline compared with a 5 per cent decrease mentioned
in the staff economic review for the nation. Manufacturing activities
represented two-thirds of the total of $582 million of indicated 1958
expenditures, Mr. Williams said, and this segment was expected to
decline 17 per cent from the current year, while expenditures for rail
ways and public utilities representing a third of the total were ex
pected to increase 24 per cent. Within manufacturing, producers of
durables expected to decrease their capital expenditures in 1958 by
8 per cent, while producers of nondurables anticipated a 22 per cent
decline.
In commenting on current activities, Mr. Williams said that
the over-all picture was one of a high plateau despite the more cautions

10/22/57 -17
psychology. No significant areas shoved a resurgence of activity
and Mr. Williams did not expect this year's fall upswing to be at
all pronounced. As to banking trends, borrowings from district
member banks had dropped $51 million in the first three weeks of
October this year as compared with a decline of $33 million in the
corresponding period a year ago. Borrowings from the Federal Re
serve Bank had decreased each week since September 18, although the
borrowing level was slightly higher than last year. Within the last
week or ten days stretch-out payments on defense loans had begun to
bite. Mr. Williams said he would agree that the System should have
a policy with respect to defense contracts, and he felt this policy
might be related to the seasonal upswing. He felt this should be
fairly clear-cut so that the Reserve Banks would know what they were
getting into.
With respect to net borrowed reserves, Mr. Williams would lean
toward a somewhat higher figure than the $300 million mentioned by Mr.
Hayes but he felt that the discretion given to the Manager of the
System Account should permit him in any case of doubt to veer on the
side of ease. In view of the fact that the Committee was talking about
a three-week period, the Manager of the Account should be authorized
to play by ear. Mr. Williams would make no change in the discount rate
at this time.
Mr. Fulton said that he was substantially in agreement with Mr.
Hayes. The steel industry in the Fourth District was not happy, he said,

10/22/57 -18
although it was still operating at a very high level, up to 93 per cent
of capacity in some areas. Steel people reported that cancellations
were coming in and that consideration was being given to closing down
some auxiliary facilities. The decline in scrap prices had affected
the industry somewhat in that pig iron had been substituted when scrap
was higher, whereas now this was not being done. The uncertainty be
cause of delayed payments on national defense contracts was bringing
about liquidation of inventories. Also, some large oil companies were
selling pipe to other users rather than have those users go to the
mills, and a redistribution of inventories was going on. New orders
for steel had fallen off and the automobile industry had been slow to
increase its takings. November business did not look as good as
October.
With respect to industries other than steel, those dealing with
consumer goods reflected rather spotty conditions, Mr. Fulton said.
However, he felt there was nothing that a good sales effort would not
correct, provided the psychology of businessmen and individuals did not
deteriorate further. He reported comments that the present recession
was largely triggered by the Government itself, reflecting the tightening
of credit and the fighting of inflation. While the Federal Reserve was
the only voice to be heard a short time ago, now the cry was general and
it was generating a defeatist or cautious attitude on the part of every
one. Unemployment had increased in the Fourth District but all in all
activity continued at a high rate. Department store sales were slightly

10/22/57 -19
below last year for the year to date.
As to policy, Mr. Fulton said that it was time for caution on
the part of the System and for doing nothing dramatic to change policy.
We should show willingness to meet the seasonal requirements fully and
probably to inject a little more money into the banking system. Net
borrowed reserves between $300 and $4O0 million would be appropriate,
giving the Manager of the System Account considerable latitude to follow
the feel of the market. There should be no move in the discount rate at
this time and there should be no suggestion of a change in reserve re
quirements.
Mr. Shepardson said that it seemed to him that we faced at this
time a psychological situation as much as anything. Certainly there had
been indications of some lessening of pressures in all areas, more so than
we had seen in some little time. But the big pressure seemed to Mr.
Shepardson to be psychological reaction to such factors as the Russian
satellite and the recent movement in the stock market. He thought it
important that the System try to maintain as nearly as possible an atti
tude of calmness; that it not be in any position of indicating that it
was fearful that recent developments would go too far. He doubted
that anyone knew the defense situation, adding that there were may
elements in the situation that seemed to counteract each other. He
hoped that more information would become available shortly, but in view
of the over-all spirit of tension at this time and of almost unreasoned
fear in some places, he felt that the Committee should hold as steady

10/22/57 -20
as possible. He would differ from what he had said at the preceding
meeting to the extent that if errors were made in carrying on opera
tions they should now be on the side of ease in order to take care of
needs that might occur. This did not mean that the Committee should
make any move toward relaxation.
Mr. Robertson said that he agreed almost completely with Mr.
Shepardson's remarks. The econony was still at a very high level.
The signs varied one way and the other, but he was firmly convinced
that the pessimism which seemed to exist throughout the country to
some extent but particularly in New York was being overdone. We have
to expect a slowdown in the economy from time to time, he said, and
if the Federal Reserve was going to do what it had said it wished to
do, that is seek a goal of stability of prices, it would have to
expect that periods of advance would be followed by periods in which
prices would go down.
Mr. Robertson said he was also convinced that the stock market
was not an important guide to economic developments. It was a very
fickle sort of thing and that market should not be given too much
weight by the Committee. This is the very time when the Committee
should avoid any sign of a panicky belief or of a panicky feeling We
should not ease the situation in any way. He would agree with Mr.
Shepardson that errors, if made, should be on the side of ease rather
than tightness. He would not suggest that this was the time for any

10/22/57 -21
tightening, but the Committee should watch carefully and be certain
that it was not indicating any feeling that public psychology was
going to run away with pessimism.
Mr. Robertson said that he also believed that too much reliance
on "feel of the market" as seen in New York could be disastrous in the
conduct of operations to carry out Committee policy. He felt that the
pressures in New York were much greater and much more difficult to with
stand than they were outside New York. Feel of the market could not be
disregarded but it should not be given full sway, he said. Therefore,
his belief was that the Committee should set a target of net borrowed
reserves. He would not be reluctant to have such a target of $350
$400 million but would not wish to see the level drop below that range.
As to the Committee's directive, he would be interested in comments
about inserting the word "increased" as suggested by Mr. Hayes in
clause (b) of the first paragraph, but he felt that such an insertion
might be an indication that the Committee was being swayed by a letting
up in the pace of advance. If the Committee were the only one that
would see the directive that would not matter, but anything in the way
of a public disclosure that there was a feeling of uncertainty might
be exaggerated out of proportion.
With respect to discount policy, Mr. Robertson would be in
terested in hearing the views of the Reserve Bank Presidents but he
was convinced that the System should take no position to indicate
that the Reserve Banks were going to provide the financing for war

10/22/57 -22-
industries where there had been a cutback in advance payments by the
Government. If this change were taken in stride it could be handled
without too much difficulty, he felt, whereas any indications that
the System was going to assume a full scale responsibility for this
development would be most unfortunate. In sum, his belief was that
the System should provide adequate reserves to meet seasonal needs
but that it should play its hand "close to the chest" for the next
three weeks.
Mr. Mills commented that his middle of the road reasoning on
the economic and credit situation and System policy had been put in
memorandum form, and he then proceeded to read the following statements
Now that a marked upturn in fall business activity has
not materialized, the time has come for adapting Federal Re
serve System credit policy to an economic situation which
indicates that general activity may be falling from its long
heralded "high plateau." Although there is no occasion for
reversing the System's policy of restraint on the expansion
of bank credit, the degree of pressure exerted to limit
credit expansion might well be modified through the applica
tion of the natural factors working in the economy which
presently support the System's policy objectives. A
pessimistic tinge to psychological attitudes and the reduced
liquidity evident both in banking and business circles are
factors which continue to work on the side of automatically
enforcing System credit policy and thereby reducing the
necessity of applying as heavy mechanical pressures in
policy enforcement as would otherwise be the case.
Acceptance of this reasoning would contemplate that
the System should not attempt to absorb reserves that may
be freed through further reduction of loans at central
reserve city banks and reserve city banks, but should
allow such reserves to find whatever new employment they
may be put to by the banks into whose possession they come.
For example, it may be desirable for banks to extend credit
to finance involuntary inventory accumulations pending
their orderly distribution, which would be economically
preferable to a restriction of credit that would compel

10/22/57 -23
their forced liquidation. Seemingly, the present level of
interest rates as a cost factor should exert a sufficient
influence to prevent the use of credit for financing unwise
or speculative inventory accumulation.
Credit leeway in the hands of the commercial banks at
the present time may also be desirable to originate the
syndicate financing of prospective new issues of corporate
and public securities during the period that they are re
distributed into final investment hands. In this case, the
slowing-down in the tempo of thec apial investment boom
should automatically serve to eliminate the possibility of
a too free use of bank credit in this financing area.
A final instance of allowing credit leeway attaches to
supplying reserves against commercial bank acquisition on
October 29 of the new issue of Federal National Mortgage
Association securities. Business conditions being as they
are suggest that System policy pressure to enforce an im
mediate redistribution of the securities from the commercial
banks will not be essential in the light of all of the con
siderations which have been touched upon, and which suggest
that the economic factors working toward an expansion of
credit are now subsiding to the extent that a counter
offensive on the part of System credit policy to prevent
an undue increase in the money supply is no longer as
necessary as heretofore.
Continuing, Mr. Mills said that if a target of negative free
reserves were to be chosen he would think it should be a range from
$300 to S4OO million. However, he believed that feel of the market
as it reaches the Manager of the System Open Market Account should be
the criterion on which the Committee should operate.
Mr. Mills' reasoning was completely in line with that expressed
by Mr. Robertson with respect to discount policy regarding financing
needs that might originate out of the change in defense program
financing methods. Essentially, the Federal Reserve was dealing in
the total of reserves and that total of reserves as it makes itself

10/22/57 -24
felt or as the System makes the reserves available through credit
policy should flow to the point where the reserves were most needed.
This would include the defense program contracts requiring additional
bank financing. Mr. Mills said that it would be an error, in his
judgment, to attempt to recognize a credit need of this type for
special Federal Reserve Bank discount action apart from the general
credit needs that would occur and which it was the evident intention
of System policy to meet.
Mr. Leach reported additional evidence of weakness in some
sectors of the Fifth District economy. Prices of cotton woven goods
had recently declined, production was reported to have been curtailed
slightly, and future orders at prices satisfactory to the manufacturer
were still lacking. Recent industry estimates of bituminous coal con
sumption indicated some decline in production in the fourth quarter,
despite a stronger than expected foreign demand. Furniture manufacturers
report that they are gearing production closely to orders to avoid adding
further to aready heavy inventories. Current estimates of leading crops
in the Fifth District show considerable decline from last year, Mr.
Leach said, with tobacco down 31 per cent, cotton 31 per cent, peanuts
21 per cent, corn 30 per cent, and wheat 28 per cent.
In looking around for some elements of strength, Mr. Leach said
that he observed that Fifth District construction contract awards had
increased contraseasonally from July to August. Residential construc
tion contracts were particularly strong. There had been no significant

10/22/57 -25
change in unemployment in the Fifth District during the last two
years.
With respect to the national situation, Mr. Leach expressed
the view that we were now achieving the objective we have been seeking
for a considerable time. It seemed to him that the inflationary
pressures had lessened greatly and they might be disappearing. This
was evidenced by most indicators other than the consumer price index,
which was still going up in August.
Despite the slight declines apparently occurring in some sectors
of the economy, Mr. Leach believed that it would be premature to make
any appreciable change in the degree of restraint. However, he would
certainly resolve doubts on the side of ease. A somewhat lower bench
mark for net borrowed reserves should be sufficient to give the desired
restraint, he said, suggesting that such a benchmark--and he emphasized
the use of the word "benchmark"--might be around $350 million with
borrowings from the Federal Reserve Banks around $900 million
Mr. Leach concluded his remarks by stating that borrowing from
the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond was comparatively low at the
present time and he was not expecting any special problems at the
discount window. It had not occurred to him that the Bank should give
any special consideration to defense contract payments. He would let
any such demands come along with other seasonal and current factors
and take all such elements into consideration in carrying on open

10/22/57 -26
market operations. These should be conducted to the extent necessary
to keep borrowings from the Reserve Banks from going above $900 million.
Mr. Leedy said that signs were lacking in the Tenth District of
weakness in the economy comparable to those reported for the Fifth
District by Mr. Leach. Trends in several areas of activity were the
reverse of those in the nation generally. While construction volume
for the first eight months this year was 2 per cent ahead of last year,
residential contracts showed an 11 per cent gain over last year. Non
farm employment was at a slightly higher level than last year. In
manufacturing employment, there also had been gains, largely in con
nection with defense activity in areas such as Wichita, Albuquerque,
and Denver. In nonmanufacturing, all States of the district excepting
one showed improvement over a year ago. Department store sales for
the last four weeks had been higher than in the corresponding period a
year ago. Business loans, contrary to the trend nationally, had been
higher since the middle of this year than in 1956. There had been some
reduction in borrowings at the Reserve Bank since the preceding meeting.
Agricultural conditions in the Tenth District were exceptionally good.
Fall weather had been ideal for maturing of fall crops and for pastures,
and the outlook for production next year was excellent.
On policy, Mr. Leedy said he would not wish to be understood as
suggesting any change in direction but he would comment on the matter
of degree of restraint. With what has been occurring in the securities

10/22/57 -27
market he felt the Committee could not completely close its eyes to
business psychology reflected there, although he agreed that the
Committee should not be panicked into a course of action that
statistics would not justify. The economic presentation this morning
made it evident that there was a marked lessening of inflationary
pressures, however, and Mr. Leedy expressed the opinion that the Com
mittee should take account of that development in its operations for
the immediate period ahead. His feeling would be that the Committee
should apply a little less pressure than in the past three-week period.
As a matter of fact, there had been a higher level of net borrowed
reserves in this period than he had anticipated at the time of the
last meeting. Recognizing seasonal needs, Mr. Leedy felt that opera
tions should be quite sensitive and should respond readily to require
ments. He would not undertake to pinpoint a level of net borrowed re
serves, but on the basis of the projections it would seem evident that
unless pressures were to be increased before the next meeting of the
Committee it would be necessary to make substantial additions to bank
reserves. As far as the Treasury was concerned, Mr. Leedy said he
could not distinguish between the Committee's responsibility to the
Treasury for its direct financing and indirectly, and he would subscribe
to sympathetic treatment of the Treasury's financing needs. He had no
thought of any change in the discount rate. He would also oppose any
public indication that the System was doing anything radically dif
ferent than it had been doing recently. As to the directive, he was

10/22/57 -28
somewhat concerned about indefinitely continuing the present wording
of clause (b) of paragraph 1. He suggested that the description of
inflationary developments which the Committee envisioned at the time
the wording was adopted was not now accurately reflected in the existing
wording. He was not suggesting a change in wording at this meeting but
thought that the Committee might be giving consideration to rephrasing
the directive along the lines of making clause (b) read "to restraining
the growth of credit (or to maintaining restraint on growth of credit),
taking account of the existence of continuing inflationary pressures,
(or, taking account of the existence of continuing though lessening
inflationary pressures)."
Mr. Leedy also expressed the view that the addition of the word
"increased" as suggested by Vice Chairman Hayes might be appropriate.
In short, he felt that at this time the Committee could do a little
less than it had been doing recently in the way of applying pressure
on bank reserves without indicating a change in policy,
Mr. Allen said that the past three weeks had brought further
confirmation of the sidewise movement of industrial activity. September
saw a slight dip in such general indicators as industrial production,
personal income, and employment, but that was largely accounted for by
the model shutdowns in the automobile industry. By mid-October, most
of the persons laid off during the shutdown period were back at work
and total employment in Michigan now was believed to be almost the
same as a year ago. Automobile production was estimated at 350,000

10/22/57 -29
units in October, 560,000 in November, and 660,000 in December, a
total of 1,570,000 for the fourth quarter--identical with the fourth
quarter of 1956. Barring unusual developments, Mr. Allen thought that
total was likely to be attained because it would take 600,300 of the
new cars to fill the pipelines and only highly disappointing sales
would curtail production schedules prior to January. If production
schedules for the fourth quarter are attained, total output of cars
in calendar 1957 would be 6,250,000, compared with 5,800,000 in 1956.
Mr. Allen then referred to estimates made by the Chicago Bank
on the automobile credit outlook. For 1957, automobile installment
credit outstanding was expected to increase $1 billion from $14.5
billion at the beginning of the year to $15.5 billion at its end.
For 1958, assuming a 4 per cent price increase and no change in the
proportion of credit sales to total, the estimated increases in out
standings were $1.8 billion if the number of new cars sold totaled
6 million; $2.7 billion if new cars sold totaled 6.5 million; and $3.8
4.0 billion if the number of new cars sold totaled 7 million.
Mr. Allen commented that frequently he doubted that monetary
policy had all of the important effects that some ascribe to it, but
he was encouraged to note that American business firms in 1957 had
relied to a greater extent on the capital markets and to a lesser
extent on commercial banks. He felt that credit restraint on the
commercial banks undoubtedly had helped to bring about this desirable

10/22/57 -30
result. He noted that from January 1 to October 31, estimated new
capital issues other than refundings totaled $10.6 billion, or 30 per
cent more than last year. Business loans at weekly reporting banks
in the period January 1 to October 9 rose $900 million, compared with
$3.2 billion in the corresponding period of 1956. Thus, the greater
issue of stocks and bonds almost exactly balanced the lesser growth in
loans. Mr. Allen hoped that this meant that the growing practice of
commercial banks making term loans for longer and longer terms had at
last been arrested.
Business pessimism was greater than it had been, Mr. Allen went
on to say, but he did not think it as yet deserved more than careful
watching. Within the past week, two large business concerns--large
both in the Seventh District and the nation--had told him that they
were in process of laying off a substantial number of workers and in
one case of curtailing plant expenditures substantially. Both of those
companies had been guilty, in his observation over the years, of ex
cessive optimism and pessimism alternately, Mr. Allen said, and a
dampening of the high spirits they exhibited and implemented with the
aid of substantial borrowing in 1955 and 1956 was long overdue. The
more stable business managements in the Seventh District area for the
most part do not appear to be more than normally pessimistic and almost
universally applaud current monetary policy.
Once more Mr. Allen felt that the Committee should continue for
the next three weeks as it had been doing for many months. He would

10/22/57 -31
not favor a change in the discount rate or any other move which could
be construed as a relaxation of credit policy. He would temper this
comment to say that if errors were to be made they might be on the
side of ease. In his relatively short time as a member of the Com
mittee, Mr. Allen said that he had come to no better guide than what
Mr. Leach called a "benchmark." He thought there should be such a
benchmark, recognizing that the Desk had to play by ear to an extent.
He would accept a figure of $350-$400 million as such a benchmark but
he did not care too much about any specific figure.
On defense contracts, Mr. Allen said that he did not think there
was sufficient information to call for any action at this time.
Mr. Deming said that there had been no developments during the
past three weeks that enabled him to see the Ninth District picture
more clearly. The net of the developments taking place was a continua
tion of the sidewise movement of the past several months. He had
observed no district situation that would indicate anything different
for the balance of the year. Looking beyond the Ninth District, Mr.
Deming said that the continued weakness in the stock market concerned
him, not because he saw this as mirroring what was happening but be
cause it might influence near-term investment and inventory policy,
thereby further weakening factors that are not expansionary at the
present time. He also was impressed with the current Treasury pinch,
the interest rate picture, and the possible increase beyond the normal
seasonal expectations in demand for credit because of the change in

10/22/57 -32
handling of defense contract payments. This combination of sidewise
statistics, some bearishness in the outlook, confined mainly to the
East and not evident in the Ninth District, and the prospective credit
situation led him to believe that the Committee should be a shade less
aggressive than it has been in following a restrictive policy. He sug
gested this take the form of a slightly lower net borrowed reserve
position, with no change in the Committee's directive. He would not
change the discount rate. Mr. Deming suggested that this probably
placed him closer to the position indicated by Messrs. Allen and
Shepardson than to the views expressed by some others.
With respect to discount operations, Mr. Deming said that Mr.
Hayes had drawn a fairly clear distinction between treating defense
contracts as seasonal developments and attempting to match dollar for
dollar any increase in financing needs because of those contracts. In
the Ninth District where there had been something of a problem in
borrowings of member banks, a series of conferences had just been held
with those banks, and Mr. Deming said that he would not wish to try to
explain to individual banks at this time that defense contracts were
to be regarded even in part as an appropriate use of Reserve Bank
credit. However, he would be entirely willing to take this factor
into consideration, along with other factors, in judging the appro
priateness of applications for discount.
Mr. Mangels said that since the meeting of the Committee three
weeks ago some statistics that had become available in the Twelfth

10/22/57 -33
District gave evidence justifying the lack of enthusiasm apparent
in business sentiment in the district during the past few months.
Last year Twelfth District activities expanded more than in the
nation as a whole. Earlier this year when a leveling tendency began
in the nation this was less pronounced in the Twelfth District than
in the country generally. More recently the Twelfth District trend
had been much the same as the national trend but in some industries
such as construction and manufacturing weakness had been greater than
in the nation as a whole. At present there was little evidence of
buoyancy in the Twelfth District economy and if any seasonal increase
developed this fall it would be less than normal. Steel production
declined 4 per cent in September from August. One mill had shut down
two of its ten open hearth furnaces. Demand for structural and bar
steel was off, and some types of sheet steel were in excessive supply.
Lumbering continued at a low rate. Manhours worked declined almost
2 per cent between July and August. However, nonagricultural employ
ment was expected to show an increase in September over August. Un
employment also had increased because of cs in manufacturing and
construction. Number of insured unemployed persons in the district
was 50 per cent higher than a year ago, and in Oregon it was double
that of last year because of the lumber situation. The Twelfth
District agricultural situation was quite satisfactory, Mr. Mangels
said, with crops generally good but with prices for most crops other
than wheat and cotton down. Gross farm income in 1957 should about

10/22/57 -34
equal that for 1956. A survey of bank loans to farmers showed
that the banks were becoming more selective and that interest
rates increased by as much as 1-1/2 per cent compared with a year ago.
Loans to buy farm equipment were being watched particularly carefully.
Large unit operators were improving their financial position whereas
the position of smaller operators was worsening. Bank loans had de
clined during the three weeks ending October 9 and demand deposits
also had decreased somewhat more than expected. Time deposits con
tinued to increase but at a lower rate than in the past year. Fewer
banks had been borrowing from the Reserve Bank in recent weeks, and
twelve district banks were still net sellers of Federal funds.
With reference to defense contracts, Mr. Mangels said there had
been inquiries from a number of banks but that no particular concern
was yet evident as a result of the change in the Government's program.
One large aircraft producer had indicated a need for as much as $100
million in addition to his regular $100 million line of credit and
some discussion of a V-loan had occurred.
Mr. Mangels said that he felt operations during the next few
weeks would require that the Manager of the System Account have more
than the usual degree of latitude. He had in mind a $200-$400 million
range of net borrowed reserves. He would not change the discount rate
at present and he saw no need for a change in the Committee's directive,
Mr. Irons said that for the nation generally a mixed situation
still prevailed. He agreed with Mr. Allen's views: there was no

10/22/57 -35
clear indication of a break through either way and he was not
impressed by a downward trend as yet, although he recognized this
to be a touch and go situation.
In the Eleventh District there was an attitude of caution, Mr.
Irons said. He would not call this pessimism, but businessmen were
more cautious than they had been for some time. Economic indicators
continued to show a high level with little change one way or the
other. September department store sales were above September a year
ago, but did not increase quite as much from August as expected
seasonally. Construction contract awards were ahead of last year.
In the petroleum industry the confidence quotient was low, Mr. Irons
said, in that leaders expected further deterioration in the situation
before any substantial improvement. He referred to a comment that
the petroleum industry, through overdrilling and overproduction, had
been trying to get itself into trouble for six or eight years, but
every time that seemed near some fortuitous event kept them from
doing so. The industry did not feel it could raise prices in order
to cover increased costs of production, and it anticipated a profits
squeeze.
With respect to defense contracts, Mr. Irons said he had talked
with several aircraft and missile producers and one of them summed up
the situation by stating that from $1-1/2 to $2 billion of defense
payments would be thrown on to them. They did not expect an even flow
but there might be $700 million to $1 billion by December. Some of

10/22/57 -36
these manufacturers were taking steps to increase their lines of
credit. Their concern was not with the availability of credit,
but in all cases the additional funds would be more costly to the
borrowers.
The agricultural situation was greatly improved, Mr. Irons said,
and the Eleventh District was probably in better position with a more
favorable outlook for that activity than at any time in six or eight
years. Large crops, favorable yields, and good fall pastures were
being accompanied by increased payments from the Soil Bank. Retail
trade people anticipate an increase in sales, gradually and moderately,
although there was weakness in sales of durable goods.
With respect to policy, Mr. Irons felt that it was too early to
make any change that would be perceptible in any way. The degree of
restraint that had been achieved in the past three to six weeks should
be maintained. He did not think it time to change the directive al
though in another three weeks some change in wording might be indicated.
Meantime, the Committee should hold steady and maintain the same degree
of restraint, although he would not increase restraint. Rather than
say "make errors on the side of ease," Mr. Irons said he would prefer
to say "avoid erring on the side of further restraint." He would like
to see the Treasury bill rate and the Federal funds rate hovering
around the discount rate with the bill rate within five to ten points
plus or minus the discount rate. In administering the discount window,
Mr. Irons would consider applications on an individual basis as

10/22/57 -37
submitted without any special treatment for any specific industry
or for defense contracts.
Mr. Erickson summarized the First District situation by
saying that factors of weakness seemed to be slightly weaker and
factors of strength were probably not quite as strong as they had
been. The economy was still on a plateau which might be tilting.
The Boston Bank's semiannual roundup of business economists including
representatives from insurance companies, banks, universities, etc.,
was taking place today, Mr. Erickson said, and he presented the
estimates that that group had made in forecasting the probable level
of various measures of activity during the second quarter of 1958.
The annual meeting of stockholders at the Boston Bank had
been held last week, Mr. Erickson said, and an uninspired, unsolicited
resolution had been presented by one of the stockholders at the meet
ing, this resolution having been adopted by unanimous acclamation to
the effect that the stockholders approved the policies and actions
adopted and followed by the Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of
Governors in their current efforts to combat the forces of inflation
and to maintain a sound and stable currency in the United States.
The resolution had also indicated strong disagreement with those be
lieving that the alternative to creeping inflation was continuous
substantial unemployment and depression.
Mr. Erickson said he agreed with Mr. Shepardson that the
System should remain calm. He agreed with others that as seasonal

10/22/57 -38
reserves were required the System should supply them. He would
make no change in the directive at this time, preferring to take
another look at it at the next meeting of the Committee. He would
make no change in the discount rate. Mr. Erickson said that he
would prefer to set no target of negative free reserves but to
maintain restraint about as in recent weeks with the understanding
that operations would err on the side of ease or less restraint.
He would leave to the Manager of the System Account the responsibility
for keeping the situation as tight as possible under the circumstances.
As for defense contract payments, Mr. Erickson reported com
ments by banks that between now and January 1 around $1 billion of
credit might be required. However, he did not think it possible to
determine at this time the size of the problem. He felt it best to
consider each case as it arose on the basis of the bank and the
particular situation. Something would have to be done or the desired
goods would not be delivered. Defense contractors in the Boston
District said that there was great confusion, mostly between the
services and the contractors.
Mr. Szymczak said that he agreed with the substance of what
Mr. Hayes had said. With the seasonal demands for credit, the Treas
ury's problems which were increasing by the day and which no doubt
would increase much further between now and next March, and also
with the lessened economic activity that could be observed, he thought
the System should tend in the direction of supplying reserves to banks

10/22/57 -39
so that net borrowed reserves would be somewhere between $300 and
$00 million. He would lean more in the direction of $300 million,
giving account to other factors in the market. This, however, was
just an indication of leaning in the direction of ease, Mr. Szymczak
said. He doubted that this was the time to change the wording of
the Committee's directive. He doubted that insertion of the word
"increased" as suggested by Mr. Hayes would be a significant change.
He did not think the Committee should change its policy now, and he
did not think there should be any change in reserve requirements or
in the discount rate at this time.
With respect to defense contracts, Mr. Szymczak agreed with
the comments Messrs. Robertson and Mills and others had made indicating
that the Reserve Banks should not be selective in providing reserves.
An attempt to be selective might well be inconsistent with the law
and Board's regulations covering discounts.
Mr. Balderston said that before commenting on policy questions
he wished to refer to the change in progress payments on defense con
tracts. At a meeting this afternoon, it was hoped to develop from
the several agencies a clear enough factual picture for framing a
news release and a letter to the prime contractors reassuring people
that the Government will pay its bills, and urging prime contractors
not to push the burden off on the subcontractors. The Treasury is
concerned, he said, that the subcontractors getting this pressure
would lay off employees and bring political pressure which would

10/22/57 -40
confuse the situation even more. Mr. Balderston said the problem
is apparently of much less magnitude than had been rumored. The
only figure he had gotten as to the added load upon commercial banks
was a figure of about $600 million (subsequently revised to $400
$500 million). The Air Force had stressed the fact that the impact
would come gradually, not suddenly. Mr. Balderston said he had urged
that the use of 13b on any extensive scale would conflict with the
System's current policy by putting high powered money into the economy,
but that the Reserve Banks would, of course, give appropriate con
sideration to any requests under that section. Mention also had been
made of the V-loan provision and Mr. Balderston said that he believed
this might be the most practical road for individual contractors to
follow. As to use of the discount window, his retort had been that
there still was a commercial banking system and that contractors, both
prime and sub, had banking connections which they should use in the
normal way. It would be unwise, he said, for any indication to go out
from Washington to the prime--and from them to the subcontractors
indicating what kind of action individual Reserve Banks would take in
particular situations. He had taken the position that the administra
tive agencies should avoid promises as to possible Federal Reserve
action.
As to monetary policy, Mr. Balderston said he found himself
in disagreement with most of those who had spoken, leaning to the
point of view expressed by Messrs. Mills, Szymczak, and Hayes. To

10/22/57 -41
him, the effective administration of flexible policy would seem to
turn upon the timing and degree of change. As to the first, he
would lean toward promptness to avoid too long adherence to what
might impress people generally as a crusading but unrealistic position.
As to degree of policy changes, he leans ordinarily toward gradual as
distinguished from drastic ones.
As to the present, Mr. Balderston said he would delay dramatic
actions until changes in business were more clear than at the moment.
He interpreted the staff analysis as indicating the likelihood, but
not the certainty, that business may be turning down. The fall in
stock market prices would seem likely to cause luxury buying to diminish.
Last week he had stayed at a luxury hotel in the South at which he had
been told of cancellations. Data for electric power, car loadings, and
plant and equipment outlays seemed to sustain the conclusion that a
downturn may have come. Because of these uncertainties, the Committee
might wish to consider at its next meeting a change in the directive.
If a change should be made at that time, the emphasis he would favor
would be reflected by some such wording of clause (b) of the first
paragraph of the directive as follows: "to fostering economic growth
that is sustainable, despite some continued upward price pressures and
uncertainties in the financial markets and in the international situa
tion that have their impact on business health." Mr. Balderston said
heh ad been unhappy with the present directive for some time, It seemed

10/22/57 -42
to him the time might come shortly to give "sustainable growth"
more emphasis than in the recent past.
As to the Committee's goal for the next three weeks, Mr.
Balderston said he ould favor a target of about $200-$250 million
of net borrowed reserves. He also raised the question whether, in
view of the current uncertainties, it might be desirable to schedule
the next meeting of the Committee in two weeks rather than three.
Mr. Hayes said that he was in hearty agreement with the view
that the System should avoid an announcement that would publicize the
provision for loans for industrial purposes under section 13b of the
Federal Reserve Act as a means of solving the problem with respect to
defense contract payments, As requests were received at the Reserve
Bank they should, of course, be processed case by case. Mr. Hayes
also felt that there was some possibility of V-loans being used con
structively, but he suggested that any initiative or publicizing of
that means should come not from the Federal Reserve but from the com
mercial banks or the Government.
With respect to credit policy, Mr. Hayes said that it seemed
to him the Committee had an easier time finding a consensus on the
policy to be followed in the next few weeks than it would have on an
appraisal of the economic outlook. There was a fairly even division
between those who appraised the outlook with the view that statistics
and developments that had been observed held a considerable threat of
recession and those who felt that basically such a possibility was

10/22/57 -43
still to be demonstrated and that recent developments were largely
psychological with the basic factors remaining strong.
When it came to what should be done, Mr. Hayes said, it was
much easier to find an approach to unanimity. It was clear that at
this juncture the Committee did not wish to make any overt move or
give any public signal that it was changing policy. It wished to
supply seasonal needs reasonably freely. It certainly did not wish
to increase restraint from what it has been. There was a mixture
of feelings on the other side, some feeling that the Committee should
actually diminish restraint a little, but more members feeling that
it should resolve doubts on the side of ease. Mr. Hayes noted in
this connection that the suggested target or benchmark figures of
net borrowed reserves including the target figures suggested by
those who wished to hold steady, were a little lower than the net
borrowed reserves the Committee had wanted during the past three
weeks. At its preceding meeting, the Committee had been thinking
of a $400-$500 million range, possibly nearer to $500 million, whereas
the average of suggestions at this meeting was around $350 million.
Be that as it may, Mr. Hayes said that he thought it clear that policy
was to give the Manager of the System Account considerable latitude,
to resolve doubts on the side of ease, and not to emphasize the figures
too much because of the importance of some of the other factors. To
the extent that figures do enter in, there was quite good unanimity
around the figure of $350 million as an average for the coming three

10/22/57 -44
weeks although some had suggested a lower figure.
On the question of the directive, Mr. Hayes stated that it
seemed quite clear that most members of the Committee did not wish
to make a change at this time. The consensus was that the Committee
give consideration to the question whether a change might be desirable
in the near future. He recommended that between now and the next
meeting all of those present give careful thought to the suggestions
of Messrs. Leedy and Balderston for a change in the wording of the
directive.
With respect to the discount window and defense contracts,
Mr. Hayes said it was apparent that while views had been expressed
in different language, none of those who had commented wanted other
Government agencies to refer to the discount window as a specific
solution to the problem. The Reserve Banks probably did not wish
in their own statements to member banks to make much of this as a
specific problem, although they wished to take this factor into
consideration in the same manner as any other factor affecting the
seasonal needs of an individual bank.
Summing up, Mr. Hayes said that general policy was not to be
:hanged appreciably, although it should tend a little on the easier
side from where it had been in recent weeks. The Committee wished
to give the Manager of the Account substantial leeway to be guided by
the feel of the market. There should be no overt public move and no
change in the general directive at this time, and there was no desire

10/22/57
for a change in discount rates. Mr. Hayes inquired whether anyone
differed from this evaluation. In the absence of comment, he sug
gested that this summary be considered the consensus of views at
this meeting and that the directive be renewed without change.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York until otherwise
directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges
(including replacement of maturing securities, and allow
ing maturities to run off without replacement) for the
System open market account in the open market or, in the
case of maturing securities, by direct exchange with the
Treasury, as may be necessary in the light of current and
prospective economic conditions and the general credit
situation of the country, with a view (a) to relating the
supply of funds in the market to the needs of commerce
and business, (b) to restraining inflationary developments
in the interest of sustainable economic growth while
recognizing uncertainties in the business outlook, the
financial markets, and the international situation, and
(c) to the practical administration of the account, pro
vided that the aggregate amount of securities held in
the System account (including commitments for the purchase
or sale of securities for the account) at the close of
this date, other than special short-term certificates of
indebtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be increased or
decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the ac
count of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with dis
cretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue par
ticipations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such
amounts of special short-term certificates of indebtedness
as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total
amount of such certificates held at any one time by the
Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate
$500 million.

10/22/57 -46
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System
account for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury
securities maturing within one year as may be necessary
from time to time for the accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such securities so sold
shall not exceed in the aggregate $500 million face amount,
and such sales shall be made as nearly as may be practicable
at the prices currently quoted in the open market.
Mr. Hayes noted that Mr. Balderston had suggested the possibility
of setting the date for the next meeting of the Committee two weeks from
today. There was brief discussion of this suggestion, at the conclusion
of which it was agreed that the next meeting would be set for Tuesday,
November 12, 1957, at 10:00 a.m.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Assistant Secretary