A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Monday, January 28, 1957, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Johns
Mr. Mills
Mr. Powell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Messrs. Allen, Bryan, Leedy, and Williams, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Leach and Mangels, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Vest, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Abbott, Hostetler, Parsons, Roelse, and
Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Storrs, Mitchell, and Tow, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Chicago, and
Kansas City, respectively; Mr. Einzig, Assistant
Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco; Mr. Ellis, Director of Research, Fed
eral Reserve Bank of Boston; Mr. Anderson,
Financial Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia; and Mr. Atkinson, Economist, Fed
eral Reserve Bank of Atlanta

1/28/57 -2
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on January 8, 1957 were ap
proved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the action by the
members of the Committee, taken as of the
close of business January 22, 1957, in
increasing by $300 million the authoriza
tion to the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York to make sales of securities from the
System open market account under paragraph
(1) of the directive approved January 8,
1957, was approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York covering open market operations during the period January 8 through
January 22, 1957, and a supplementary report covering commitments exe
cuted January 23 through January 25, 1957. Copies of both reports have
been placed in the files of the Committee.
Mr. Rouse stated that by Thursday of last week the operations of
the System account had achieved in terms of figures the position indi
cated by the discussion at the meeting of the Committee on January 8,
although the market had not regained the spirit of restraint that had
been contemplated by the Committee at that meeting. As of today, he
felt that the market was back in the position that the Committee had
hoped for.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period January 8
through January 25, 1957, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.

1/28/57
Mr. Young's statement on the business picture, made at Chair
man Martin's request and as a supplement to the staff memorandum dis
tributed under date of January 25, 1957, was as follows:
The economic situation domestically remains one of in
tensive utilization of manpower and other resources and of
demand pressure on price levels. Recent reversals in credit
market conditions, together with more selective price and
market developments and with the seasonal uncertainties
characteristic of this time of the year, is prompting wide
reconsideration of business forecasts. Compared with a month
ago, more recognition is being given to the fact that the
momentum of advance in recent months has been in considerable
measure price illusion. Consequently, reservation is being
expressed more frequently than at year-end about full year
prospects. Abroad, output and employment generally continue
at high levels, with price trends most typically on the up
side.
Wholesale prices domestically have registered another
impressive gain of .7 per cent since mid-December, putting
the current level 4.5 per cent above a year ago and 6 per
cent over mid-1955. Finished industrial prices advanced
little over the month, while prices of industrial materials
and farm products and foods rose further. Among industrial
materials, some striking diversity was shown. Finished steel
prices rose, but the price of steel scrap declined from its
very high peak. Prices of copper and aluminum scrap have
weakened, as have also lumber prices. Strength in farm
prices has reflected mainly higher prices for livestock;
grains have continued at about last spring levels. Consumer
prices at mid-December showed a further increase and were 3
per cent above a year earlier.
Industrial production for January is now guessed at
about the same level as December. Steel output is up from
December as is also output of autos and petroleum. Paper
board, lumber, and diversified consumer durables outputs,
however, are down. Output of industrial equipment continues
at capacity.
The automobile market has been aptly described by a
Detroit economist as not as bad as the Wall Street Journal
makes out and not as good as the industry would like to have
it. Sales to customers for the first twenty days of January
ran about 3 per cent under a year ago, and, while stocks rose
to about 600,000 units, they were still better than a fifth

1/28/57
under last year. Used car sales this January have held close
to last year's January rate, and used car stocks have been a
tenth under last January's level. Used car prices, after
allowing for depreciation, continue about steady.
Consumer instalment credit in December rose between $200
and $300 million, about the same as in October and November.
The average new car note is now about $200 higher than a year
ago, with the average used car note up about $100. The pro
portion of cars sold on credit late in the year was about the
same as in late 1955.
Housing starts in December maintained an annual ate of
just over 1 million units, about the level of the preceding
three months. On the other hand, mortgage lending has been
off some over this same period, although for the whole year
1956 it was not far under the record 1955 volume. Discounts
on VA mortgages increased further in December and new FHA
5 per cent mortgages have been generally priced at 98. It is
too early to judge the impact of the new FHA rate on the avail
ability of mortgage funds. Mortgage offers and application for
standby commitments fo F[NsMiAc ]c ontinue in large volume despite
further FNMA actions to curtail demand for its funds.
Nonfarm employment by the latest figures has continued to
hold at record levels, about a million higher than a year
earlier. In early January, however, there was a more than
seasonal increase in claims for unemployment benefits. The
work week in December was little changed from preceding months.
Weekly earnings, at a record of 84 dollars, were nominally 5
per cent higher than in December 1955, but they had risen only
2-1/2 per cent over the twelve month period in purchasing power.
Retail sales in December, seasonally adjusted, ran about
4 per cent ahead of December 1955. For department stores in
January, sales are now estimated to be down from December but
still moderately above last January.
The dollar value of business inventories in November, as
in October, showed a higher rise than the average of preceding
months for 1956, but the rise was about in line with the rise
in dollar sales.
In the United Kingdom, activity remains high, with demand
pressures on price levels still marked. Sterling has been
strong and credit market conditions somewhat easier.
Activity in Germany, which had been slackening in pace, has
shown pickup most recently. Also, price pressures have again
been in evidence.
France is experiencing intensive use of resources and rapid
monetary expansion. Manifestation of inflationary pressures in
price indexes is being partly avoided by price ceilings, subsidies,
and other devices, but it has not been avoided in international

1/28/57
transactions. In consequence of inflationary pressures,
French gold and dollar reserves have suffered a further
substantial drain.
Mr. Thomas next presented a review of the credit situation and
outlook substantially as follows:
Credit developments during January have moved in the
opposite direction from those in December, and have been
just as spectacular and surprising. December's sharp rise
in interest rates has been followed by an equally sharp
decline; the increase in bank loans by an even greater de
cline; the tight tone of the money market by a feeling of
ease. The concern that Federal Reserve operations designed
to meet seasonal needs in December may have made possible
undue credit expansion has been belied by the contraction
that followed. This contraction occurred notwithstanding
a continued state of relative ease in bank reserve positions
reflected in a decrease in member bank borrowing to the
lowest level since early 1955.
Some concern has been expressed that the decline in
member bank borrowing may have given a false indication of
a shift in System policy and been a factor in the more
ebullient market for bonds of all kinds. Like the opposite
and equally incorrect view evident in December when rising
interest rates were attributed to a feeling that System
policy was getting tighter, the current interpretation
represents a propensity for market participants to treat
symptoms as causes, instead of seeking the real underlying
causes. Whether this feeling will lead to undesirable
consequences can be established only by the course of
events. So far the trend of bank credit would indicate
that credit liquidation has been an important cause of the
easier situation. The ease has not stimulated undue expan
sion--at least not yet. Further reasons for the change in
tone in capital markets in the face of very heavy demands
are not easy to appraise.
Issuance of the new Federal budget does not provide a
basis for complacency as to the subsidence of inflationary
pressures. For the past year the fiscal position of the
Government has been a counter-inflationary influence of
considerable import. The new budget provides for a fairly
substantial expansion in cash outgo during the next year or
more that is not fully covered by an increase in receipts.

1/28/57 -6-
A significant feature of the budget is the steady increase
in cash expenditures not covered in the conventional bud
get with a narrowing excess of extra-budgetary receipts
over such expenditures.
The additional expenditures for goods and services by
the Federal Government will be a stimulating factor and the
smaller excess of receipts will reduce the counteracting
effect of the surplus. There will be a smaller reduction
in Government securities held by the public, thus reducing
the amount of investment funds released for meeting other
borrowing demands. Compared with a reduction of $6 billion
in calendar year 1956, the reduction in 1957 is likely to
be less than $4 billion. These differences, it should be
noted, however, are relatively small and prospects are for
a continued surplus in contrast to deficits in the three
previous fiscal years. Moreover, it is highly likely that
receipts may turn out to be larger than the published
estimates; on the other hand, expenditures may also exceed
estimates.
If the increase in the regular weekly bill issue by
$100 million, announced for this week, is continued through
the full cycle of 13 weeks and the February 16 special bill
is refunded with an issue maturing after June, the Treasury's
new borrowing needs for this fiscal year may be adequately
covered. If receipts exceed the official estimates, as seems
likely, and expenditures do not increase beyond those esti
mates, some additional debt could be retired in June or
borrowing needs in July reduced.
The sharp decline in yields on Treasury bonds has brought
them down close to the levels of early last autumn, but the
entire yield structure is still higher than it was at any time
before late last August. The drop in yields was particularly
sharp in the case of medium and short term bonds, which had
previously shown the largest rises. With the decline in long
term yields more moderate, the hump in the yield curve ap
parent since last summer has been almost wholly eliminated.
This change gives rise to the possibility that the Treasury
might find it feasible in the forthcoming refunding operation
to offer as part of the exchange an issue with a longer-than
one-year maturity.
With all the decline in bond yields and notwithstanding
the low level of member bank borrowings, it is significant
that Treasury bill yields have continued above the discount
rate. This is in contrast to developments in January of last
year, when bill rates quickly fell below the discount rate,
although member bank borrowings were at a high level and in
fact increased somewhat. This difference no doubt reflects

1/28/57
the increased reluctance of banks to borrow or remain in
debt, owing to the higher discount rate, the reduced liquid
ity positions of banks, and perhaps to other factors. It
may also reflect the smaller holdings of Treasury bills by
corporations and their reduced ability to absorb bills.
Dealers' holdings of bills are substantially larger than
they were a year ago.
Performance of the capital market has been one of the
most unexpected features of this month's surprising develop
ments and its significance is difficult to interpret. The
record volume of new corporate and state and local government
issues, which it was feared would create a bad case of
indigestion in the market, has been absorbed so readily as to
engender confidence and hope. It should be recognized, how
ever, that this absorption has been accomplished at a level
of yields which two or three months ago would have been con
sidered very high. It appears that the supply of long-term
funds available for investment has increased considerably.
This is partly a seasonal, beginning-of-year development and
may partly reflect the holding back of investment while yields
were in the process of rising. Proceeds from savings bond
redemptions and a rebuilding of dealer inventories were
evidently other sources of demand. Whether the easier reserve
position of banks is a cause or effect is difficult to determine.
Indications are that business corporations will continue to
be rather substantial borrowers in the capital market and also
from banks. Their needs grow out of large prospective capital
expenditures, the levelling out of corporate profits, the
further drawing down of funds accumulated for taxes, and the
sharply reduced holdings of cash and other liquid assets.
State and local governments also will continue to be heavy
borrowers. The trend of demands for mortgage funds is more
uncertain, but, if builders are correct in their views that
principal restraint on building is financing of home buying,
then there is likely to be a demand for all funds available.
The raising of permissible rates on insured and guaranteed
mortgages should increase demands from these sectors of the
market. All of these demands will press upon the available
supply of savings and probably also on the banks. This will
raise questions as to the appropriate amount of bank credit
that might be made available.
Liquidation of bank loans since Christmas indicates that
most of the unprecedented credit demands in December were to
cover temporary needs for cash. Why these were so large is
largely a matter of conjecture. Changes in business loans in
December and January 'generally followed a seasonal pattern on

1/28/57 -8-
a somewhat wider scale than usual, except for a further increase
in borrowings by public utilities. Payment for the large new
issues of securities this month is expected to provide for some
further reduction in business loans at banks. Consumer credit
demands, though moderately large, seem still to be increasing
at a slower rate than last year. Loans on securities have been
considerably reduced.
Bank holdingsof Government securities have been influenced
by refunding of the January 16 special bill issue. A con
siderable portion of the new issue was taken by city banks.
Last week's figures for New York and Chicago indicate substantial
curtailment in bill holdings. Holdings of Treasury notes and
bonds by banks have continued to decline moderately.
Credit expansion in December, together with a decrease in
U. S. Government deposits, resulted in a larger than seasonal
growth in deposits of businesses and individuals and estimates
indicate that these deposits have shown little decline so far
in January. The increase in time deposits since early December
has been noteworthy. U. S. Government deposits at banks, how
ever, have declined sharply and are at an exceptionally low
level. With the rebuilding of Treasury tax and loan accounts
and perhaps some further decrease in bank bill holdings, demand
deposits adjusted may be expected to decline in coming weeks in
accordance with usual seasonal trends. Demand deposit turnover
continued at a relatively high level in December.
Nearly all factors other than System operations have com
bined to increase the supply of or decrease the demand for bank
reserves in recent weeks by even larger amounts than were ex
pected. Among these are: the return flow of currency, which
was greater than seasonal; a reduction in member bank required
reserves due principally to the decrease in Treasury tax and
loan deposits; and the decrease in the Treasury balance at the
Reserve Banks. As a result, and notwithstanding very large
sales of securities by the System, member bank borrowings
declined to the lowest level since early 1955 and member banks
showed an average net free reserve position for a four week
period.
The reserve picture is in the process of changing dras
tically this week. It is likely that member bank borrowings
may increase to well over three-quarters of a billion dollars
during this calendar week. Net borrowed reserves may average
close to $250 million in this statement week and to $400 million
or more next week in the absence of further System operations.
It is difficult to know what effect so sharp a change may have
on the money market. Since additional reserve funds are likely
to be available around the middle of February, any System opera
tions to relieve immediate pressures might well be of a temporary

1/28/57
nature. Perhaps the needs of the situation may be met
through repurchase contracts, which can be run off later.
In March there may again be temporary needs for reserve
funds; the amount will depend upon the tone of the markets,
the magnitude of credit demands, and the state of the
economy at the time.
Today's sale of $300 million of gold by the Inter
national Monetary Fund to the Treasury in exchange for non
interest bearing notes and the monetization of that gold
will at first result in an increase in the Treasury balance
at the Reserve Bank. It will have no immediate effect on
bank reserves as long as the Treasury keeps a correspondingly
larger balance than it otherwise would, but when the Treasury
balance declines, presumably as the IMF redeems the notes and
pays out the funds, reserves will be increased. As this
happens, the System will need to consider appropriate off
setting action.
Taking a longer run viewpoint, the question facing this
Committee during the coming year is: Should bank credit to
meet the essential cash needs of the economy be supplied less
restrictively this year than last and can this be done with
out adding to upward price pressures? Business financial
needs for investment expenditures may even be larger this
year than last, while liquid assets available to be drawn
upon are much smaller, hence borrowing needs will continue
large. Will businesses want to replenish their cash balances?
To what extent can deposit turnover be expected to increase
further? State and local governments will probably want to
borrow more, while the Federal Government will retire less
debt. Consumer credit growth may be somewhat larger than
last year. Will the rate of current saving be adequate to
meet these demands? Are past savings available for shifting
into more active investment to the same extent as in the
recent past? On balance, the situation still seems to be
one of pressures on the expansionary side requiring con
tinued restraint on credit growth, but perhaps more care
to avoid becoming too restrictive.
In response to a question from Mr. Powell, Mr. Thomas said that
the annual rate of demand deposit turnover in cities outside leading
financial centers was 22.5, seasonally adjusted, in December 1956, the
same as in November. This rate was about 8 or 9 per cent above the
rate of turnover in December 1955, he said, and was very close to the

1/28/57 -10-
rate that prevailed during much of the 30's although it was somewhat
lower than the rate that prevailed in the 1920's.
Chairman Martin next called upon Mr. Hayes, who made a state
ment on the economic and financial situation and outlook as follows:
1. There has been additional evidence recently that
the economy may be losing some of its upward momentum.
While these data are not sufficient to support a forecast
of a downward turn as a clear nearby prospect, they do
suggest that we may be entering a period of sidewise move
ment when we must be especially alert to signs of a definite
trend.
2. To the auto industry, which was already giving
cause for some doubt early this month, we can now add im
portant segments of the steel industry where capacity is
outrunning demand. In marked contrast with forecasts only
a few weeks ago, it is now expected that the over-all
operating rate will drop materially below 100 per cent of
capacity within a few months. The slight advance of 1
point in the Federal Reserve index of production since
October has reflected a highly mixed picture with some
industrial groups rising while others remained unchanged
or declined. Inventories were accumulated at an accelerated
rate in the fourth quarter of 1956.
3. A tendency for total capital expenditures to level
off is evidenced by recent figures for factory construction
contracts, new machine tool orders, and freight car orders,
together with scattered announcements of postponements of
plant construction projects.
4. There are cross-currents in the area of prices,
with higher costs showing up in increased prices for
finished goods both at wholesale and at retail, in contrast
with a softening trend for a number of primary product
prices. Even in the area of consumer prices, continuance
of the upward tendency is open to question in view of
added signs of consumer resistance. Reports of an impend
ing general steel price increase are diminishing, following
the recent increases in prices for some bottleneck items,
and prospects for an eventual increase would doubtless
fade if the operating rate should drop appreciably. Buyers'
markets are appearing in more and more segments of the
economy, this development being dramatized currently by the
breakdown and abandonment of several "fair trade" price
agreements.

1/28/57 -11-
5. Reports on member bank credit have been extremely
interesting in the past three weeks. Business loans of all
reporting member banks, after a fourth quarter rise of $1.6
billion, or close to the increase of a year earlier, fell by
$705 million in the three weeks to January 16, 1957, a post
war record decline for the period comparing with a drop of
$355 million a year ago. A rapid decline in security loans
has also occurred, so that about three-fourths of the fourth
quarter rise in total loans has been wiped out. Total loans
and investments were off by $1.4 billion--somewhat more than
a year ago--and this drop would have been much greater if
the banks had not been called upon to help underwrite the
special June Treasury bills for which payment was made on
January 16. Loans and investments of the New York City banks
fell by $468 million in the January 23 week. The rapid re
payment of bank loans suggests that the rise in December was
largely seasonal and that cumulative credit restraint has
been effective in limiting growth of credit beyond seasonal
needs. Despite the striking recent decline in loans, it is
quite possible that heavy tax borrowing will occur again in
March this year.
6. Three weeks ago we felt serious concern over the
outlook for the capital markets, in view of the very heavy
calendar of new corporate and municipal offerings. Sub
sequently, the highly successful outcome of most of the new
January offerings has brought about a vastly changed atmosphere
in the capital market, although the schedule of new issues due
in the next few months is still large. While it is difficult
to draw conclusions on the strength of one month's experience,
the success of the recent offerings may mean that savings are
closer to being in balance with demands for long-term credit
than we had previously thought.
7. Our policies must take careful account of the Treasury's
very large financing program for the weeks immediately ahead.
This program includes the refunding, perhaps to be combined in
one operation to be announced this week, of about $10.7 billion
of certificates and notes, including $5 billion held by others
than the Federal Reserve System and U. S. Government accounts.
In addition, it will be necessary to refinance the $1,750 mil
lion special bills maturing February 15, and unexpectedly large
cash needs have caused an increase in the size of the regular
weekly bill offering.
8. Through open-market operations the System has succeeded
in absorbing reserves in a record amount since the December peak,
and only a fortuitous combination of a persistently low Treasury
balance, a sluggish decline in float, a rapid return of currency

1/28/57 -12-
from circulation, and a sizable drop in required reserves
reflecting the lower loans and investments has prevented
this absorption from being translated into a sizable figure
for net borrowed reserves. Such a figure is likely to
develop within a few days in any event, without further
open market sales by the System.
9. Both the uncertainty of the business outlook and
the Treasury's program point to the desirability of maintain
ing about the degree of restraint determined upon at the last
meeting of the Committee rather than any intensification of
restraint. We should keep a tight rein on the banks' re
serve position through appropriate open market transactions,
and while it is hard to set a target in figures, I would
think that net borrowed reserves might range anywhere be
tween 0 and $400 million depending upon the "feel" of the
money and capital markets and the immediate requirements
of the Treasury's financing program. To the extent that
funds may have to be provided by the System in the next two
weeks, repurchase agreements would seem to offer the best
mechanism for achieving the desired results, provided dealer
positions and needs make this possible, but outright pur
chases may be necessary.
10. It seems to me that nothing in the present economic
situation would justify any overt signal that the intensity
of our restraint is being materially altered in either di
rection. I would therefore be strongly opposed to any in
crease in the discount rate at this time, quite apart from
the consideration that such an increase would be of very
questionable wisdom at a time when the Treasury faces a
major financing problem.
11. The precautionary clause which was added to (b)
of the directive at the last meeting no longer seems
appropriate. It is therefore suggested that this clause
be eliminated. The question of whether a different
qualifying clause should be added might be left for con
sideration after the members of the Committee have given
their appraisals of the current situation and prospects.
Mr. Erickson said that conditions in the Boston District still
remained generally good, although they were not as buoyant as they had
been months ago. Nonagricultural employment in November was lower than
in October. Manufacturing indexes of textiles, leather, and primary
metals were lower in November than earlier in the year. Construction

1/28/57 -13
awards for the year as a whole were above the 1955 total, but in
December awards were 28 per cent lower than a year earlier. Freight
car loadings declined 8 per cent in December. Bank loans declined
materially during January, the decrease this year being larger than
in January of 1956. Mr. Erickson said that in view of the local situa
tion as he observed it in New England and in view of national conditions,
he would not favor a change in the discount rate at this time. He would
not make any change in the Open Market Committee's policy but would
maintain restraint at the level that had existed last fall, using open
market operations and repurchase agreements as needed.
Mr. Mangels reported that thus far during January the Twelfth
District economy had operated on a reasonably satisfactory basis.
Savings funds had increased moderately, and banks had opened a sub
stantial number of new accounts. Approximately 75 per cent of the
savings accounts in Twelfth District banks were now subject to a 3 per
cent interest rate and an additional 17 per cent to a rate of 2-1/2
per cent; very few banks were paying 2 per cent or less. Some funds
had come into savings accounts in banks from savings and loan associa
tions, although the rate of dividends paid by such institutions also
had been increased, and some of the increase in savings deposits
reflected redemptions of savings bonds.
In the Pacific Northwest where agriculture and lumbering pre
dominate, Mr. Mangels reported very little optimism. Bankers expect
some softening in loan demand and feel that corporate borrowers will

1/28/57 -14
be in better position in March of this year than they were a year ago
to take care of their tax needs without large borrowings. Consumer
credit demand has not been as large as a year ago, and automobile sales
have not been as satisfactory as expected. A Portland Branch director
reported new car sales down 5 per cent from a year ago and used car
sales down 10 to 15 per cent; his expectation was that for the year
1957 as a whole new car sales would be somewhat below 1956. In
California, demand for bank credit did not differ greatly from that
in the Northwest, and no large demand for tax purposes was anticipated.
Slower sales of houses were reported in some sections of the Los
Angeles area, and for California as a whole sales of automobiles also
were slowing. One large San Francisco bank reported December financings
of new cars for dealers 20 per cent below a year ago, and a decline
also was recorded in over-the-counter financings for individuals.
Weakness in department store sales recently was reported in the
Pacific Northwest, and a small increase in California reflected higher
prices. Recent postponement of plant construction by General Electric
Company and General Motors Corporation in the Pacific Coast area
apparently represented a general reassessment of their expansion pro
grams. Borrowings at the Reserve Bank continued small. Mr. Mangels
referred to an editorial that appeared in a Pacific Coast publication
recently in which it was stated that "while the Federal Reserve might
be putting on the brakes, the labor boss was at the wheel with the
accelerator pressed to the floor."

1/28/57 -15
Mr. Mangels' conclusion was that there was some uncertainty
in the picture but that inflationary pressures were still predominant
and quite strong. If consumer spending does not come up to expecta
tions there might be some reaction in the way of smaller investments
in inventories and in plant expansion. If this were to occur, the
Federal Reserve should anticipate such a development rather than wait
until it had gone too far. Mr. Mangels said that he would concur
generally in the policy views expressed by Mr. Hayes although he would
think that a $0-100 million range for net borrowed reserves might be
more appropriate than a $0-400 million range. He would not change the
general philosophy of the Committee at this time but he felt the re
straint to be applied now should be slight. He would not recommend a
change in the discount rate at present.
Noting that the Ninth District was experiencing mid-winter
weather, Mr. Powell stated that the snow pack in mountain areas was
now reported to be only about 50 per cent of normal. Currently farm
income was somewhat larger than a year ago, and agricultural credit
was reported to be ample at country banks. Farm machinery sales were
expected to show some increase this spring over a year ago. In non
agricultural areas, industrial employment was high and this reflected
a good level of activity in the type of industrial specialties
manufactured in the Ninth District. Iron mining was unusually high
for the winter months but copper mining in the western part of the

1/28/57 -16
district had declined. Electric utilities were selling more indus
trial power than ever before, the only exception to this being re
ported from lumber producing areas. Bank deposits were up somewhat
and borrowings at the Reserve Bank were quite low. Interest rates
being paid by Ninth District banks on time deposits were creeping up
but not many were yet paying the 3 per cent maximum permitted.
Mr. Powell said he could see nothing to indicate that the
Committee should now increase restraint on the market. He would be
inclined to maintain the present measure of restraint through open
market operations, but he would not increase restraint and would not
favor an increase in the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Allen said that the automobile year, while still young,
had progressed to the point where industry officials say privately
that instead of selling 6.2 million cars in the 1957 season as pre
viously hoped, it now appeared that 6 million was more likely to be
the figure or that there might even be no improvement over the 5.8
million sold in the 1956 model year. New car inventories represent
a 30-day supply at the present rate of sales, a high level for this
season. Both production and purchases of materials are being geared
to this situation. Employment in Michigan is now reasonably full and
is expected to continue that way for the next few months. Sales of
farm machinery in November and December showed some improvement over
a year ago but in recent weeks there has been some slowing,and manu
facturers now expect sales in 1957 will not exceed 1956 totals by
more than 5 to 10 per cent.

1/28/57 -17
Business loans by banks in the Seventh District did not in
crease during the last six months of 1956 in proportion to the nation
wide increase. This was because of the relatively large importance of
metals manufacturers and sales finance companies in the Seventh District,
whereas the industries that increased their borrowing most--petroleum,
chemicals, public utilities, and others--are relatively unimportant in
the Seventh District borrowing figures.
Mr. Allen said that the larger Seventh District banks anticipate
no decline in their business loans between now and March 31; some expect
an over-all increase of 3 to 4 per cent from the present level. As for
the discount rate, Mr. Allen concurred in the views already expressed
that no change should be made at this time, and he felt that open market
operations should attempt to continue about the present degree of pressure.
Mr. Leedy reported substantial moisture in some of the drought
stricken areas of the Tenth District as a recent favorable development.
He felt it clear from the economic report this morning that there was
some leveling off in economic activity nationally, but there was not yet
a positive indication of downward pressures which would justify a change
in the general policy the Committee had been following. For the im
mediate period, Mr. Leedy felt the Committee should attempt to do what
it contemplated at the last meeting, that is, it should apply pressure
on bank reserves somewhat comparable to that which existed before
seasonal requirements came into the picture last November and early in
December. He would not be too much concerned about any particular figure

1/28/57 -18
but felt that operations should indicate that pressure was being ap
plied. He would make no change in the discount rate at this time.
He was inclined to feel that the Committee's directive should be
changed by deleting from clause (b) the part that was revised at the
preceding meeting calling for recognition of unsettled conditions in
the money, credit, and capital markets and in the international
situation.
Mr. Leach said that since the preceding meeting of the Committee
there had been virtually no signs of increased economic activity in the
Fifth District and that further evidence of weakness had appeared in the
textile, lumber, and construction industries. A spot check of auto
mobile dealers in the larger cities revealed that January sales were
"disappointing" although dealers in Chrysler products generally reported
a better experience than did others. Tobacco growers faced discouraging
income prospects for 1957 as acreage allotments had been cut back by
20 per cent and support prices for certain varieties of tobacco had
been reduced by 50 per cent.
Mr. Leach went on to describe developments in tobacco production,
which is of especial significance to the Fifth District and particularly
to the State of North Carolina, which produces two-thirds of the total
flue-cured tobacco and looks to flue-cured tobacco for more than half
its cash income from farm marketings. Despite successive acreage cut
backs, production has been maintained at a high level through various
devices to increase yields. Of particular significance has been the

1/28/57 -19
increased planting of new tobacco varieties that produce higher yields
per acre of the mild, light-colored leaf traditionally considered the
highest quality for cigarette production. While cigarette production
shows year-to-year gains, new techniques are resulting in more cigarettes
per pound of tobacco, and the widespread use of filter tips--accounting
for about 30 per cent of 1956 sales--has modified standards of quality.
Efforts to get added taste through the filters have led to increased
buying emphasis on the darker, stronger grades. Mr. Leach noted that
these are the same grades that, because of price and quality, had
previously been attractive to foreign buyers. In brief, he described
the current situation as one of excessive supply and unbalanced pro
duction.
With respect to Committee policy, Mr. Leach said that despite
the signs of a slow-down in the upward momentum of the national economy,
he still did not see sufficient evidence of weakness to warrant a
departure from the Committee's over-all policy of restraint. Without
wanting to be tied to a single indicator of the degree of restraint
desired, he suggested that an appropriate policy at this time would be
reflected in a limited amount of net borrowed reserves. This would be
in line with what the Committee contemplated at its meeting three weeks
ago and net borrowed reserves might range from zero to $200-300 million,
depending upon Treasury financing and conditions in the market. Mr.
Leach said that he felt it would be a mistake to increase the discount
rate at this time. Also, he felt that because of the substantial

1/28/57 -20
reduction in loans since the first of the year and the changed
atmosphere in the capital markets, it might be well to delete from
clause (b) of paragraph (1) of the Committee's directive to the New
York Bank the reference to unsettled conditions in the money, credit,
and capital markets and in the international situation.
Mr. Vardaman said that Mr. Hayes' review of the national picture
presented about what he (Mr. Vardaman) had found in the southeastern
part of the United States. Since October, he had traveled pretty well
over 14 States, and during the past ten days he had traveled through 7
States. He had noted an enormous change in the psychological approach
since last October; at that time, there was great optimism in the
Mississippi Valley and the southeast, but at present, it seemed that
"the air had gone out of the balloon." He now observed a feeling of
doubt and discouragement, and he described conditions in some fields
of small business as disastrous. The backwash of these conditions
could be expected to affect big business, such as the automobile in
dustry where sales were proving quite disappointing.
Mr. Vardaman expressed the view that banks had gone further in
increasing interest rates than was warranted by the rise that had taken
place in the discount rate. He felt that the psychological phases of
the Committee's actions would have more importance in the next 30 to
90 days than actual operations. Perhaps now was not the time to do
anything in the way of changing the Committee's policy, but it was his
view that some indication by the Committee that funds would be available

1/28/57 -21
later on would be helpful. Mr. Vardaman said that he could not concur
in any actions that would make for further tightening, and he urged
that the Committee seriously consider whether now or within the next
three weeks was the time to "release some of the brakes."
Mr. Mills said that it would not appear to him that January
1957 was a great deal different from January in earlier years, in that
there was a low degree of economic visibility. To pattern the Com
mittee's operations to what it could now see, he shared the views that
had been expressed that System policy should continue to maintain a
degree of credit restraint. This would contemplate the reappearance
of negative free reserves but with the level of negative free reserves
to be watched very carefully as they rise so as to observe their re
action on the Treasury bill rate and on the capital markets. If those
reactions should indicate a too severe pressure on bank credit and on
capital market conditions, the Committee should modify its policy
accordingly. Mr. Mills also said that he would not favor an increase
in the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Robertson said that he was unable to see any lessening in
the inflationary pressures that had been present for some time. The
Committee could easily overweigh the possibility of consumer resistance
to price increases, he said, and nothing that had been presented this
morning indicated a need for lessening the degree of restraint that
had been contemplated by the Committee at its meeting on January 8.
It was Mr. Robertson's view that the Committee should maintain at least
that degree of restraint and perhaps in order to achieve that degree it

1/28/57 -22
should set a target in the form of a negative free reserve figure
since, if the Committee did not set a target, he feared that it was
not likely to get the desired restraint. He would do nothing on the
discount rate at this time.
Mr. Robertson then commented on the operations of the System
account since the last meeting, emphasizing that he did not wish to
have his remarks taken as criticism of the Account Management. Over
the past three weeks, he said, it had seemed to him that open market
operations had been carried on much too timidly. Just as had been the
case during 1956, we had tended to fear deflation resulting from Com
mittee actions, much more than we had tended to fear inflationary re
sults. It seemed as though the Account Management had been almost
overwhelmed by the feel of the market: they had acted too slowly and
had done too little, and had given greater weight to the feel of the
market than the condition of the general economy would warrant or
than was called for by the Committee's directive. Mr. Robertson sug
gested that after the meeting on January 8 of this year there should
have been early action to absorb reserves.
Looking ahead, he was aware that the market might tighten it
self during the next week or so, but he hoped that the Committee would
boldly, not timidly, maintain the degree of restraint contemplated
January 8. He hoped that the account would be reluctant to enter into
any outright purchases or any repurchase agreements until that degree

1/28/57 -23
of restraint had been achieved; by following such a course, the System
might now undo some of the harm that had been done in the past. Too
often during the past, open market operations had brought on "ease" just
before a Treasury financing with the result that the Treasury had offered
securities at too low a rate--securities which then dropped below par as
we tightened the reserve picture. He hoped we could avoid this in the
future.
Later in the meeting, Mr. Robertson added the comment that he
would not be happy with an open-mouth policy such as Mr. Vardaman had
intimated, one that indicated publicly that the System would make credit
available at a later date, just as he was not happy about what seemed
to be an open-mouth policy in the article by Mr. Dale in today's New
York Times.
Mr. Shepardson said that since the meeting on January 8, he had
attended the drought conference in Wichita, Kansas, at which representa
tives of 15 States were present for the purpose of developing recommenda
tions for relief of the drought situation. While the group was too large
to complete the task effectively, its work was interesting and encourag
ing, and the general attitude was one of trying to find a method of fore
stalling recurrence of the distress that has resulted from drought
conditions that have affected the area in recent years. This would in
clude studies of land use and water conservation as well as feed reserves
and other insurance features designed to mitigate the effects of drought
and other natural disasters. The conference did not expect too much

1/28/57 -24
help from credit in dealing with the problem, feeling that in the long
run undue extension of credit was likely to bring on additional diffi
culties rather than to solve the problem.
As to the general situation before the Committee this morning,
Mr. Shepardson said that on the basis of the discussion at the January 8
meeting, he would have anticipated a more highly inflationary level at
the present than seems to have developed. At the earlier meeting, he
had expressed the view that the System should be prepared at this meeting
to face an increase in the discount rate. As conditions had actually
developed, there seemed to have been some lessening of the pressure.
However, Mr. Shepardson said he thoroughly agreed with Mr. Robertson
that there was still a good deal of inflationary pressure: there was
an incipient or latent pressure that could very easily develop again
if the System gave any evidence of a change in policy away from re
straint. The economy had lost ground on the price situation, and it
was still faced with price increases. By all means, he said, the Com
mittee should attempt to maintain the degree of restraint that had
existed earlier, and it should give no signal of easing.
Mr. Fulton described the Cleveland District machine tool and
road building machinery industries as operating athigh levels. The
steel industry was also operating at a high rate on the basis of the
new figures of capacity. Except for materials in short supply such
as oil pipe and plate, demand for steel items had not been quite so
good recently; appliance, automobile, and other manufacturers using

1/28/57 -25
sheets were cutting back their orders. Steel warehouses were well
stocked and were not buying for inventory. Mr. Fulton reported a
steel industry forecast of operations at 92 per cent of capacity
during the first quarter of this year, a slightly lower rate during
the second quarter, a sharply lower rate during the third quarter,
and a slight increase from the third to the fourth quarter of the year
with, however, total production during the second half of 1957 sharply
lower than in the first half. He noted postponement of several plant
expansion programs in the District, it being his feeling, however, that
these represented simply more realistic timing for construction of plants
so that they would become available more nearly at the time when the
capacity would be used. A small increase in unemployment also was
reported. Mr. Fulton stated that price pressures continued upward and
that the steel industry expected an increase in basic steel prices in
mid-year. Although they were still present inflationary pressures were
being subdued to some extent, and any move to relax credit restraint
would be followed quickly by an inflationary movement in the economy.
As to policy, Mr. Fulton felt the Committee should maintain a
firm hold on the money supply in the weeks to come, but he would not
change the discount rate at the present time. Negative free reserves
in the $200 million area would seem appropriate, depending upon the
feel of the market.
Mr. Williams said that to the extent he could judge, there had
been little change in the business picture in the Third District in

1/28/57 -26
recent weeks. Department store sales in January were running about
3 per cent ahead of sales in corresponding weeks a year ago. Un
employment compensation claims were down during the first half of
January from December but were higher than a year ago. Mr. Williams
pointed out that factory employment in the Third District had not
regained the peak 1953 level, contrary to the country as a whole,
adding that this reflected losses from the District to other areas
of plants in a number of industries, especially hosiery and apparel.
Business loans of reporting member banks in the Philadelphia District
declined during January slightly more than a year ago but at about the
same rate as for the country as a whole.
Mr. Williams expressed the view that there should be no change
at this time in the Committee's policy of restraint; operations should
work toward a net borrowed reserve position, but there would be some
fluctuation. The discount rate should remain unchanged for the present.
This was a time when the System should be very sensitive to changes in
climate as well as in statistics, Mr. Williams said, but pending such
changes we should continue to try to achieve the degree of tension
intended in the January 8 directive.
Mr. Bryan noted that there were some trouble spots in the Sixth
District. As Mr. Leach had reported for the Fifth District, the textile
industry was having its difficulties in the Sixth. Construction had
dropped rather sharply. However, retail trade had been at record levels
and above January 1956, and employment remained at a record level.

1/28/57 -27
Banks continued under pressure and there had been a good deal of
borrowing at the Federal Reserve during the past month. Loans had
declined no more than seasonally since the first of the year and in
a good many categories they were still going up.
In the national picture, Mr. Bryan said that we were in a
situation in which there were crosscurrents, and in which it was easy
to catalogue soft spots that could give cause for concern. However,
at present it seemed to him that for every soft spot that could be
enumerated, we could enumerate a strong spot in the economy. As he
saw it, at the moment the elements of strength were greater in number
and probable magnitude than the elements of weakness. We were still
dealing with an economy that tended to be inflationary, one in which
we were still getting many administered price increases.
Mr. Bryan described the Committee's policy since the January 8
meeting as a policy of "inadvertent ease." The behavior of the bill
rate and of the capital markets indicated a considerable ease that we
did not have before that meeting. This bothered him, Mr. Bryan said,
for several reasons. There was the heavy calendar of Treasury issues
coming up and there was the contemplated sale of gold by the Inter
national Monetary Fund. If we should get a Treasury issue closely
priced on the market and if the Committee then went into the market
to create a climate in which the issue would go over, monetary re
straint would be largely lost. He felt that the Committee was con
fronted with the problem of getting an additional level of restraint

1/28/57 -28
into the market and getting it in fast, so that a climate of expecta
tions would not be created that would eventually force it to negate a
policy of restraint. This could not be done by use of the discount
rate at the moment, Mr. Bryan said, but would have to be done through
open market operations. The projections indicated a situation that
would tighten itself naturally, but if this did not prove to be the
case or if the projections should go as wrong as they had at times in
the past, the Committee should actively see to it that greater tightness
did develop. The Committee should get back to a bill rate of around
3.25 and should get there quickly.
Mr. Johns recalled that on January 24, 1956, the Committee
modified its directive to provide that in conducting open market opera
tions, account should be taken of any deflationary tendencies in the
economy; it deleted that provision from the directive on March 27,
1956; and in April, the discount rates at ten of the Federal Reserve
Banks were increased by 1/4 of 1 per cent and at two Banks by 1/2 of
1 per cent. Mr. Johns went on to say that he was not sure what there
was about January that made it impossible accurately to appraise what
was going on in the economy but that it did seem to be a month in
which it was dangerous to take radical decisions. Therefore, he was
not disposed to take one in January of this year. He referred to the
question posed by Mr. Thomas in his statement earlier in this meeting
as to whether the System should supply the reserves needed for

1/28/57 -29
sustainable growth with more or less reluctance than heretofore. Mr.
Johns said he was not prepared at the moment to try to answer that
question. He sensed some lessening of the optimism that existed through
out 1956, but he was not yet ready to say that the Federal Reserve should
supply these funds with less reluctance. He would like at this time to
take about the same position that he had taken and that the Committee
had taken three weeks ago in its decision to recover the degree of re
straint that existed late in November and early in December. He would
like to see this done without an increase in the discount rate at the
present time. He was reluctant to try to pinpoint a figure of net
borrowed reserves but suggested a range around the $200 million figure.
Mr. Szymczak said that he felt the Committee should be prepared
to act when any weaknesses were seen in the economy. He did not see
weaknesses developing at the present time, although he was mindful that
the Committee should watch automobile sales and production as well as
construction very carefully. These should be observed constantly, not
only as a means of seeing how they affected the credit field, but also
how they affected other areas of the economy. He referred to Mr. Bryan's
comment that the Committee had recently followed a policy of "inadvertent
ease." Mr. Szymczak suggested that the market had thought the ease was
by design, that it suspected developments that had caused the Committee
to leave sufficient reserves in the market to offset something that the
market did not see clearly. While the market might be correct, Mr.
Szymczak said that he could not see anything at the present time

1/28/57 -30
indicating that the economy was not going to continue at a high level.
The Committee should continue to absorb reserves even though a negative
reserve position developed. He would not allow the negative free re
serves to get too high, but they might range in the $200-400 million
area, depending on conditions in the market. The System should not
increase the discount rate now, but it should watch developments over
the next three weeks to see whether the situation developed in a way
to require that the System act on the discount rate.
Chairman Martin said that he had not much to add to the picture.
Over the past weekend he had reread the minutes covering meetings during
the past 18 months. He gathered that Mr. Johns also had been reading
the minutes. The Chairman said that he could have made a comment similar
to that Mr. Mills had made on the low degree of economic visibility in
January of each year. He reported listening to a talk by a bank econo
mist a few days ago on the outlook for the next year at the end of which
a comment was made that the forecast could be summed up as saying that
"we would just sag along in 1957." The Chairman said that he could see
exactly what was meant by this statement.
Chairman Martin went on to say that Mr. Robertson had brought
out on the table something that should be brought out, something that
he knew the Manager of the System Account and Mr. Hayes would wish to
have before the Committee. These innermost thoughts should be discussed
and no one should be sensitive about hurting any other person's feelings
in commenting on the handling of the account; the subject was too im
portant not to be discussed fully. He, too, had been a little fearful

1/28/57 -31
earlier this month that the Committee's operations were being handled
too timidly, the Chairman said, but he had revised that feeling after
having been in New York recently and, in any case, he had not pressed
the point too much earlier. The men on the desk have an extremely
difficult problem, he said: the Committee has been trying to recapture
something that perhaps could not be recaptured because of forces at
work that were bigger than the System account, or there might be forces
of which we were not cognizant.
After referring to the problems growing out of Treasury financ
ing, Chairman Martin noted that, if certain things were not done at just
the right moment, the Committee might be defeated in what it was trying
to achieve. This was a poor time to make long-term projections of the
business outlook, he felt, but it was a good time to try to maintain
the status quo. Personally, he had been exasperated with recent stories
in the press about changes in Federal Reserve policy; he mentioned two
recent talks he had given and pointed out that no matter what he said,
the newsmen tried to twist his comments into something different, be
cause there was no news in them otherwise. As to policy, he was con
vinced that patience was the thing that was needed at this time to un
ravel the knot. The consensus of the Committee seemed clear: that we
should endeavor to follow the policy that we thought was to be followed
three weeks ago but which some now felt had not been followed. This
was a difficult period, Chairman Martin said, and his thought was to

1/28/57 -32
attempt to maintain the status quo until the Committee could see more
clearly into the spring developments.
Referring to Mr. Johns' comments, the Chairman said that he was
one of those who was timid on the short-run outlook in January a year ago,
although he had not been timid on the longer-run outlook. Now, and until
the Committee had obtained a clearer view of developments, he hoped we
would follow the policy we had been trying to follow the past few weeks.
We should avoid trying to "make business." Improvidence and imprudence
were present in the economy and their effects had to be washed out
sooner or later, but this could not be done by putting in more credit.
Chairman Martin concluded this part of his comments with the statement
that his understanding of the consensus of today's discussion was that
the Committee wished to maintain the policy that was agreed upon at the
meeting on January 8, and there was no indication of disagreement with
this statement.
Chairman Martin then turned to the directive, noting that Mr.
Hayes had suggested deleting the second part of clause (b) of paragraph
(1), calling for recognition of unsettled conditions in the money, credit,
and capital markets and in the international situation. His own view
was that it would be unfortunate to eliminate the instruction to take
cognizance of conditions in the capital markets and then have a knot
develop, or have the Treasury's forthcoming financing fail. He could
see no objection to leaving the words in and, on the whole, felt that

1/28/57 -33
the Committee would be wiser to continue until the next meeting with
the directive in its present form.
Mr. Rouse said, in response to the Chairman's question, that
his inclination was to take out the phrase as suggested by Mr. Hayes.
He had no suggestion for changing the dollar limitations in the directive.
Mr. Hayes said that he had considered the desirability of sub
stituting some language for that part of clause (b) of paragraph (1)
under discussion, for example, an instruction to keep alert to any de
flationary developments that might emerge. He was not sure whether it
was worth while to spell out the directive in detail. Mr. Hayes also
mentioned that he was pleased that the Chairman had called attention
to the exasperating consequences of the Treasury financing in mid
January. He noted that at the time of the Treasury's refinancing of
the special bills maturing January 16, the Account Management was
effectively kept from disposing of bills in the market for a few days
and was faced with the fact that dealers and banks underwrote $1 billion
of the new securities. It was quite possible that the Federal Reserve
would have to do something to assist if problems developed in the
Treasury's refunding in February.
In further discussion of the directive, Chairman Martin expressed
the view that since the preceding meeting there had been a disorderly mar
ket on the up side, brought on by conditions beyond the control of the
Committee. This was likely to occur at any turning point. He suggested

1/28/57 -34
the possibility that the Treasury might announce its February refunding
shortly, that on the basis of projections there might be a tightening in
the market a little later, and that if these developments occurred the
Committee might find itself in a position where it felt it necessary to
enter the market. Should these developments take place, the Chairman
thought that the Committee would prefer not to have taken action at
this meeting to change the uirective in a manner that would indicate
that its only concern during the next three weeks was with inflationary
pressures.
Mr. Leedy said that he felt as Chairman Martin did, but he
wondered whether it might be possible to delete the phrase referred
to by Mr. Hayes and to substitute therefor an instruction to "take
account of changing conditions in the money, credit, and capital markets."
Chairman Martin responded that such wording would meet his point.
Messrs. Mills and Williams stated reasons why they would prefer
to retain the existing wording of the directive at this time, and Mr.
Hayes said that he would have no objection to leaving the directive in
its present form. After several other members of the Committee had
expressed similar views, it was agreed that no change in the wording
would be made at this meeting.
Mr. Rouse referred to Mr. Robertson's comments earlier in the
meeting, stating that he had not taken them as critical of the opera
tions of the System account but rather as pointing up the difficulties
experienced in carrying out Committee wishes during the recent period.

1/28/57 -35
He stated that the System account had sold securities in this period
when some of his immediate associates on the trading desk were quite
apprehensive of the effect of such sales. On a number of days some
of those concerned felt the account was taking a substantial risk in
going as far as it had. This point of view could be expected from
persons very close to the market, Mr. Rouse said. He, being a little
further removed from the market, might have a different feeling, and
when he was in Chicago and talked by telephone with those on the trading
desk in New York he had noted a difference in feeling. As it had turned
out, Mr. Rouse said, the risks those on the trading desk had been con
cerned about actually had not materialized.
Mr. Robertson responded that Mr. Rouse had stated correctly
the point he was trying to make; that the pressures on the "trading
desk," resulting from the so-called "feel of the market," were so great
as to sway the judgment of those in charge of the operation. He went
on to say that had he been on the desk he might have made exactly the
same errors that were made, and that he was merely trying to bring
out the point that he had expressed.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Committee voted unanimously
to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York until otherwise directed by the Com
mittee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (includ
ing replacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities
to run off without replacement) for the System open market ac
count in the open market or, in the case of maturing securities,
by direct exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary in

1/28/57 -36-
the light of current and prospective economic conditions
and the general credit situation of the country, with a
view (a) to relating the supply of funds in the market
to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to restraining
inflationary developments in the interest of sustainable
economic growth, while recognizing unsettled conditions
in the money, credit, and capital markets and in the
international situation, and (c) to the practical administra
tion of the account; provided that the aggregate amount of
securities held in the System account (including commitments
for the purchase or sale of securities for the account) at
the close of this date, other than special short-term certifi
cates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be in
creased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to
one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special
short-term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the
Treasury; provided that the total amount of such certificates
held at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not
exceed in the aggregate $500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System ac
count for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury securities
maturing within one year as may be necessary from time to time
for the accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total
amount of such securities so sold shall not exceed in the
aggregate $500 million face amount, and such sales shall be
made as nearly as may be practicable at the prices currently
quoted in the open market.
Chairman Martin referred to the question that had been raised at
the meeting on January 8 in connection with the suggestion made by Mr.
Mills that the Committee study whether the past year's increment in the
size of the System's portfolio should be converted from Treasury bills
into longer-term U. S. Government securities. He suggested that this
and related questions be studied by a special committee which would in
clude, in addition to himself, Messrs. Hayes, Allen, Balderston, Erickson,
and Szymczak.

1/28/57 -37
Chairman Martin's suggestion was
approved unanimously with the under
standing that the special committee
would report at a later meeting.
In a discussion of the date for the next meeting of the Committee
it was agreed that a meeting would be held at 10:00 a.m. on Monday,
February 18, 1957. It was also tentatively understood that the annual
organization meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday, March 5,
1957.
Chairman Martin then presented a question that Secretary of the
Treasury Humphrey and Under Secretary Burgess had asked him to take up
with the Committee. Specifically, some thought was being given to the
issuance of optional securities, one of which might be a three-year
obligation, in exchange for the 2-5/8 per cent Treasury certificates
maturing February 15, 1957, of which the System account now holds
approximately $5 billion. The Treasury officials felt that if the
option were offered and the System were to exchange some portion of its matur
ing holdings for the longer-term securities, such action would be
helpful to the Treasury. Chairman Martin said that some of the leading
dealers in Government securities also had indicated that such action by
the System would be helpful. He also said that the inquiry by the
Treasury in no way contemplated a change in the general System policy
that it would confine transactions to short-term securities, preferably
bills. Reasons advanced for the procedure were that acquisition by the
System of some of the longer-term securities in an optional offering

1/28/57 -38
would indicate that the Federal Reserve was sympathetic with the
pricing of that particular issue and that it would give some en
couragement to the market for redistribution of the securities.
He commented that personally he was not impressed with an argument
for lengthening the term of the Federal debt through use of the
System's portfolio.
In response to Chairman Martin's request for comments, Mr.
Rouse said that he had not heard recently from the Treasury on this
question, although Mr. Burgess had mentioned it a couple of weeks
ago. He noted that Treasury maturities during 1960 were relatively
light and that a three-year security would fit into the maturity
schedule.
Mr. Allen said that in his judgment sizeable maturities of
Government debt must be taken into consideration because they can
affect the money market and anything that affects the money market
must be taken into consideration. If, as Mr. Rouse had stated, a
three-year security would add a maturity in a year of relatively
small maturities, that would help to even out the Government maturity
schedule and would thereby appear to be beneficial to the money market.
On that basis Mr. Allen said he could support a proposal for the
System to take three-year obligations in exchange for some of its
holding maturing February 15, although his basic feeling was that
the System should restrict itself to securities maturing within a
year.

1/28/57 -39
Mr. Robertson asked that the staff members comment on reasons
why such a procedure would not be desirable.
Mr. Thomas pointed out that if the System was not dealing in
longer-term securities, it would not make a great deal of difference
what it held other than bills. However, if the System held a sub
stantial volume of the longer-term securities and if it was believed
that it might deal in them, that fact might be a hindrance to the
market rather than a help.
Mr. Riefler said that a central bank enjoyed public confidence
in its operations to the extent to which it had a liquid portfolio.
This suggestion of the Treasury would be a small departure from liquidity.
It seemed to him that the question was one of psychology. He did not
think there was much case for doing what the Treasury asked on the grounds
of bringing about better distribution; the case for doing it was that it
would indicate some approval on the part of the Federal Reserve of the
pricing of the securities. The case against doing it was that appre
hension might be raised that the securities might be sold by the System
account and thus come back to load the market.
Mr. Hayes said that taking the longer-term securities offered
in an exchange would have no bearing on whether the System account would
deal in them in the future. On the other hand, it could be argued that
there was some advantage to the System to have some distribution of
maturities in its portfolio if the System ever wished to deal in securities
other than bills. The Treasury's proposal would give the System a little
more diversification.

1/28/57 -40
Mr. Robertson suggested that the Treasury must feel strongly
about the matter or it would not have made the request. He inquired
whether this feeling was based on the grounds that it would help give
better distribution to the securities and improve the confidence in
the market.
Mr. Rouse noted that unless the exchange of some of the System
securities into the three-year obligations were to be made public while
the offering was open, it could have no effect on this refunding.
Chairman Martin stated that there was no indication that the
System's acquisition of such securities would be made public until
after the exchange had been completed, and it was his feeling that the
procedure would have an effect on the public only to the extent that
it might have a bearing on future issues.
Mr. Vardaman said that this would represent a break in the
policy that the Committee had been following for some time, and the
market would wonder when the next step would be taken. From the
psychological standpoint, he felt the proposal undesirable on the
grounds that if acceptance by the System of the longer-term securities
were to be taken as now indicating its approval of the rate, a failure
by the System to take such securities in a later offering might well
be interpreted by the market as indicating an unfavorable view of that
offering.
Mr. Robertson concurred in this view. He felt the present
problem was not large, but the future consequences might be troublesome-

1/28/57 -41
more so to the Treasury than to the Federal Reserve.
Mr. Allen said that some members of the Committee had raised
a point which seemed important to him, namely, that if the System
were to take the suggested three-year Treasury obligations, the
public might be led to believe that the System had assisted the
Treasury and would do so again, and such a public belief would not
be desirable. Mr. Allen said that the word "assist," which he had
heard here today, was disturbing to him.
Mr. Szymczak said that he could not get concerned about the
question one way or the other.
Chairman Martin said that he did not feel this was a big
problem for the System in any event. To the extent it was a problem,
it was one for the Treasury. His feeling was that if the Treasury
really wished to have the System take the longer securities as a
matter of helping in the financing, it was the type of thing on
which the System should not be inflexible. He suggested, therefore,
that he discuss the matter further with Treasury officials with a
view of indicating that there was some difference of opinion among
the members of the Committee concerning the proposal.
After some further discussion, it was understood that
Chairman Martin would discuss the matter along the lines indicated,
and if the Treasury then desired the System to take longer-maturity

1/28/57 -42
securities in an optional offering, he would communicate further
with the members of the Committee.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary