A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on
Wednesday, April 24, 1957, at 10:00 a.m. This was a telephone con
ference meeting and the location of each individual is indicated in
parenthesis after his name in the following list of those in attendance:
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman (Washington)
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman (New York)
Mr. Allen (Chicago)
Mr. Balderston (Washington)
Mr. Leedy (Kansas City)
Mr. Shepardson (Washington)
Mr. Szymczak (Washington)
Mr. Williams (Philadelphia)
Mr. Irons, Alternate for Mr. Bryan (Dallas)
Mr. Treiber, Alternate Member (New York)
Mr. Riefler, Secretary (Dallas)
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary (Washington)
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel (Washington)
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel (Washington)
Messrs. Marget and Young, Associate Economists,
(Washington)
Mr. Roelse, Associate Economist (New York)
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
(New York)
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
(Washington)
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors (Washington)
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors (Dallas)
Mr. Larkin, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York (New York)
Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia (Philadelphia)
Chairman Martin said that this was not in any sense a crisis meet
ing or an emergency meeting. It was a meeting to bring the members of the
Committee up to date, brought about by the fact that during the past
week Under Secretary of the Treasury Burgess had been expressing considerable

4/24/57 -2
alarm about the state of the Government securities market in connection
with the Treasury financing just ahead. The Chairman said he thought
it desirable to have an informal discussion at this time so that the
Manager of the Account, who was not present at the April 16 meeting of
the Committee but who was ably represented by Mr. Larkin, would have
clearly in mind the sense of that meeting. Chairman Martin then read
a portion of the statement that he had made at the meeting on April 16,
as recorded on pages 28 and 29 of the minutes of that meeting.* He
concluded his statement with the comment that the only suggestions at
the April 16 meeting as to maintaining a specific level of net borrowed
reserves were those contained in comments by Messrs. Mangels, Deming,
and Szymczak, who mentioned figures of $400 and $500 million. The
Chairman said that the statement he had just read summed up the problem
Mr. Rouse was dealing with, The Treasury had a difficult pricing
problem, and the System account had a difficult problem of not misleading
the Treasury. Chairman Martin stated that the Committee should not let
panic develop in the market if there was any way to maintain an even
keel and to continue the type of credit operation that seemed to be
called for.
Mr. Hayes said that he felt it desirable to have this meeting
because there were new developments since the April 16 meeting that
raised rather difficult questions for the Account Management, problems
that were difficult to resolve without going back to the Committee.
*Refers to mimeographed copy. In typed copy, reference should be made
to pages 33, 34, and 35.

4/24/57 -3
Specifically, while a net borrowed reserve figure was not set as a
target at last week's meeting, the consensus generally was to keep
approximately the degree of restraint that had existed during the
preceding three-week period. Since April 16, developments had made
the Treasury financing seem to be more of a problem than was then
visualized, and at the same time there had been factors that had
reduced the visible measures of restraint. Mr. Hayes then asked
that Mr. Rouse comment on the situation.
Mr. Rouse stated that when he returned to New York on Monday
of this week after an absence of about ten days he found the situation
quite different from that which existed at the time he left New York.
He also felt that the current situation was different from that pre
sented to the Committee at the April 16 meeting. His understanding
of the Committee's decision at that meeting was that it endorsed
fully the atmosphere of the preceding three weeks and desired that it
be continued for the next three weeks. The remainder of Mr. Rouse's
statement was substantially as follows:
Although no specific guides were established, it was of
course in everyone's mind that net borrowed reserves and mem
ber bank borrowings had been relatively high--averaging over
$600 million and over $1 billion, respectively. The projec
tions for the succeeding period were for a continuation of
the same levels; little attention was focused on the Treasury's
immediate problem.
The first talk I had on Monday morning, aside from a
preliminary talk with Mr. Larkin, was with Mr. William
Heffelfinger of the Treasury who indicated that because of
the Treasury's concern over market conditions in relation
to its impending refunding operation, he had been instructed

4/24/57
by Mr. Burgess to reduce the balances which the Treasury
carries at the Reserve Banks by $150-200 million, and that
presumably Mr. Burgess, himself, would speak to me about it
later in the day when the Under Secretary would be in New
York.
Mr. Hayes and I saw the Under Secretary Monday afternoon
and he confirmed his intention of reducing the Treasury's
balances with the Reserve Banks. In his view a part of the
increase in net borrowed reserves had been due to a rebuilding
of these balances after the middle of March. He said that it
was his opinion that the Treasury could not have a successful
refunding when a considerable portion of the securities to be
refunded were held by commercial banks if these banks were
heavily in debt and under pressure by the System to get out of
debt. The Treasury people understood that it might be unwise
for the System to take overt action to reduce net borrowed
reserves but that if the Treasury balances were reduced it would
be taken in stride and that net borrowed reserves of around $400
million and member bank borrowings of under $1 billion, in his
opinion, would not scuttle monetary policy but would facilitate
his refunding problem. I made it clear both to Mr. Heffelfinger
and Mr. Burgess that I thought that the Treasury should not en
gage in such an open market operation.
There are certain other matters I should mentions
On Monday there crystallized a loss of confidence
in bond values particularly in municipal and govern
ment securities which probably had been in the making
for several days.
It then developed that there had been an extra
ordinary expansion of float on Thursday that reduced
net borrowed reserves to less than $300 million which
carried over the week end.
On top of this development, the railway express
airport strike affecting a number of important
financial centers suggested a further substantial
increase in float--by how much I don't know, but it
could run an additional $200 million.
It is the conclusion of the market that the Treasury's ex
change offering will be a failure even though the Treasury puts
a reasonably attractive coupon on a one-year security or a six
month security. Attrition of at least 25 per cent is expected
as of now. Prices of other securities in the market are expected
to move down to meet the rate on the new offering.
In partial explanation of the market's attitude, the dealers
reflect the attitude that the System did not validate the Treas
ury's cash offering and provide the necessary reserves through
outright purchases. Market opinion doesn't necessarily have to

make sense or be consistent with past positions. It is just
current opinion but as such, influential. It also says that
the number of available underwriters, i.e., dealers and banks,
is steadily dwindling.
I share the Committee's concern as to misleading the mar
ket and shall do my best to avoid that result. However, there
is one further matter that I should mention. The Treasury now
feels that, as a result of System policy, it must confine the
maturity of its refunding to under six months, thus adding to
our problems in the autumn; furthermore, if the Treasury suffers
a very heavy attrition, it will mean cash financing sooner than
expected representing a further compounding of our problems.
In the light of what I understand to have been the position
taken by the Committee a week ago and the present statistical
position of the banking system, i.e., average net borrowed re
serves this week of under $00 million, perhaps we should sell
Treasury bills to offset the Treasury's action. I think we
should not do so in the face of the Treasury's impending fi
nancing. On the contrary, it might be wise to extend some
repurchase agreements to dealers today. All outstanding re
purchase agreements ran off yesterday. Unless we do something
today, our statement for the current statement week will show
a decline in our holdings.
Chairman Martin referred to the possibility of a failure of the
Treasury's financing, stating that he did not understand that Mr. Rouse
was suggesting that the System should make the issue a success by buying
it.
Mr. Rouse stated that he did not intend to imply that the System
should buy the issue but that his statement did imply that the Treasury
might have to come to the market again soon. He had no thought of the
System's buying rights or doing anything of that sort.
Mr. Hayes summarized his view with the statement that he believed
the Committee should give revised instructions to the Manager of the
System Account. It should be well agreed that, unless the general tone

4/24/57 -6
of the market improved, the Manager would not sell securities at this
time to offset the action of the Treasury in putting reserves into the
market and the fortuitous developments in float. The Manager of the
System Account should feel free to let the net borrowed reserves figure
be what it may within reason, and he should not feel that he had to
take offsetting action in the way of selling securities. Similarly, a
little after the Treasury's announcement was made, if it would help the
financing to be a success the System Account should be able to make re
purchase agreements available to dealers, even though at the time the
net borrowed reserves figure was fairly small statistically. This was
on the assumption, of course, that the tone of the market had not
improved by that time.
Speaking in more general terms, Mr. Hayes said that what was
needed was a considerable degree of leeway to the Manager of the System
Account who should be guided by the behavior and the feel of the market.
Similar authorizations had often been given in the past and in this
particular case it seemed to Mr. Hayes desirable that the Committee
give specific consideration to such authorization because of the condi
tions that were developing and that could not have been foreseen at the
April 16 meeting. If the Treasury should have a failure of its offer
ing of the magnitude that Mr. Rouse had mentioned (25 per cent attrition
or more) that could mean a scuttling of the Committee policy of restraint.
Mr. Hayes suggested that the Manager of the System Account should have

4/24/57 -7
leeway to the extent necessary to try to help the Treasury's financing
within the reasonable limits of the policy of credit restraint.
Chairman Martin commented that, in his opinion, that degree of
latitude was implied in the directive agreed upon April 16. However,
he understood fully Mr. Rouse's desire to have this point clarified so
as to eliminate the element of judgment as to whether he was exceeding
the policy directive. The Chairman said that he believed the Committee
would have to give maximum discretion to the Manager of the System Ac
count, but it did not wish to lose the credit policy for the sake of
helping the Treasury, even if the Treasury should have a failure.
Mr. Hayes concurred fully in this statement, adding that the
Committee must adhere to its basic policy. However, he believed there
was considerable leeway within that policy that would permit the Com
mittee to operate so as to avoid greater difficulties later on.
Chairman Martin agreed with this view, adding that the Committee
should not be swayed too much by the Treasury's difficulty and the cater
wauling of some of the syndicates that were in difficulty.
Mr. Allen said that the substance of the comments of Chairman
Martin and Mr. Hayes as to pursuing the operating policies the Committee
had had for several years was most important. The results of the Treas
ury's financing operations in recent years had been bad. It was Mr.
Allen's view that what the Treasury wanted now was to have the central
bank "bail it out." He felt that if the System were to do this it

4/24/57 -8
would be at the expense of the country and this, of course, would
not be the right thing for the System to do. Mr. Allen suggested
that the Treasury was "control minded" but he hoped that the Com
mittee was "market minded" rather than "control minded." Speaking
specifically, Mr. Allen agreed with what Mr. Rouse had said to the
effect that we should not be concerned that net borrowed reserves
at the moment were less than any target mentioned at the meeting
last week. This was a temporary situation and did not call for
precipitate action to cure it. The Treasury was independent just
as was the Federal Reserve; some of the things the Treasury did made
the System's job more difficult. Mr. Allen did not propose to com
plain about Treasury action however difficult it might make things
for the Committee, just as he did not think the Treasury should com
plain of Committee action in pursuing Committee objectives.
Mr. Balderston agreed with Mr. Rouse's suggestion for taking
such measures as would keep the market on an even keel without losing
sight of the restraint that the Committee was trying to preserve for
the long run. To him, the Treasury's problem was secondary to the
Committee's primary responsibility. Nevertheless, it was something
that should not be minimized. The responsibility for a Treasury
failure would certainly be shared by the Committee, Mr. Balderston
said, especially if any overt action were taken by the Account that
would precipitate a psychological crisis in the securities market.
Consequently, he believed that at this particular juncture the

4/24/57 -9
Trading Desk should have leeway to do the things that were indicated.
He would not attempt to compensate for the temporary float situation.
At this point Mr. Hayes reported on a bulletin concerning the
securities market this morning, and Chairman Martin commented that on
the whole the market seemed to be a pretty orderly one.
Mr. Shepardson stated that he realized the difficulty of side
line coaching and he would not attempt to say in detail what the
Manager of the Account should do. His general thought was that it was
highly important that the Committee not lose sight of the basic credit
objectives. He realized the Committee's responsibility to provide as
stable a situation as possible for the Treasury but did not think this
extended to bailing them out of a situation. Mr. Shepardson referred
to the comment Mr. Rouse had made that the number of dealers or under
writers was dwindling. He suggested that this might reflect the situa
tion that had developed upon a number of occasions in the past when,
after helping to make a favorable market situation for the Treasury,
the Committee tried to get back to its credit policy and found that
it created a situation that caused a decline in the price of the new
security. Mr. Shepardson thought that the Committee should recognize
the unexpected ease resulting from float, but it should maintain as
nearly as possible the degree of restraint discussed at the meeting
last week. The economy generally was no less optimistic today than
at that time, he said, and he would favor putting the Committee's

4/24/57 -10
credit policy strongly on the line, doing what might be necessary
to avoid unforeseen tightening, but not taking steps to help ease
the Treasury situation.
Mr. Szymczak thought that the Committee was faced with the
practical problem of ease that had been created by the float situa
tion. How long the ease would continue depended on the strike of
express company employees. None of us could tell how long the strike
would continue, and the Treasury must proceed to make its plans for
the refunding. On the one hand, Mr. Szymczak said that he did not
feel that we should deviate from the policy adopted at the meeting
last week. On the other hand, he did not feel we should be selling
securities in the light of the present practical situation. We
should make repurchase agreements available, but we should not add
to reserves by buying because that might create a more difficult
situation for the Treasury; nor should we sell in the market. Mr.
Szymczak said that he would play by ear, depending on the judgment
of the Manager of the Account to deal with the situation in the light
of the policy adopted at last week's meeting.
Mr. Williams said that he was concerned about the Treasury's
problem. The Committee should not lead the market, but in its actions
should bear in mind the possibility of heavy attrition on the Treasury
issue. It seemed to Mr. Williams that the Manager of the Account
should have latitude in making repurchase agreements, and he felt
this could be given without departing from the general Committee

4/24/57 -11
policy. If the Committee permitted conditions to get too tight at
this stage it might build up trouble for itself later in the year.
Mr. Irons said that the Committee's primary responsibility
was appropriate credit policy from the standpoint of the economic
situation. He saw nothing in that picture that would change his view
of policy from that discussed at the meeting last week which called
for a degree of restraint. In fact, Mr. Irons felt that the economic
picture was showing improvement or gradually increasing strength rather
than a tendency toward increasing weakness. We were dealing with an
inflationary danger that might get away if there were definite easing.
Mr. Irons said that he was not concerned with the net borrowed reserve
figures and he had stopped using them. He was concerned with the
degree of tightness in the market as measured by the behavior and feel
of the market. A decline in net borrowed reserves of $100 or $150
million because of a rise in float would not concern him and he would
not interfere to offset that position for a day or two. He was con
cerned by the nature of the problem implied by the Treasury's actions
in opening up another arm of open market operations. He doubted if
this was the time to oppose that action by sales of securities from
the System account, but he felt this was something to be discussed
fully by the Committee. As for the Treasury's position, Mr. Irons
did not feel that prior to the announcement of the refunding the Com
mittee should deviate from what it regarded as a necessary and de
sirable credit policy for an economic situation that was tending to

4/24/57 -12
be inflationary. If the Treasury offered a security priced in line
with the market and if the Committee's credit policy was appropriate,
then it might have a responsibility to "see the Treasury through."
This, however, was not the present situation. Summing up, Mr. Irons
said that the comments Chairman Martin had read from the minutes of
last week's meeting would reflect his judgment. The Committee should
maintain a degree of tightness. He understood that the Manager of
the Account must be given some leeway to operate on the basis of feel
or behavior of the market and not as reflected by some figure of net
borrowed reserves. He was not concerned about the net borrowed re
serves figure going to $400 million instead of $700 million.
Mr. Leedy said that the comments of Mr. Irons represented his
views. He thought the decision at last week's meeting would permit
the kind of approach that Mr. Rouse had outlined. Mr. Leedy would
not be too much concerned about the statistical ease appearing as a
result of float, nor would he offset what the Treasury had done in
the way of reducing its balances at the Reserve Banks. Repurchase
agreements might serve a purpose, but Mr. Leedy said that he would
favor staying completely out of the market as far as purchases and
sales were concerned for the moment. There should be no departure
from the basic policy of restraint.
Chairman Martin said that he felt this discussion had been
quite helpful in bringing out the views of the members of the Com
mittee. He then called upon Mr. Rouse.

4/24/57 -13
Mr. Rouse commented that perhaps we had seen the worst of
the situation on Monday of this week. This meeting had served the
purpose of indicating that he would not be violating the Committee's
policy by not offsetting the Treasury's operations. The net result
of the discussion this morning gave him the discretion needed to do
what had to be done, Mr. Rouse said, although he indicated that this
would be a difficult period. He would try to keep the market as
tight as possible in the circumstances, and he gathered that this was
what the members of the Committee wished.
Chairman Martin said that he thought this was correct.
Mr. Hayes noted that one or two members of the Committee had
spoken about the Treasury having created its problem, indicating that
it was not the Committee's responsibility to help the Treasury out of
a situation that it had gotten into. Mr. Hayes said that there was
something to this comment, but at the moment the Treasury was not
talking about the rate; it was talking about the difficulty of making
any refunding operation a success regardless of the rate because of
the degree of tightness in the market. Mr. Hayes said that to him
this meant that while the Committee should hold to its general policy
of restraint without any question, there might have to be some shading.
Mr. Williams said that this reflected the thinking he was
trying to express in his comments a few moments earlier.
Chairman Martin said that he felt the Committee's posture
should be clear at all times that it wished to do everything it could

4/24/57 -14
to help the Treasury in its problem short of sacrificing credit
policy responsibility. He felt that the problem had been well
summarized at this discussion and stated that we would have to
rely on the good judgment of the Management of the Account,
Mr. Allen referred to his earlier comments on the Treasury's
attitude and to Mr. Rouse's comments on what he referred to as the
Treasury's "open market operations." Mr. Allen went on to say that
he would not be disposed to criticize the Treasury for these opera
tions. The Committee had its responsibility and the Treasury had its
responsibility.
Chairman Martin said that he thought this subject was one that
should be discussed at another meeting of the Committee.
Mr. Hayes stated that this discussion had been very helpful
and that the New York Bank was prepared to give its attention to carry
ing out the Committee s wishes.
SecretaryThereupon the meeting adjourned.