A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, July 9, 1957, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Allen
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymcsak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Williams
Messrs. Fulton, Irons, Leach, and Mangels, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Johns and Deming, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Minneapolis,
respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Atkinson, Bopp, Marget, Mitchell, Roelse,
and Tow, Associate Economists
Mr. Rousa, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Robinson, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Koch, Assistant Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Mr. Volcker, Securities Department, Federal Re
serve Bank of New York

7/9/57 -2.
Mr. Freutel, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis; Mr. Daane,
Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of Richmond; Messrs. Balles and Einzig,
Assistant Vice Presidents, Federal Re
serve Banks of Cleveland and San
Francisco, respectively; Mr, Litterer,
Business Economist, Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis; and Mr. Walker,
Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank
of Dallas.
Chairman Martin suggested that Mr. Robinson, Adviser, Division
of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors, and Mr. Volcker, Market
Specialist, Securities Department, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, be
invited into the meeting. There being no objection, Messrs. Robinson
and Volcker entered the room.
Chairman Martin then referred to the luncheons that had been
attended by some of the Committee members and staff and by Treasury
representatives at frequent and fairly regular intervals over the past
several years. He stated that today Under Secretary of the Treasury
Burgess, Mr. Wren, Assistant to the Secretary, and Mr. Heffelfinger,
Fiscal Assistant Secretary, were coming to lunch and that all members
of the Federal Open Market Committee were invited to attend the luncheon
if they were able to do so.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on June 18, 1957, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the action by the
members of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee on July 2, 1957, in authorizing

7/9/57
the furnishing of information requested by
Senator Albert Gore relating to transactions
in Government securities during the week
ending June 26, 1957, was approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
Secretary's note: The letter sent by Chairman
Martin to Senator Gore on July 8, 1957, copies
of which were also sent to Secretary of the
Treasury Humphrey and Under Secretary Burgess,
read as follows:
"This is in response to your letter of July 1, 1957 re
questing information concerning transactions in Government
securities on behalf of the Federal Open Market Committee
consummated during the week ending June 26, 1957. In accord
ance with the provisions of the Committee's by-laws and its
Rules on Procedure, I have taken up this request with the
Federal Open Market Committee which has authorized me to make
available to you the information asked.
"The accompanying memorandum includes a statement of out
right sales and purchases each day showing the issue bought
or sold and the price received or paid. It also covers U. S.
securities bought and sold during the week under repurchase
agreements. The totals account for the week-to-week changes
shown in the published Statement of Condition of the Federal
Reserve Banks as of June 26, 1957. The figures do not in
clude such purchases or sales as may have been effectuated
through the Federal Reserve Banks acting as agents for other
principals, i.e., the execution of orders on behalf of the
U. S. Treasury, foreign central banks or governments, inter
national institutions, or member banks.
"I appreciate your understanding that this information
in the detailed form shown in the memorandum is not normally
made public."
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York covering open market operations during the period June 18 through
July 2, 1957, as well as a supplementary report covering commitments
executed July 3 through July 8, 1957. Copies of both reports have
been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee,

7/9/57
-4-
Mr. Rouse reported that the Account Management had been rather
fortunate in scheduling operations during the period since the June 18
Committee meeting. A reasonably tight money market had been maintained
throughout, in spite of difficulties imposed by wide swings in reserve
positions and other potentially disturbing factors in the money and
securities markets. As discussed at the last meeting, the corporate,
municipal, and Government securities markets were then being rather
severely wrenched, and the situation appeared to be developing somewhat
as it did in the spring of 1953. Since that time, however, these markets
have been experiencing something of a rally. At the time of the last
meeting, an AAA-rated telephone issue had just reached the market at a
reoffering yield of 4. 85 per cent, marking a further upward step in the
rapid yield adjustments then taking place. That offering, which included
a nonrefundable-for-five-years clause, proved to be successful, as the
reflex action of the market following sharp adjustments over previous
weeks resulted in a rapid distribution of that and other new corporate
issues over the period, with prices subsequently moving higher in the
secondary market.
Municipal offerings have been rather light since the last
meeting, but the experience in that sector of the market has been
rather similar. The improved atmosphere in the corporate and municipal
markets, in turn, was an important factor in the moderate recovery of
Government security prices. However, special influences on the Govern
ment market, including in the short-term area a reinvestment demand by

7/9/57 -5
holders of the tax anticipation obligations maturing on June 24,
were also partly responsible for the improved tone in the Government
securities market since the last meeting.
All in all, Mr. Rouse commented, the atmosphere throughout
the securities markets now seemed definitely better despite the fact
that the money market had remained tight and reserve positions had
been under greater pressure.
The period since the June 18 meeting has included the successful
$3 billion offering of March tax anticipation bills and the July 3 pay
ment date, prior to which there was considerable when-issued distribution
by the banks. In the absence of serious strain in the money market up
to that time, operations to provide reserves in connection with that
operation could be deferred until the payment date itself. At that
time, the Account Management was able to handle the situation largely
through sizable repurchase agreements.
Mr. Rouse indicated that revised projections now suggest that
reserve positions may turn relatively easy before the forthcoming
Treasury refunding, for which an announcement is expected on July 18
and 19. Earlier projections had indicated a much tighter reserve
position this week and in the weeks following, justifying the provision
of a substantial volume of funds through repurchase agreements and
through outright purchases. Since the reserve outlook had been modified
by the new projections (those of the staffs of the New York Bank and of
the Board of Governors are reasonably close), a commitment was made

7/9/57 -6
yesterday to run off the System's holdings of bills maturing this
week, and market conditions may make it possible to sell additional
bills through the midmonth period to counter the usual float expansion
at that time. The reserve projections still suggest tightness for the
remainder of this statement week, but then some easing, at least in
the sense of lower net borrowed reserves.
In conclusion, Mr. Rouse remarked that one feature of the
recent period had been heavy member bank borrowing at the start of
each statement week. This was particularly marked just before the
midyear statement date, but it was also true again at the start of
the current week. Overborrowing in New York and elsewhere subsequently
contributed to a greater availability of Federal funds in the market
after the calendar weekend, helping to take the sting out of the
tightness indicated by the daily reserve data.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period June 18
through July 8, 1957, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Chairman Martin called upon Mr. Koch for a statement on the
economic situation, supplementary to the information contained in the
staff memorandum distributed under date of July 5, 1957. Mr. Koch's
statement was as follows:
At mid-year, over-all economic activity is being main
tained at about the high level of the past winter. Downward
adjustments have been going on in a number of lines but the

7/9/57
areas of weakness have not widened significantly and upward
adjustments have been taking place in other areas.
The general sidewise movement is similar to the trend
of business during the first half of last year. In 1956,
easing tendencies through July were followed by strong ex
pansion later in the year. A like course of events is widely
anticipated in business and financial circles today.
Aside from the recent steel price increase, price changes,
the most direct measure of demand pressures, have continued
small and generally offsetting in the case of industrial
commodities. The steel price rise is estimated at slightly
more than 4 per cent for all steel mill products. Altogether
since mid-1955 the price of steel has gone up 25 per cent
compared with a rise of 8-1/2 per cent for all commodities
other than farm products and food.
Among farm products meat prices have continued strong in
recent weeks. Over-all consumer prices advanced further in
May owing mainly to higher food prices, and another increase
seems likely for June. Government spokesmen, however, have
recently stated that they expect the index to level off by
August, presumably in large part because of the seasonal
topping off in food prices by that time.
Turning to the over-all measure of economic activity,
the gross national product, the growth from the first to the
second quarter of the year may have been at a seasonally ad
justed annual rate of $4-5 billion rather than the $3 billion
anticipated earlier. This larger estimated growth is due
partly to the fact that it now appears likely that the moderate
rate of inventory liquidation of the first quarter may have
been replaced by slight accumulation. In terms of book value,
total business inventories seasonally adjusted rose about
$400 million in May, slightly more than April. Total business
sales also rose slightly in May as contrasted to small de
clines in the previous three months.
Despite a possible turn-around in the inventory situation
from liquidation to slight accumulation, the Board's seasonally
adjusted index of industrial production may have edged off some
what further since May, reflecting among other influences more
extensive vacation curtailment than usual in some lines. Steel
mill operations, which were up to 88 per cent of capacity in
early June, subsequently fell below these higher schedules and
for the month as a whole averaged 86 per cent, about unchanged
from May. There was a notable lack of extensive forward buying
in anticipation of the steel price increase posted July 1.
Thus far in July steel production has declined seasonally to
about 79 per cent of capacity.

7/9/57 -8-
Automobile assemblies were up more than seasonally in
June, though not as much as scheduled at the beginning of
the month. Tentative production schedules for the third
quarter have been revised upward to almost 1.3 million cars,
or more than a fifth above a year ago.
One of the strong factors in the current review of
economic developments is construction. Outlays on residential
building increased in June, the first rise in seven months.
Total construction contracts rose sharply in May--the last
month for which these data are available. In the first five
months of the year, contracts were 10 per cent above a year
ago. One of the current disturbing elements in construction
is the renewed rise in construction costs after six months
of relative stability.
Another factor of potential strength in the current situa
tion is the rise in new orders of durable goods manufacturers
that occurred in May. This was the first rise since November
last year. Moreover, it was widely distributed among all major
groups of producers except those of primary metals. May new
orders remained below the rate of sales, however, indicating
some further decline in unfilled orders.
In the labor market average weekly hours worked in manu
facturing increased slightly in June following several months
of decline. In nonmanufacturing, as in manufacturing industries,
hours of work have been somewhat lower this spring than a year
earlier. There were increases in the number employed as well
as unemployed in June but the changes were mainly seasonal and
due to the usual influx of students to the labor market in the
summer months. Unemployment claims declined seasonally but re
mained slightly higher than a year ago.
In the field of consumer credit, outstanding instalment
credit has been expanding at a seasonally adjusted rate at
about $200 million a month since the third quarter of last year.
Personal loans and automobile credit have accounted for most
of the increase. A noteworthy development in the consumer
credit field recently is the fact that the proportion of 36
month contracts on new cars has been increasing steadily this
year, but there has been no tendency for maturities longer than
that to rise.
Finally, economic activity abroad remains buoyant with
further expansion in Britain and Germany. In most other
countries strong inflationary pressures continue to be felt.
Recently, France, Japan, and several other countries adopted
additional measures to restrain demand.

-9-
Mr. Thomas next made a statement on recent credit develop
ments, substantially as follows:
Notwithstanding adjustments in various areas, views as
to the future generally continue more confident than cau
tious. Inflationary pressures are still being felt. The
cost-price push, which is a manifestation of inflation as
well as a contributor to the spiral, is still in evidence.
At the same time the cost-price-profit squeeze, which might
be relied upon to check the inflationary spiral, does not
appear to be developing.
Financial markets, which appeared to be on the verge
of a crisis for various reasons at the time of the last
meeting of this Committee, have shown surprising stability
and strength during the past two weeks. Banks extended a
record-breaking volume of loans during the tax payment
period; an exceptionally large volume of new corporate
bond issues has been floated with unexpected success; the
Treasury has sold a $3 billion issue of March tax notes,
which are being absorbed by the market without undue pres
sure; and the early July enlargement of member bank reserve
needs has turned out to be less than expected and has been
adequately covered by System operations. Bond yields and
interest rates have levelled out and in fact declined
somewhat after reaching new peaks. The ominous speculative
upward spurt in the stock prices was followed by a down
ward reaction, but more recently the rise has been resumed,
and a new high average for this year was reached yesterday.
Although moderation has continued to charactarize
changes in total loans and investments of banks and in the
money supply, which are the credit elements directly af
fected by Federal Reserve policies, it can not be said
that credit availability has been unduly restricted.
Corporate capital issues have been in record volume;
state and local government indebtedness continues to in
crease at a substantial pace; increases in consumer in
debtedness and in mortgage credit, although slower than
the record of 1955, continue at rates of around 8 per
cent a year, which could hardly be sustained indefinitely.
The Federal Treasury is finding it necessary to borrow
more than it did last year owing in part to a smaller
surplus and in part to more cash redemption of outstanding
issues.
The Treasury surplus both for the fiscal year as a
whole and for the last six months was somewhat less than

-10-
had been previously expected, owing primarily to increased
expenditures. In addition redemptions of savings bonds
have been quite large and promise to continue so, even
though maturities of F and G bonds will not be as large as
in May and June. Unless attrition on the August maturing
issues is unusually small, the Treasury will probably need
to borrow again early in September. There is question
whether the $275 billion debt limit will be large enough
to permit all borrowing that is likely to be needed before
the season of large tax returns early in 1958.
The increase in bank loans during the June tax-payment
period was larger than in March and than in June, last year,
notwithstanding a somewhat smaller corporate tax liability.
Nearly all business increased their borrowings, but the big
gest change from a year ago was this June's large increase
in finance company loans at banks, compared with a decrease
in the same month last year. Tendencies noted during recent
months for the increase in loans and the decrease in bank
holdings of Government securities each to be less than in
the previous year were reversed in June. The decrease in
holdings of Governments reflected substantial bank holdings
of the tax anticipation securities retired in June. Bank
subscription for the new tax bill, for which payment was
made on July 3, however, will probably more than wipe out
the decrease in bank holdings of Governments during the
preceding weeks. Unless a marked loan contraction follows
along with reduction in the newly created tax and loan
accounts, bank credit expansion will be excessive. Last
week's figures for New York show considerable reduction in
loans.
As measured by changes in privately owned deposits and
currency, the money supply has conformed closely to the cus
tomary seasonal pattern during most of this year. Needed
reserves have been supplied in part by System open market
operations and in part by member bank borrowing. There are
indications that some of the borrowing by member banks may
not be as restraining as might be desired. Some banks in a
few of the reserve cities continue to be rather heavy steady
borrowers, and there has been an increase in the amount of
such borrowing in recent weeks, as well as in the volume of
in-and-out borrowing at the Reserve Banks. Because of the
volume of willing borrowing, System purchases, until the
last few days, were somewhat smaller than it had been thought
would be needed.
The stabilizing of money rate; and in fact some decline
in yields, is an indication that the recent volume of member
bank borrowing has not been as restraining as might have been

7/9/57 -11-
expected. To some extent, no doubt, the settling down of
money rates reflects the effect of the higher rates in at
tracting funds to the market. The large redemptions of
savings bonds are probably an indication of the tendency
to shift holdings and help to account for the improvement
in the corporate bond market in the face of heavy new
issues.
Estimates of future reserve needs, based on customary
seasonal factors and expected changes in Treasury deposit
balances, indicate that measures to meet the early July
squeeze have been fully adequate. In fact, it appears
likely that without reverse action restraints during July
and August might be insufficient in the view of the current
credit demands and the apparent willingness of many banks
to borrow to cover their needs. To maintain member bank
borrowing at a restraining level--probably at least $1
billion--System sales of $200 or $300 million of securities
will be appropriate next week. If credit demands show a
tendency to expand beyond normal seasonal amounts, a dis
count rate increase would be in order. In view of the
prevailing tone of confidence in the economy, consideration
might be given to the advisability of raising discount rates,
at least in districts where steady borrowing has been evi
dent, or of establishing a penalty rate on such borrowing,
as a precautionary measure to forestall anticipatory borrow
ing by bank customers.
Mr. Hayes then presented his views on the business and credit
situation, and his suggestions as to the credit policy that should be
followed. His statement follows:
As was true three weeks ago, we are still confronted
with a generally strong business situation, but one which
is moving sideways and which gives no clear evidence as to
the trend to be expected in the latter part of the year.
While the steel price rise is unquestionably disturbing,
it remains to be seen to what extent resistance to higher
prices by consumers and business may check the spread of
price increases for many metal products which would
normally tend to result from the increase in steel prices.
A further element of uncertainty has to do with future
inventory policy. Will the cautious policy of the past
six months be encouraged by price resistance or perhaps
by the rising trend of interest rates, or will it give
way to a new wave of heavy buying in the belief that
additional price rises are inevitable?

7/9/57 -12-.
Borrowing from banks in the June tax period was con
siderably larger than had been expected and seemed to con
firm earlier evidence of a sharp decline in the liquidity
of corporations as a whole over the last year or so. Some
satisfaction is to be found in the fact that total loans
and investments increased less rapidly in the three weeks
ending June 26 than in the corresponding period of 1956.
Preliminary figures on income velocity of money for the
second quarter of 1957 provide additional evidence that
credit restraint is proving effective. These figures
indicate that income velocity failed to increase appre
ciably for the first time in nearly three years, during
most of which period velocity has scored substantial gains,
thus offsetting much of the restraining effect of a
relatively stable money supply.
The continuing threat of inflation, whether defined as
"cost-push" inflation or as any other variety, clearly calls
for maintenance of a policy of restraint. On the other
hand, current business and credit conditions do not, in my
view, justify increasing the present degree of tightness-
and our responsibilities to the Treasury lend strong sup
port to this conclusion. With the terms for refunding the
large August maturities due to be announced within ten days,
one of our major objectives should be to preserve as steady
an atmosphere as possible to facilitate this financing with
out of course attempting in any way to establish an artificial
interest rate level. At the last meeting it was agreed that
the Manager of the Account should have ample leeway to exer
cise his judgment rather than to be tied to a specific target
of net borrowed reserves. This leeway turned out to be use
ful, as it has been possible recently to maintain a constant
degree of restraint while allowing net borrowed reserves to
average well above the $500 million mark we had looked upon
as more or less a norm. By the same token I think the
Manager should be free to adjust to the feel of the market
in the next three weeks and should not consider himself
obliged necessarily to offset temporary availability of
reserves attributable to market factors such as float.
Rumors of impending changes in the discount rate and
in the prime rate have been a disturbing element in the
market at a time when success of the coming Treasury refund
ing hinges to a considerable extent on market expectations
in relation to the rates set by the Treasury. It could
therefore be argued that an immediate rise in the discount
rate, which would dispel these uncertainties in large part,
would be beneficial to the Treasury's program. I find it

7/9/57 -13
hard to accept this argument, since it is more than possible
that action of this kind, instead of "clearing the air"
would merely set off a series of new increases in short-term
market rates which would leave the Treasury in no better
position to compete with other demands for funds. Moreover,
there would seem to be much merit in trying to maintain
something like the present spread between short and long
term rates to lend impetus to whatever modest funding the
Treasury might attempt to accomplish at this time--perhaps
encouraged by the tendency of longer term rates to find at
least temporary stability. Finally, and more importantly,
just as I see no justification in the business situation
for appreciably greater restraint through open market opera
tions, I also believe that a higher discount rate is not
warranted by the present economic outlook, nor is there,
it seems to me, such a wide spread between the discount rate
and market rates that the discount windows of the Reserve
Banks are in grave danger of abuse. I would therefore be
opposed to a discount rate change at this time.
Mr. Irons commented briefly on the national situation, summing
up his remarks with a statement that high levels of activity were being
maintained as a net of offsetting movements in individual areas. In
the Eleventh District, the over-all picture was substantially similar
to the national picture, he said, with high-level activity continuing
without much change from the situation reported three weeks ago. De
partment store sales recently had picked up and construction was strong,
while there had been some further decline in the petroleum industry.
Automobile sales on a cumulative basis this year were running 10-12 per
cent ahead of a year ago. The agricultural outlook, particularly as to
cotton, was very favorable in terms of crop production. Bank reserve
positions were not under great pressure except perhaps at two or three
banks, although borrowing at the Reserve Bank recently had increased
a little.

7/9/57 -14.
Mr. Irons felt that inflationary forces and the high-level
economic activity continued to call for restraint at least of the
degree that had existed during the past three weeks. The Treasury
refunding was a factor, and the Manager of the System Account should
have considerable leeway and should be watchful of the Government
securities market. While Mr. Irons would favor maintaining as strong
a degree of restraint as consistently could be maintained in the light
of the situation in the Government securities market, he would not
favor an increase in the discount rate at this time nor would he favor
a change in the Committee's directive.
Mr. Mangels said that the Twelfth District situation had not
changed markedly in the past three weeks. Some of the savings and loan
associations had increased dividend rates to 4 per cent and he antici
pated that during the next few months banks would discover whether the
gain in their savings deposits during the first half of this year would
be retained. Discontinuance of overtime work at aircraft plants in
Southern California had had important effects on payrolls for large
numbers of employees; it was estimated that this factor would reduce
Southern California payrolls by $75 to $125 million a year. The
Pacific Northwest continued to reflect the unfavorable situation in
the lumber industry. Some reports indicated that collections were
slowing although delinquencies were not yet particularly high. The
agricultural outlook was fairly good with normal pea and wheat crops
expected in the Pacific Northwest. Over-all employment had been

7/9/57 -15
maintained at a satisfactory level and department store and automobile
sales were holding at the level of recent months. The housing surplus
that had existed in Southern California and Oregon was being worked off
and by the year-end the situation might again indicate a need for con
struction of substantial numbers of housing units. Twelfth District
banks reported that corporate tax borrowings in June had not been as
large as anticipated. Bank borrowings had been quite high and banks
were buying more funds than they were selling in the Federal market.
The pressure that had been maintained seemed to Mr. Mangels
to be about as great as it should be. He felt that the Committee
should continue about the degree of pressure that had existed recently
but that it should not make it more intense. The Manager of the Account
should have considerable leeway during the period immediately ahead.
Mr. Mangels would make no change in the discount rate at this time, but
he noted many rumors about a change in the prime rate and suggested
that if the prime rate should increase, the System would be compelled
immediately to take some action on the discount rate. If commercial
banks initiated an increase in the prime rate, considerable sting
would be taken out of a discount rate increase, but in the absence of
some such development, Mr. Mangels would not now recommend an increase
in the discount rate.
Mr. Deming said that Ninth District conditions tracked those
of the nation. The farm situation was favorable, although there had
been too much rain in some areas. Business sentiment was still

7/9/57 -16
generally cautiously favorable, and loan demand was strong. Some of
the directors of the Minneapolis Bank were thinking in terms of an
increase in the discount rate, Mr. Deming said, but his personal
feeling was that this would not be the time to change that rate,
primarily because of the Treasury financing situation. However, open
market operations should be continued about as they have been recently.
Mr. Allen said that business sentiment appeared to remain
optimistic, perhaps cast in terms of an expected continuation of the
recent high level of activity rather than any vigorous rise from the
present level. Construction employment in the Seventh District showed
a gain over a year ago. Farmers were doing better. Motor car manu
facturers were in good spirits. The used car situation seemed to be
in excellent shape. Automobile dealers as a group were making pretty
good money this year, and the manufacturers still expected to turn out
1,300,000 cars during the current quarter, compared with a million in
the third quarter a year ago.
As to monetary policy, Mr. Allen said that in view of the con
tinuing high level of economic activity and the optimistic sentiment
which he felt prevailed, he had nothing to suggest other than con
tinuance of the restraint that the Committee had practiced for some
time now. He occasionally had nostalgic longings for the days when
it seemed appropriate to use the discount rate and reserve require
ments as instruments of monetary policy, rather than to have constant
concern with and operations in the bill market, but he did not at this

7/9/57 -17
time advocate use of either of those so-called "blunt" tools. He
suggested that the Open Market Committee should continue about as
it had been doing, at least until the next meeting.
Mr. Leedy stated that rains had persisted in the Tenth District
during recent weeks and had interfered with threshing with some result
ant losses of wheat. The rains had benefited growing corn and other
crops, and improved pasture conditions had contributed to considerable
strength in the cattle market, particularly for stockers and feeders.
Nonagricultural employment was up slightly as a result of increases at
aircraft plants and in defense work. Residential and nonresidential
construction were down slightly. Retail sales had barely held their
own since the first of this year, although recently there had been
some indication of an upturn. The Tenth District shared with the rest
of the country the substantial increase in business loans over the
June tax period, he said, although since the first of this year there
had been less growth in Tenth District business loans than in the rest
of the country and they were running at about the same level as a year
ago. Borrowings from the Reserve Bank had increased lately largely
from reserve city banks which had lost deposits, especially those of
country correspondents. Mr. Leedy said that he had observed little
reluctance on the part of many banks to borrow.
For the period immediately ahead and until the Treasury refund
ing was out of the way, Mr. Leedy said that he would continue the pro
gram that had been followed by the Committee during the past three weeks.

7/9/57 -18
However, he felt that when the refunding was out of the way the
System should attempt to do something more than it has done in
applying pressure. He was impressed with the performance of the
capital and securities markets during recent weeks and with the
strength shown during a period of a substantial financing by the
Treasury. These provided evidence of great underlying strength
which perhaps called for more pressure than the Committee had been
applying. Mr. Leedy said he would not favor an increase in the
discount rate immediately, but he wondered whether it might be de
sirable to let borrowed reserves creep up further. He noted that
earlier this year there was a feeling that net borrowed reserves of
about a half billion dollars might give suitable pressure, but perhaps
we had found out that borrowed reserves might go much higher without
producing results that were unwelcome. Similarly, he wondered whether
the figure of around a billion dollars of member bank borrowings might
be too low. He felt that when the Committee was in position to do so,
it might undertake to test how far the figures of net borrowed reserves
and member banks borrowings might go without producing unwanted results.
Mr. Leach said that the principal piece of economic news in the
Fifth District was the failure of the slight improvement in the cotton
textile industry to be sustained. Sales were again largely on a spot
basis. Furniture production was continuing at a lower level, and there
were no indications of an immediate improvement. Somewhat more optimistic
signs were, however, apparent in other leading district industries.

7/9/57 -19
Bituminous coal output and shipments were running higher than a year
ago. The lumber industry reported increased orders. Cigarette pro
duction also was above a year ago, and both shipbuilding and aircraft
continued to evidence marked strength.
Mr. Leach said that preliminary reports from automobile dealers
indicated no improvement in new car sales during June, with sales con
tinuing below expectations. There was no evidence of further relaxation
of credit terms for automobiles.
In the Fifth District, as in the country as a whole, there was
a large temporary increase in borrowings from the Reserve Bank for
several days near the end of June. Daily average borrowings for June
totaled slightly less than in May, and there was no indication that
member banks were taking advantage of the spread between the discount
rate and other short-term rates.
Mr. Leach felt that in determining Committee policy, it was
incumbent on the System to be as restrictive as it could be without
causing a downturn in the economy or a disorderly Government securities
market. This would be a difficult objective to attain even if the
Treasury financing were not in the picture, he noted, and the refund
ing now facing the Treasury was unusually large. Mr. Leach felt that
the Committee should follow an even keel policy until the refunding
was over. That is, it should endeavor to maintain the same degree of
pressure that we had been achieving in recent weeks. The Manager of
the System Account should be instructed to give even more consideration

7/9/57 -20
to the feel of the market than in periods when no Treasury financing
was in the offing. This did not mean, Mr. Leach said, that open
market policy should be subordinated to the needs of the Treasury,
but it recognized that the Committee had an inescapable obligation
to the Treasury with respect to the timing of its actions. Considera
tion of further tightening in policy, which in Mr. Leach's opinion
should initially take the form of an increase in the discount rate,
must await completion of the refunding. Noting that demand for loans
in the Fifth District continues strong, Mr. Leach suggested that after
the summer doldrums are past and when the Treasury financing is out of
the way, serious consideration should be given to increasing the dis
count rate.
Mr. Vardaman said that, speaking for the three weeks that would
intervene between now and the next meeting of the Committee, he would
continue the present wording of the Committee directive, would continue
the present policy of restraint without any increase in it, and would
even lean toward the side of less restraint. He would not vote at this
time for an increase in the discount rate.
Mr. Mills said that the economic conditions that had been
described to the Committee this morning and the movements in the
securities market confirmed, in his judgment, the desirability of
continuing a firm policy of credit restraint. The degree of credit
restraint that he would conceive and that he would believe to be
attainable would be to continue to endeavor to have the 3 per cent

7/9/57 -21
discount rate not only effective as reflected in the interest rate
structure, but also foreshadowing to the investment community the
possibility of an increase in the discount rate at a not far distant
date. A policy of that sort presumably would be such as to compel a
continued divestment from the commercial banks of their holdings of
the March 1958 special Treasury tax anticipation bills and their re
distribution to other classes of investors in a manner that would have
the effect of freeing reserves at the commercial banks. If that were
done the banks would be in a position to supply reserves needed to
support the seasonal demands for credit without the necessity for the
System to supply new reserves that could produce an abundance of
reserves. Mr. Mills felt it essential that the reserve pressures be
applied in a manner that, if possible, would achieve this purpose.
If the pressures were applied too severely and if reserves were not
freed to the banks as they divested themselves of their Treasury bills,
the effect might be to invite a far higher amount of attrition on the
August Treasury refunding than would be desirable. If this policy
objective could be attained, Mr. Mills said that he would judge that
as a sequel to the Treasury refunding, and assuming that economic
conditions at that time had the life and optimism they now have, an
increase in the discount rate would be in order. He felt very strongly
that such an increase should have been made over the last five or six
weeks but that it would be impossible to make it under the present
conditions.

7/9/57 -22-
Mr. Robertson said that he thought there could be no doubt
that the biggest problem facing the country today was the inflationary
pressure. Hindsight was much better than foresight, of course, but
he did not feel the System had been as restrictive as it should have
been. At this moment he did not see what could be done other than to
maintain the degree of restrictiveness that the Committee had tried
to maintain in recent weeks and to hope that the cumulative effects
of that policy would increase. Mr. Robertson felt that Mr. Mills was
correct in saying that the discount rate should have been raised earlier but
he did not see how such action could be taken now. He agreed with
Mr. Leach that the matter should be considered in August. He hoped
that the Committee could do something to evidence its intent to stop
the economic inflationary spiral before it got out of hand. He would
not permit any ease to come into the picture during the next few weeks
and would not attempt to offset the effects of changes in float that
caused an increase in tightness nor would he attempt to offset such
effects on the side of ease. Over the next three weeks, Mr. Robertson
hoped that the System Account would do everything possible to tighten
the situation in the hope that when the Treasury refunding was out of
the way an increase in restraint would be brought about.
Mr. Shepardson expressed the view that the country was very
definitely confronted with the problem of inflation. The present side
wise movement, as Mr. Hayes had expressed it, presented a situation of
seasonal summer slack, but there was every evidence of confidence and

7/9/57 -23
optimism that would make for an upswing in the fall. If the Com
mittee were to wait until this upswing gained momentum, far more
drastic action would be required to cope with the situation than
if action were taken before the rise. Mr. Shepardson noted that
discussions often suggested that the time was not opportune to
take a given action. He recognized that there were problems con
nected with the forthcoming Treasury financing, but he wondered
whether the Treasury might not be in a better position to face its
problems if the System took action promptly on the discount rate
and thus "cleared the air," rather than to have uncertainty and
speculation as to when an increase might occur. Mr. Shepardson
said that he did not believe the Committee could afford any easing,
advertent or inadvertent, during the next few weeks. Personally, he
would much prefer to see the situation tightened. He felt that now
was the time to increase the pressure in order to avoid setting up
conditions that would allow the fall boom to get under way. His
inclination would be to take action more restrictively than the
Committee had taken up to the present time.
Mr. Fulton said that the Fourth District picture was about
the same as three weeks ago: high-level activity, with some weaknesses
accompanied by other evidences of strength. Businessmen seemingly were
optimistic for the future, allowing for some seasonal adjustments
during the next few weeks because of the heat and vacations. The fall
months were expected to bring a high order of business. With reference

7/9/57 -24
to the machine tool industry, Mr. Fulton pointed out that although
new orders are running about 50 per cent of last year, men in the
industry felt that 1957 would be a good business year. About $600
to $700 million of new orders for machine tools are anticipated,
while shipments during the year would total around $900 million,
reducing the backlog. Their views on the profit outlook were much
more optimistic than those of the statisticians. Mr. Fulton reported
that employment in the district was good and, while department store
sales in June were down about 4 per cent from a year ago, for the year
to date they were about even. Discussions with businessmen indicated
that about two-thirds of them anticipated increases in prices up to
10 per cent within the near future; about 20 per cent indicated they
would not increase prices because they had already done so; and very
few indicated any expectation of reductions in prices.
Loan demand continued large in the Fourth District, Mr. Fulton
reported, and delinquencies remained low. Banks were borrowing heavily
at the Reserve Bank despite discussions with bankers who seemed to have
no reluctance to show borrowings in their statement, Mr. Fulton stated
that he agreed completely with the views expressed by Mr. Shepardson.
The Committee should give no indication of easing but should maintain
firm restraint during the next few weeks, and in August the Federal
Reserve should give serious consideration to a change in the discount
rate.
Mr. Williams indicated that changes in the Philadelphia
District's economy in recent weeks had been minor. He reported

7/9/57 -25
discussions at a recent meeting of licensed small loan companies,
all of whom made it clear that they were feeling the effects of
the tight money policy. They were paying higher rates both on bank
lines and for money market funds and were finding that banks and in
vestors were not eager to extend lines or to increase the funds made
available for consumer financing. The smaller independent finance
companies reported they could now find very few country banks with
any loanable fund capacity, whereas last fall they were able to get
lines of credit from smaller banks in units as low as $25,000. Mr.
Williams also stated that the loan companies had observed the new de
vice used by one of the large finance companies whereby the investor
could select his own maturities for the debentures the company was
selling, adding that other large companies which financed through the
open market planned to follow this procedure with interest.
Mr. Williams went on to say that the chief banking development
recently was the increase in borrowing from the Philadelphia Reserve
Bank, an increase that was large both in amount and in relation to
total borrowing from all Reserve Banks. Part of the increase was
seasonal, but discussions with bankers indicated that they now antici
pated no diminution in demands upon them. On the contrary, rising
demands were expected. Under these conditions, consideration had been
given to increasing the discount rate at the Philadelphia Bank, Mr.
Williams said, so as to establish a differential between the rate at

7/9/57 -26
that Bank and other Reserve Banks. The decision, however, was not
to make such an increase because (1) a higher rate did not seem
warranted by national developments; (2) a higher rate at Philadelphia
would create uncertainty in money and capital markets already in
delicate balance; (3) the added uncertainty would be prejudicial to
prospective Treasury financing; (4) the borrowing at the Philadelphia
Reserve Bank was concentrated in a few institutions. As a consequence,
Mr. Williams said that the decision was to deal with the problem
through firmer administration at the discount window. In his view,
firmer credit restraint might be coming and the System should be
getting mentally adjusted to that possibility, but he did not think
the present was a propitious time for such action.
Mr. Bryan said that the Sixth District condition was one of
boom, the only exception being in the textile industry where there
were some signs of stability. Minor reductions in lumber and steel
output had been counterbalanced by other gains. Consumer spending
had great strength. Bank debits were high and department store sales
were strong in June. Mr. Bryan said that he had not recommended an
increase in the discount rate to the directors of the Atlanta Bank,
chiefly because of the almost unanimous opinion expressed in a recent
open market meeting that such action would be unwise. However, in
his view an increase in the rate should be made and there might now
be a few days when that could be done. He agreed with practically

7/9/57 -27
everything Messrs. Mills, Robertson, and Shepardson had said although
he perhaps went a little further than some of their comments.
While there was apparent stability in the current situation,
Mr. Bryan said that the System would have to supply a great amount of
reserves during the remainder of this year to take care of seasonal
borrowings and Treasury needs. With the traditional signals calling
for an increase in discount rate, failure to make such an increase
would inject into the capital markets an element of uncertainty that
could be expected to increase attrition and cause difficulty. Mr.
Bryan stated that he was keenly alive to the responsibility of the
Federal Reserve to the Treasury, but he wished to raise a question as
to how that responsibility could best be discharged. If the inflation
continued, the Treasury would be maneuvered into the classical pattern
of a Government whose expenses were increasing faster than revenues.
An attempt to assist the Government through easing its financing
problems would only add to the difficulties. Mr. Bryan felt that the
System should do nothing that would encourage the issuance of Govern
ment securities that would promptly go to a discount in the market.
He suggested that the argument that the discount rate should not be
raised now but that it might be increased in August was, in effect, one
for supplying reserves through open market to help a Treasury issue
go over at a rate, and shortly thereafter signaling the market for
an increase in the rate that would cause the Treasury issue to show a
loss to investors. Mr. Bryan suggested that this had happened on

7/9/57 -28
several occasions; he did not think the Committee should risk a
repetition.
Mr. Johns indicated that Eighth District conditions did not
differ materially from the general picture described for the nation
as a whole. District banks did not seem to be under great pressure,
and discounts at the Reserve Bank were nominal. Notwithstanding the
apparent ease of district banks, Mr. Johns reported some indications
that corporations were doing anticipatory borrowing for seasonal and
other future needs, although he did not think the banks were rushing
to accommodate such borrowers. Mr. Johns stated that he did not con
template recommending to the directors of the St. Louis Bank a change
in the discount rate at this time, although this did not imply what
hiw view might be three weeks hence. He would not favor any relaxation
of pressure at present by the Open Market Committee or otherwise. He
would not resolve doubts on the side of relaxation but would try to
maintain an even keel for the next three weeks.
Mr. Szymczak referred to the memorandum prepared at the New
York Bank under date of July 3, 1957 regarding relations between the
System and the Treasury, stating that this memorandum indicated the
difficulties that the New York Bank had in carrying on operations at
the same time for the Treasury and for the Open Market Committee.
This presented a difficult problem for the Manager of the System Open
Market Account. Mr. Szymczak expressed the view that the economy was
now at a high level and all indications were that it would continue at

7/9/57 -29
a high level. However, he felt there was nothing that the Committee
could do at this time other than to pursue the policy that it had been
following during the past three weeks. If an opportunity presented
itself to do something about the discount rate, it would be desirable
to discuss the matter with the Treasury. His recommendation for the
present would be to continue the program that the Open Market Committee
has been following in recent weeks but to watch the situation carefully.
Mr. Balderston said that he had been taught that monetary policy
faced the ultimate dilemma when we had rising prices on the one hand and
rising unemployment on the other, It seemed to him clear that we were
moving up a canyon with ever-rising walls and without the benefit of
significant support from fiscal policy such as we had last year. Mr.
Balderston said that he was concerned because the escalator clauses in
certain manufacturing industries were giving rise to wage advances that
were spreading out through the service industries. He was concerned at
the moment not only with continuing plant expansion but with the heavy
demand upon commercial banks which signified to him that inventory
reduction may have ceased, and that short- and intermediate-term money
was continuing to be used for long-term purposes. He felt that the
System and the commercial banks had been complacent. The 1 per cent
increase in the money supply over last year in which we took comfort
had been negated in large part by increased velocity of demand deposits.
This brought him to the question for which he had not found the answer.
He liked the way in which the Desk had handled its problems during the

7/9/57 -30
last three weeks which had resulted in quite appropriate pressure.
He disliked the fact that we might have an increase in the prime
rate which would catch us without our own guns being cocked. If
an increase in the prime rate were to come shortly, he felt that
the System should respond almost immediately. In commenting further
on this possibility, he suggested that if one or more Reserve Banks
found themselves ready to recommend an increase in the discount rate,
such recommendation might be laid before the Board of Governors
hoping, of course, that no such recommendation would leak. The Board
would then have something before it on which action could be taken
if that seemed important. Because of the scheduling of the Treasury's
financing, there was not much time in which to take action on the
discount rate. If, however, the System were to delay for long after
a rise in the prime rate it would seem as though it were abdicating
its responsibilities.
In response to a question from Mr. Bryan as to whether it
would be preferable for the commercial banks to take action on the
prime rate first or for the Federal Reserve Banks to take leadership
by changing the discount rate, Mr. Balderston stated that under
existing circumstances he would prefer that the commercial banks act
first.
Mr. Shepardson stated that he would take a view opposite that
expressed by Mr. Balderston, adding that Mr. Bryan had expressed
effectively his feelings as to why the System should not be in the

7/9/57 -31
position of tightening the market immediately after a Treasury
financing.
Mr. Szymczak interjected that the System did not operate
in a vacuum, and that an ideal policy from all standpoints is not
always possible. In the current circumstances, the Treasury's needs
must be considered.
Mr. Hayes also referred to the comments Mr. Bryan had made,
stating that he did not believe that the material gathered in the
memorandum of July 3, 1957,on relations with the Treasury supported the
contention that regularly or quite often the System had misled the
Treasury by following one policy before and a different policy im
mediately after a Treasury financing. He also said that he felt that
rates in the market were the major factor that influenced the Treasury
in pricing its securities. Reflecting the recent rise in rates, the
Treasury officials were quite aware that they had to price the securi
ties in the forthcoming refunding much more attractively than on the
recent refunding, Mr. Hayes said, and he doubted that a movement of
the discount rate would be a crucial factor in the Treasury's pricing
problem. Rather, an increase in the discount rate would signify a
strong feeling on the part of the Federal Reserve that general credit
policy should be considerably tighter than it has been. If this were
not the intent, he would think an increase in the rate would be quite
inappropriate at this time. Mr. Hayes said that his feeling was that
sufficient doubt existed as to the economic justification for an

7/9/57-3
increase in the discount rate so that he would prefer to see the com
mercial banks take the lead in a change in rates, as Mr. Balderston
had indicated.
Chairman Martin stated that he had in mind placing on the
agenda for consideration at the next meeting of the Committee the
memorandum distributed with Mr. Rouse's letter of July 3, 1957,re
garding relations between the Federal Reserve and the Treasury. He
felt that there were many facets to that document and that it would
not be profitable to get into a discussion of its content at this
meeting since some of those present had not had adequate opportunity
to study the material.
Chairman Martin then commented that the Committee today had
had a repeat performance of the preceding meeting, except that Mr.
Balderston was not present three weeks ago. He felt that it was not
desirable for the Committee to get too far in advance of itself in
projecting what might be done several weeks hence. The important
thing for the Treasury at this time was to face up to the current
market. In retrospect, it was clear that the Treasury underpriced
the rate on its offering in May. Chairman Martin said that he felt
the Treasury recognized this and that it felt it must not underprice the
forthcoming issue. From the standpoint of the Committee, he felt it
important to give as good an atmosphere to the market during the re
funding as was feasible.
Chairman Martin went on to say that he believed there was
danger in thinking that the Federal Reserve was the only agency that

7/9/57 -33
could stop inflation. We were at the crucial period in the fight
against inflation, he said, and the country would have to "fish or
cut bait" in the next few months in his opinion. He was not speaking
of the Federal Reserve, but of the Congress and the business community
and the whole public. He had come more and more to the view that the
Federal Reserve was the only group that had been actively fighting
inflation. This position could become untenable. The Chairman said
that he agreed with virtually everything that had been said here today,
and he then referred to the summary statement of policy recorded in
the minutes for the meeting of June 18, 1957, in which he stated that
he had come to the conclusion that we could not simultaneously
increase the flow of reserves and raise the discount rate ef
fectively under present conditions; that the Treasury was
about to make an offering of securities for which payment
would be made when we were going into a seasonal demand for
reserves; that in his view the Committee should give the
Manager of the Account as much latitude in the execution of
policy as consistently could be given; that we were in a
period of prosperity as well as of inflation; that the con
sensus seemed to be that there should be no change in the
directive for the next three weeks; and that we should not
deviate from the present general policy but that we should
give the Manager of the System Account whatever latitude
was needed to try to adjust around the feel of the market,
recognizing that in a period such as this net borrowed re
serve figures were very difficult to determine.
Chairman Martin stated that the June 18 summary of policy seemed to
apply to the situation today, and he inquired whether there was any
disagreement with this view. In the absence of an indication of dis
agreement, he suggested that the Committee approve a renewal of the
directive to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in its present form.

7/9/57 -34
Mr. Shepardson inquired whether this contemplated a con
tinuation of the existing degree of pressure and, after the Chairman
commented that this seemed to be the consensus, Mr. Shepardson stated
that he disagreed with such a policy because he believed that the
pressure should be increased.
Following a brief discussion as to whether the summary state
ment the Chairman had made represented a consensus or a majority view,
Mr. Vardaman stated that he felt it undesirable for these meetings to
include projections of potential actions for more than three weeks in
the future.
Chairman Martin then called on Mr. Rouse and Mr. Hayes, mention
ing that the matter of swaps had come up yesterday in a discussion with
Under Secretary of the Treasury Burgess. The Chairman said he had not
encouraged him to believe that the Committee would be favorable to
swaps, but he had stated that he would bring the question up at this
meeting.
Mr. Rouse responded that the question of swaps had not been
mentioned to him recently.
Mr. Hayes stated that Mr. Burgess had mentioned this question
to him, and Chairman Martin said that while Mr. Burgess was not pro
posing a definite action, he was wondering whether anything could be
done at this particular juncture which might help in connection with
the Treasury refunding to be announced shortly.

7/9/57 -35
Mr. Rouse expressed the view that the value of any swap
would depend upon the particular circumstances prevailing at any
given time, but that at times it would be possible to utilize swaps
to some extent to assist the Treasury without harming general open
market policy. While the Committee was aware of his general views
on this matter, authority for such operations in Treasury bills had
not seemed vital to him recently, although such operations could
occasionally be useful; he could not suggest any specific swaps that
would be useful currently but would be glad to look into the question.
On the general situation, Mr. Rouse said that as Mr. Bryan
had indicated the market had felt from time to time that "the rug had
been pulled from under it" by reason of changes in the System's actions.
This was not necessarily because of changes in the discount rate but
because of changes that tightened the reserve position of banks, whether
fortuitous or deliberate, so soon after a Treasury offering that the
dealers and underwriting banks had not had an adequate opportunity to
work out of commitments that had been taken. This had resulted in
considerable feeling that whatever the new Treasury issue proved to
be, purchasers might be buying into a loss, Mr. Rouse said, adding
the comment that to his way of thinking this was not correct.
On the rate situation, Mr. Rouse said that he had learned of
reports by dealers that many banks outside New York City had received
telephone calls from New York suggesting that some banks other than

7/9/57 -36
those in New York take the lead in raising the prime rate. There
was general discussion among the principal banks that as soon as
it was decently possible after the Treasury financing, the rate
should be raised. It was expected also that the discount rate would
be increased by 1/2 of 1 per cent. This was gossip, Mr. Rouse noted,
and was talked to customers as well as bankers.
One other point Mr. Rouse mentioned had to do with a position
he had taken. The Treasury and the market felt that the refunding
announced in May was priced on the market. In trying to appraise the
results of that offering, Mr. Rouse felt that almost everybody had
been influenced by the record of the past fifteen years in that there
had been support for Treasury issues by the Federal Reserve during
the war period and the pattern of rates could be played, so that there
was not really any point in pricing securities under the market. It
had been difficult to get away from this type of thinking, Mr. Rouse
said, and it was now necessary for the Treasury to take all of these
factors, including the possibility of increases in the prime rate
and the discount rate, into consideration in pricing the forthcoming
issue. Mr. Rouse said that he had taken this position fairly strongly
in discussions with Mr. Burgess and others at the Treasury over the
past two months, emphasizing that the new issues must stand on their
own feet.
Mr. Robertson asked for clarification of Mr. Rouse's statement
that he did not think dealers were correct in feeling that whatever the

7/9/57 -37
Treasury issue might be, purchasers might be buying into a loss.
Mr. Rouse responded that there had been occasions when that
had happened in the past but that he did not think the fear was
justified on the present occasion.
Mr. Hayes commented that it was well to bear in mind that in
a rising trend of interest rates, any financing was likely to be in
danger of going to a discount shortly after it was announced. This
had happened in many corporate issues and was considered not abnormal.
Mr. Hayes then referred to the discussion of swaps, stating
that all that Mr. Burgess had mentioned to him was the possibility of
some kind of direct buying by the Federal Reserve of an issue of one
year or longer maturity and selling of shorter-term securities in
order to satisfy the liquidity needs of holders of rights. The general
intent is to avoid a necessity for the Treasury offering a very short
term security which might tend to cut off demand for the other new
issues.
Mr. Allen suggested that this would not be a swap as be
understands swaps.
Chairman Martin said that he did not think the Committee would
wish to exchange some of its shorter securities for longer securities,
and Messrs. Robertson and Allen indicated they would not favor such an
arrangement. The Chairman then inquired whether anyone present would
favor such action and, in the absence of any affirmative response,
stated that the matter was thus disposed of.

7/9/57
Chairman Martin asked for other comments in connection with
the renewal of the Committee's directive, in response to which Mr.
Rouse stated that he had no suggestions for change in the amounts.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York until other
wise directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (in
cluding replacement of maturing securities, and allowing
maturities to run off without replacement) for the System
open market account in the open market or, in the case of
maturing securities, by direct exchange with the Treasury,
as may be necessary in the light of current and prospective
economic conditions and the general credit situation of the
country, with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in
the market to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to
restraining inflationary developments in the interest of sus
tainable economic growth while recognizing uncertainties in
the business outlook, the financial markets, and the inter
national situation, and (c) to the practical administration
of the account; provided that the aggregate amount of securi
ties held in the System account (including commitments for
the purchase or sale of securities for the account) at the
close of this date, other than special short-term certifi
cates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be in
creased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with
discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue
participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such
amounts of special short-term certificates of indebtedness
as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total
amount of such certificates held at any one time by the
Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate
$500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System
account for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury
securities maturing within one year as may be necessary
from time to time for the accommodation of the Treasury;

7/9/57 -39
provided that the total amount of such securities so sold
shall not exceed in the aggregate $500 million face amount,
and such sales shall be made as nearly as may be practicable
at the prices currently quoted in the open market.
Mr. Rouse stated that net borrowed reserves had been running in
excess of $700 million for about 10 days and that the market appeared
very calm although he sensed some turbulence underneath the surface.
He also sensed less unwillingness on the part of banks to borrow. Mr.
Rouse also referred to a report this morning of another AAA rated thirty
year utility bond issue that was being re-offered at 4.43 per cent,
stating that that illustrated the rapidity with which the recent move
ments in bond prices had taken place. He expressed the view that the
decline a few weeks ago had been faster and had gone farther than was
warranted and that the recovery during the last few days reflected the
same situation.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held at 10:00 a.m. on Tuesday, July 30, 1957.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary's note: Immediately following the
meeting, Governor Robertson reviewed plans
for Operation Alert 1957, during which Mr.
Leonard, Director, Division of Bank Opera
tions, and Mr. Allison, Special Consultant,
entered the room.
Secretary