A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, October 1, 1957, at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Allen
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Williams
Messrs. Fulton, Irons, Leach, and Mangels, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Erickson, Johns, and Deming, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, St. Louis,
and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Rieflr, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Atkinson, Bopp, Marget, Mitchell, Roelse,
Tow, and Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Koch, Assistant Director, Division of Re
search and Statistics, Board of Governor
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Abbot, Daane, Ellis, Hostetler, and
Wheeler, Vice Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Richmond,
Boston, Cleveland, and San Francisco,
respectively; Mr. Parsons, Director of
Research, Federal Reserve Bank of

10/1/57 -2
Minneapolis, and Mr. Walker,
Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on September 10, 1957, were
approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York covering open market operations during the period June 18 through
September 25, 1957, and a supplementary report covering commitments
executed September 26 through September 30, 1957. Copies of both re
ports have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Mr. Rouse said that fortuitous developments in the market since
the preceding meeting had affected the distribution and volume of re
serves. During part of the period net borrowed reserves had been lower
than some members of the Committee would have preferred, while during
part of the period they had been higher than other members would have
preferred, on the basis of the discussion on September 10.
Mr. Rouse also referred to the offering of Treasury securities
announced on September 12, stating that the market had given a very
good account of itself in connection with the securities. He felt
that criticism that had appeared in the press regarding the amount
of speculation in the offered securities had been somewhat overdone
and that the behavior of the market confirmed this to have been the
case.

l0/1/57 -3-
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period September
10 through September 30, 1957, were ap
proved, ratified, and confirmed.
At Chairman Martin's request, Mr. Young presented a report on
current economic activity substantially as follows:
An increasing number of business observers are disposed
to the view that the momentum of major expansive factors on
the demand side has now been spent, that the pressure of
inflationary forces is in process of lessening and even
dispersing, and that the prospective movement of activity
and prices is to be downward. The emphasis of these ob
servers is on the leveling out of business capital expendi
tures and of total product in real terms and on the prospect
of future declines both in business capital investment and
in military outlays of the Government. They also stress the
declines in primary material prices over the recent months
and in stock prices over recent weeks. And they discount,
as a statistical illusion largely, recent strength indicated
by measures of consumer spending. Finally, they point to a
leveling out in productive activity and demand in important
industrial countries abroad, to continuing pronounced infla
tionary trends in selected development countries, and to
international liquidity crises and persisting lack of
confidence in key international exchange values.
Obviously, this diagnosis reads with a bearish bias the
statistical record of current economic adjustment at a high
level and still (for the consumer area at least) inflating
prices, While it is possible that prices and activity
generally are at a crest and that the next broad movement of
prices and activity will be downward, the recent figures are
far from clear that such a development is becoming an
actuality That important realignment of activities, com
modity prices, and investment values is taking,or has taken,
place, is not to be denied. In fact, such realignments to
gether with a dampening expansion of aggregate demand would
appear to be a necessary precondition to reformation of ex
pansive forces without creeping inflation
That over-all inflationary pressures in the recent past
have been very strong is confirmed by the third quarter GNP
figures. These show the annual rate of GNP in current dollars

10/1/57
up another $5 billion, or over 1 per cent, above the second
quarter. However, in real terms--in deflated dollars, that
is--GNP in this quarter showed no gain; indeed, there has
been little, if any, real gain in total product now for
three quarters, while the dollar rise over this period has
amounted to $13 billion, or 3 per cent.
The most significant development since the first quarter
has been a pronounced rise in consumer takings, especially of
nondurable goods and services but to some extent also of
durables, notably automobiles. This rise implies that further
increase in consumer incomes caught up last spring with the
consumer price level and that further rise in consumer prices
since has had full support of expanding consumer demand.
Various business observers have expressed skepticism
about this indicated rise in consumer buying because the
beginning of rising retail sales figures coincides with a
substantial revision in the information collection methods
for the retail sector. There is independent evidence of a
marked rise in consumer purchases since the first quarter,
however. About the most that can be said about the statis
tical issue is that, while the rise in takings may not have
been as much as the figures indicate, it was still sub
stantial. Although nondurable goods sales to consumers have
been off in recent weeks, perhaps due to unfavorable shopping
weather, it is not without interest in this connection that
new automobile purchases in the first 20 days of September
ran 8 per cent ahead of the same period for August and 16 per
cent above a year ago. Used car sales also showed strength
at fairly firm prices, though less strength than did new cars
where price concessions were a sales attraction. Also relevant
here are reports of more active consumer demand in the new and
used housing market. Cessation of decline in new housing
starts and some apparent pick up in the past two months are
said to reflect somewhat better demand conditions.
Construction activity generally, reflective of continuing
strength of aggregate investment demand, has remained at high
levels, and data on contract awards suggest that, for the near
term future, total construction will remain at or near current
levels. All sections of the construction area have been show
ing recent strength.
Industrial production has been holding at the June-August
level but some uncertainties exist as to future trends. Out
put of nondurable goods has been rising and improved tendencies
have also characterized consumer durable goods output. But
output of producers and military equipment has generally,
though with some exceptions, been showing moderate declines
and output of primary metals and materials has been significantly

10/1/57
reduced, with some accumulation of stocks of particular
basic items (e.g., copper, newsprint, lumber, and
petroleum products). Figures for primary metals suggest
a consumption of materials by secondary fabricators in
excess of metals output, with important inventory decumula
tion occurring in these secondary industries, Pick up in
automobile output, after new model introduction, is another
uncertain factor for steel and other metal markets. With
large stocks of 1957 models on hand and with tight money
affecting instalment credit supplies, aatomobile producers
are evidently holding back in placing fall orders for sheet
and metal parts to produce new models. Petroleum output
seems clearly subject to probable cutback ahead since stocks
have reached levels much in excess of industry schedules.
Reflecting continuing high levels of activity generally,
nonfarm employment since June has remained at record levels
through August, with declines in manufacturing employment
offset by gains in trade and local government employment.
Labor market information is sketchy for September, but initial
claims for unemployment compensation have risen fairly sharply,
a development associated with temporary layoffs for automobile
model changeover and some reductions in employment, again
possibly temporary, in aircraft, lumber, and steel industries.
Defense cutbacks in the months ahead are expected to contribute
to manpower availability, but these effects will probably be
felt only gradually.
Average prices at wholesale have declined 1/2 per cent
since the end of August, mainly reflecting significant declines
in prices of basic or sensitive commodities, especially
materials, and of agricultural products, notably meats and
livestock. With important inventory and downward price adjust
ments over the past year for such materials as copper, zinc,
lumber, and rubber, and for major farm products, prices of
basic commodities appear much less vulnerable to recession in
demand than earlier this year or at other postwar points of
potential business crest.
Average consumer prices at mid-August showed further
modest rise, reflecting especially further increases in prices
of foods and services and in rents. Some further rise in the
consumer price index is expected to mid-September. It is
interesting to note that, with weekly earnings of factory
workers about stable since the beginning of the year, the rise
in consumer prices has reduced real weekly earnings by about
2 per cent.
The liquidity crisis abroad, confined though it is to a
few countries that did not contain their inflationary pressures,
will doubtless have contractive repercussions on U. S. exports

10/1/57 -6-
in the months ahead. The countries involved have been
important importers from the U. S. and the dampening of
excess demand, which can no longer be postponed, can be
expected to reduce temporarily export demands.
In conclusion, we do not report a picture of a settling
or declining economy. Rather it is one showing diverse
tendencies in significant value indexes and little change in
physical output and resource availability. Business sentiment
is much more cautious about prospects than for some months,
but business sentiment has shown pronounced gyrations over
the past two years, being at times more optimistic than the
figures and portents, at other times less optimistic. The
latter mood seems to characterize the present situation.
While inflationary clouds may be breaking up, it would be
altogether premature to conclude that they have now scattered.
Mr. Thomas next made the following statement concerning recent
credit developments:
Perhaps the most significant financial development in
recent weeks has been the leveling out of interest rates at
the high level reached early in August. Relative steadiness
in interest rates, following earlier rising tendencies, has
persisted notwithstanding a number of developments that would
be expected to work toward higher rates. These include the
raising of Federal Reserve discount rates, the continuation
of member bank borrowing at a fairly high level, the large
volumes of new issues of securities offered by business
corporations, State and local Governments, Federal credit
agencies, and the Treasury, and finally the dramatic increase
in the Bank of England discount rate from 5 to 7 per cent.
The next most significant development has been the sharp
decline in prices of common stocks. This decline and the
steadiness of bond yields at the advanced level are no doubt
related. Investors appear to be shifting their preferences
in some degree from stocks to bonds. This is one channel
through which high interest rates have an impact upon in
vestment decisions and general economic conditions.
Changes in bank loans have conformed fairly closely
to the usual seasonal pattern. Reflecting the gradual but
pronounced decline in the liquidity of business corporations
during the past two years and the increaso in tax liabilities
due in mid-September, business borrowing at banks for tax
purposes was a little larger than a year ago. In the latest
week, however, there has been an unusually large decline in
business loans. Loans to usual seasonal borrowers have shown

10/1/57
about the same increase as a year ago. Some of the recourse
to banks was represented by a temporary shifting of sales
finance company financing to banks from corporations.
The net result for the four weeks of September (based on
partial figures for the last week) has been a slightly smaller
increase in business loans than in most previous years. Other
types of loans in the aggregate also increased less than in
the two previous years. In the same period bank holdings of
Government securities showed a somewhat smaller decrease than
in 1955 and 1956, with the result that total loans and invest
ments rose by about the same moderate amount in each year.
There was also little net change in demand deposits adjusted
in September, both this year and last, but time deposits in
creased more this year. The money supply may have shown a
less than seasonal growth in recent weeks. Turnover seasonally
adjusted has also shown little or no increase in recent months
but continues higher than last year.
New corporate capital issues continued close to $1 billion
in September, corresponding to the monthly average for the past
12 months, and it appears that this figure may again be reached
in October. State and local government issues were only slightly
below the recent monthly average of $500 million in September
but are scheduled to equal about $600 million in October. The
Treasury offering of about $3.5 billion was successfully floated,
although the premiums evident during the subscription period dis
appeared when subscribers offered the securities in the market.
Although Treasury cash holdings are now at a relatively high
level and somewhat larger than had been earlier estimated, addi
tional funds will be needed in October and more in subsequent
months. The projected British drawing on the Export-Import
Bank credit adds to previous estimates of needs. Attempts to
curtail defense expenditures are not expected to bring the
fiscal year total down to the figure budgeted. To keep within
the statutory debt limit, some of the Treasury's cash needs
will have to be supplied other than through public debt
offerings--such as an issue of FNMA securities and perhaps
also the use of the Treasury's free gold.
Member bank reserve needs have been somewhat less than
had been projected three weeks ago, owing primarily to a
smaller increase in required reserves than was assumed. This
reflects the moderate growth in bank credit and deposits.
Reserves have been absorbed during the past three statement
weeks by reductions in the System portfolio but are being
supplied by purchases this week. Net borrowed reserves,
which were close to $400 million early in the month, declined
to about $260 million in the middle week of September. Owing,

10/1/57 -8
however, to substantial liquidity requirements of banks and
customers in this period and to the continuation of heavy
borrowings by central reserve and reserve city member banks,
the money market generally continued to show signs of tight
ness. Subsequently net borrowed reserves have risen to around
$500 million. System purchases will be needed to keep net
borrowed reserves from exceeding $700 million during most of
October and the first half of November. With the higher dis
count rate and reduced liquidity of banks and corporations,
adequate restraint should be exerted by a lower level of
member bank borrowing than was appropriate during the summer.
Banking developments, it appears, have kept fairly well
within the limits envisaged by recent policies of credit re
straint. There is a possibility that interest rates in the
capital markets have reached a level appropriate to the
maintenance of equilibrium. Investment demands throughout
the world seem still to be fully adequate to absorb all of
the lendable funds available at current rates. Under the
circumstances there would seem to be no need for relaxation
of restraints, nor would any tightening of restrictive
measures be appropriate.
Mr. Hayes concurred in the general substance of the comments
that Messrs. Young and Thomas had made regarding the economic situation
and credit developments. He then presented the following statement of
his views:
Business activity remains on the high plateau that has
prevailed for the past several months. In the aggregate,
demands remain strong, with the best showing perhaps in re
tail sales--although the rate of gain over last year ap
parently is more modest than had been thought previously,
since part of the increase is attributed to a statistical
adjustment in the retail sales series. While declines in
capital expenditures and Federal spending--and perhaps in
net exports--are now clearly foreshadowed, they have not
yet actually occurred, and there is no reason to expect a
pronounced downward drift in business activity as a whole
in the near future. At the same time, business sentiment
is cautious and there is a notable absence of the strong
upward pressures which were giving us concern early in the
year. The structure of demand and the level of inventories
are such that any prospective changes seem likely to take
place gradually, giving us time for a continuous reappraisal
over the coming months.

10/l/57
The price situation is decidedly mixed. On the one hand,
important raw material prices have weakened further, and farm
prices have turned down in recent weeks. However, prices for
finished goods and services as a whole continue to inch ahead,
despite the growing number of products which are characterized
by buyers' markets. There is considerable talk and some evi
dence of a profit squeeze, but statistics on this point are
still rather inconclusive.
Now that bank credit figures are available for most of
the third quarter, it is interesting to observe that the rate
of growth of total bank loans fell further behind that of a
year earlier during the third quarter than in the second
quarter. This was due primarily to further slackening in
business loans, partly offset by somewhat greater growth in
consumer and real estate loans. With relatively small changes
occurring in the third quarter of either year in bank holdings
of securities (except for the effect of last week's Treasury
financing) total loans and investments showed a trend roughly
similar to that of total loans. The money supply shows a gain
of less than 1 per cent over a year ago. We would expect an
even smaller year-to-year gain by the end of December, especially
if the improved tone of the bond market continues to permit the
Treasury to rely somewhat more on nonbank investors than was
possible a few months ago and to enable business to finance its
capital expenditures without recourse to bank credit.
It is not easy to determine the best credit policy at a
time when industrial output has leveled off, plant capacity has
been substantially increased, and world prices for many raw
materials are notably weak, while at the same time retail prices
and wage rates show continued signs of upward pressure. However,
I feel that a policy of steady credit restraint should be main
tained, even though it carries with it some risk of further
pressure on profit margins, unless and until there is clear evi
dence that the economy has turned downward. We should, of course,
provide reserves as needed for seasonal purposes. While target
figures for total net borrowed reserves must always be qualified
to allow for such items as geographical distribution of reserves,
seasonal tensions and other factors affecting the actual tight
ness of the money and capital markets, it would seem appropriate
to think roughly in terms of about the same general range of net
borrowed reserves which has prevailed for the last two weeks.
Current projections would suggest that a minimum of open market
operations would be required in the next three weeks, except
perhaps toward the end of the period, when the effects of the
usual monthly bulge in float will be felt.
Although I feel strongly that steady credit restraint
should be maintained under present conditions, I also believe

10/1/57 -10
that the System will have to be exceedingly alert during
the next few months for conclusive signs of any break-out
from the sideways movement now characteristic of business.
Such a breakout might well call for a modification of our
policies.
Mr. Erickson said that in New England nonagricultural employ
ment continued at a high level but with slackening tendencies outweigh
ing those for further expansion. August employment was up slightly
over July but not as much as last year, and manufacturing weekly earnings
also were ahead. Automobile sales continued to drag and new car registra
tions through July of this year were 7.7 per cent behind last year. A
sampling of 27 commercial banks showed that the amount of consumer loans
extended in August was 12 per cent ahead of last year and that out
standings at the end of the month were 15 per cent ahead. Department
store sales which had been affected unfavorably a few weeks ago by the
newspaper strike continued below a year ago, perhaps partly because of
the excellent weather which had not been conducive to sales of winter
goods. Preliminary figures of the vacation business this year indicated
that it was 5 per cent ahead of the record 1953 volume. Mr. Erickson
stated that at the meeting of the directors of the Boston Bank last week
there was considerable discussion by the directors along the lines of
Ralph Young's opening statement, but there was unanimous agreement that
the present discount rate should be maintained. The discount window of
the Bank had been used less in the last two weeks than for some time,
discounts having averaged slightly more than $10 million. Mr. Erickson
said he would favor a continuation of the policy of restraint, making

10/1/57 -11
no change in the Committee's directive and continuing open market
operations along the lines followed during the past few weeks. He
would make no change in the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Irons subscribed to the statements of Messrs. Young and
Thomas. In the Dallas District, conditions continued about as he had
reported at recent meetings. The petroleum industry was somewhat over
inventoried and production schedules had been reduced further. He did
not anticipate much change in that industry over the next few months
unless cool weather were to increase demand for fuel oil earlier than
usual. In agriculture, crops were larger and income higher this year
than in 1956. There had been good rains during the past ten days and
these would help winter crops. Mr. Irons said that he would subscribe
to what Mr. Hayes had said regarding credit policy for the next few
weeks: hold steady with about the same degree of restraint that we
have been experiencing.
Mr. Mangels' impression was that West Coast business sentiment
had deteriorated somewhat further, although sentiment often reacted
more strongly on the up side or the down side than statistical evidence
indicated that it should, he stated, and current statistical evidence
indicated very little change in the underlying situation. Recent
changes in bank loans and deposits, both time and demand, followed the
national pattern. Requests for discounts at the San Francisco Bank had
been quite moderate in recent weeks with no applications from San
Francisco banks in the week ending September 25, but on September 26

10/1/57 -12
borrowings rose to $37 million when Federal funds were difficult to
obtain. Mr. Mangels said that he felt the Committee should continue
the policy it had been following. He had in mind negative free re
serves somewhere in the $400-$500 million range. He saw no occasion
for changing the directive or the discount rate.
Mr. Deming saw no change in the over-all situation in the Ninth
District during the past three weeks and no indication of an appreciable
change in the near term outlook. There seemed to be a continuation of
the sidewise movement that had been evident most of this year. How
ever, somewhat wider diversity in the stronger and weaker tendencies
was noted, he said. In Montana, the nonferrous mining and lumber
industries had been quite weak for some time whereas the farm situation
was stronger than usual. On balance this gave a somewhat better than
average picture for Montana. This was true of the district as a whole,
but business sentiment was cautious with the exception of the retail
trade people who foresaw a strong fourth quarter this year. Mr. Deming
said he could see no occasion for changing the Committee's policy over
the next few weeks, and he would continue about the same level of net
borrowed reserves for the present.
Mr. Allen said that he did not feel that there had been any
basic change in the over-all business situation in the past three weeks.
Business capital expenditures had been leveling off at a high level
and seemed likely to decline in 1958. This was neither surprising nor
disturbing to him in view of the very high level of such expenditures

10/1/57 -13
in the past two years. Retail sales have been strong and continue
that way. Cash receipts from farm marketings continue to expand in
the Seventh District somewhat faster than nationally, largely as a
result of large harvests over most of the district. Shipments and
retail sales of farm equipment have improved this year, and industry
sources express confidence that a further rise is in prospect because
of higher farm income. The automobile business is in between models,
Mr. Allen noted, and at this time he had nothing to add to his comments
at recent meetings except that there was a general belief in Detroit
that automobile prices would advance only 2 to 4 per cent on 1958 models,
which would be considerably less than the advances made last year.
Since the seasonal low at the end of July, business loans at
Seventh District reporting banks had increased dollar-wise more than a
year ago, Mr. Allen said, and nationally the increase was not far be
hind that of last year. Chicago money market banks had been under
heavy pressure for the past three weeks and experienced their largest
basic reserve deficit since May. Very few country banks had been borrow
ing in recent weeks.
Mr. Allen said that the concluding sentences used by Messrs.
Young and Thomas in their statements expressed his feelings very well:
while inflationary clouds might be breaking up, it would be altogether
premature to conclude that they have now scattered, and he could see
no occasion for an intensification of pressure at this time nor should
there be an easing.

10/1/57 -l4
Mr. Leedy said that the most important thing that had happened
in the Tenth District in the last few weeks had been the general and
ample rains. Planting of winter wheat had progressed well and pasture
conditions throughout virtually the entire district were most favorable.
Mr. Leedy commented that last year when the time for planting winter
wheat arrived acreage put in the soil bank came to the extremely large
total of ten million acres. This year because of favorable moisture
conditions up to mid-September only one and one-half million acres had
been signed up and, while the time would not expire until October 4, it
was expected that participation in the soil bank this year would be much
less than last year.
Growth of business loans in the Tenth District as in the Chicago
District had been different than nationally, Mr. Leedy said, in that there
had been a larger increase since mid-year in the Tenth District than had
occurred last year. Borrowings at the Reserve Bank recently had been the
reverse of the reports of the Boston and San Francisco Districts in that
discounting at Kansas City had risen quite sharply.
On balance, Mr. Leedy said that it seemed to him that at this
juncture the System should be particularly cautious to make sure that
seasonal requirements were met. The fact that there had been less ex
pansion of loans and a most moderate increase in the money supply, along
with the other indications that the situation was quite different from
that with which the Committee had been dealing for a considerable period
of time, should cause the Committee to be very cautious with respect to

10/1/57 -15
the degree of pressure that was applied. Mr. Leedy said he did not
intend to suggest a change in policy; he believed the Committee should
continue about the same level of pressure that it had been striving for
recently but it should be quite cautious about overdoing the restraint.
Mr. Leach said that on balance it appeared that the seasonal up
turn in business activity in the Fifth District during the past month
had been somewhat weaker than in past years. In the important textile
industry market interest remained concentrated on immediate and nearby
delivery. Orders for future delivery were lagging behind the usual rate
for this time of year, and the long awaited improvement in the industry
was still around the corner. On the other hand, the furniture industries
in North Carolina and Virginia seemed to be running slightly ahead of
the year-ago production rate.
Marketings of the 1957 crop of flue-cured tobacco currently was
under way in three of the four belts of the district, Mr. Leach said.
Assuming no price changes during the rest of the marketing season, it
was estimated that growers income this year would be down 25 to 30 per
cent from last year which would mean a loss in income of $175 to $200
million. Employment gains in tobacco stemming and redrying plants in
Virginia in August were smaller than usual possibly due to the reduced
volume of flue-cured tobacco resulting from the drought and acreage cuts.
In contrast, cigarette production in the district for the first seven
months of this year was 7 per cent ahead of last year.

10/1/57 -16-
Business loans of weekly reporting banks in the Fifth District
increased 3.4 per cent in the three weeks ended September 18, Mr. Leach
said, a little faster than for the country as a whole. Borrowings from
the Richmond Bark had averaged less than $30 million in September, com
pared with $50 million in August and $l0 million in September a year ago.
As to policy, Mr. Leach said it seemed appropriate that the
Committee should continue for the immediate future the same degree of
tightness that it had been achieving. In his judgment, it was not yet
time for any easing and the Committee should be careful not to ease too
soon. At the same time, he thought the Committee should be careful not
to be any more restrictive. In short, he thought the degree of pressure
in recent weeks had been just about right and should be continued, but
the Committee should be on guard to refrain from becoming too inflexible
on the tight side as some of our friends feared.
Mr. Vardaman said that even if he had contrary ideas he would
hesitate to express them in the face of the views expressed by Messrs.
Young and Thomas and the eight Presidents of the Reserve Banks who had
reported thus far. It seemed obvious, he said, that the Committee should
continue just about as at present and that it should pay particular at
tention to the point made by Mr. Leedy about taking care of seasonal
needs. Mr. Vardaman would take care of these needs even cordially, and
he felt that commercial banks should be encouraged to take care of the
seasonal needs of their customers. He would continue the Committee's
directive and general policy without change.

10/1/57 -17
Mr. Mills said that his views of credit policy followed those
that had been expressed in favor for the present of exerting about the
same degree of pressure in evidence since the last meeting of the Com
mittee. He hoped that this would promote a redistribution of the
securities that were acquired by the commercial banks during the
Treasury's recent financing operation, and in so doing make the re
serves then supplied available to support the prospective seasonal
expansion of bank credit.
Mr. Mills then referred to reports of a sluggish reception and
distribution of new securities offerings by various Federal agencies.
These offerings were largely of a short-term nature and presumably
found a market in the same investment area that was usually attracted
to Treasury bills and certificates. It had occurred to him that the
present active demand for Treasury bills might indicate a strong liquidity
preference on the part of investors that was being reflected in the in
vestment market for intermediate-term securities by the cool reception
given the Federal agency offerings.
Mr. Mills suspicioned that an early offering of a substantial
issue of FNMA securities and likewise a successful refunding in December
of the Treasury's issue of 3-5/8 per cent certificates might be handi
capped by the influence of the relatively slow market for Federal agency
securities. Inasmuch as the FNMA issue is in effect a substitute for a
direct offering by the Treasury, he believed that the Committee should
especially consider what responsibility the System had within the limits

10/1/57 -18
of appropriate credit policy for facilitating this financing operation.
He hoped that Mr. Rouse would discuss this subject later in the meeting.
Mr. Robertson said that, for the first time in a long time, it
seemed to him that the Committee's restrictive policy was beginning to
bite. He was of the opinion that the degree of restraint had been in
adequate for a long period and therefore slow in taking hold, but he
believed that it was now beginning to work. Hence, he believed the
System should adopt the position of waiting and watching. System
policy should not be made more restrictive at this time, but it cer
tainly should not be relaxed.
Mr. Shepardson reported that in recent weeks he had visited a
considerable part of the agricultural sections of the Northwest. He
could not recall when he had seen better conditions over those areas
as judged by current crop and range conditions, the condition of live
stock, the attitude of the people in the areas, and the indications of
well-being as judged by the appearance of houses, barns, outbuildings,
and so on. The condition of agriculture in this rather large section
was a pleasant surprise and furnished an indication of good economic
conditions generally. Most persons with whom he had talked who were
actively engaged in the farming business were feeling quite optimistic.
Mr. Shepardson said that he was thoroughly in accord with the
presentations made by Messrs. Young and Thomas and with most of the
views expressed by others who had commented this morning. He would
differ somewhat from views expressed by Messrs. Leedy and Vardaman in

10/1/57 -19
that, while he felt the System should meet seasonal needs for credit,
he would meet those needs with some continuing degree of restraint
rather than as freely as he understood their comments suggested. Mr.
Shepardson thought that Committee policy was beginning to get some of
the results that had been wanted and that it would be a mistake to
indicate a change in policy just as these results were starting to
appear.
Mr. Fulton said that the situation in the Fourth District was
not quite as bright as had been indicated for some other districts, but
it should be characterized as one of high level activity. Operations
in the steel industry were a little higher than the national average.
While orders from automobile manufacturers for steel had not come in as
expected, orders for the fourth quarter for some components were quite
satisfactory. Unemployment had increased somewhat because of layoffs
connected with the changeover to new model automobiles. An indication
of sentiment for future manufacturing expansion was to be found in
inquiries for new business sites, Mr. Fulton said. He reported an
active demand for such sites in the Fourth District in connection with
programs for 1959 and 1960.
With respect to policy, Mr. Fulton said that while this was a
period of some hesitancy and while sentiment on the down side seemed
to be outrunning the statistics, he considered the over-all outlook
for the future to be buoyant. He agreed with Mr. Shepardson that the
Committee should not give a sign of relaxation. It should take care

10/1/57 -20
of seasonal needs, of course, but it should retain about the tightness
of the past three weeks, which he felt had been quite appropriate.
Mr. Williams said that business developments in the Third Dis
trict in general were not markedly different from those described for
other districts. He then reported the views that had been expressed
at a recent meeting of seventeen business economists from firms located
in the Third District, summing up their comments with the statement that
it was clear that the pessimistic evidences were weighted more heavily
than other evidences in the expressions of those men. Mr. Williams said
that there had not been significant changes in the banking figures
recently although there had been some increase in borrowings at the
Philadelphia Bank. In view of the cautious business sentiment that
existed and the lack of evidence of a strong fall upturn, he believed
the Committee should continue about the same degree of restraint that
had existed recently, and he suggested that net borrowed reserves might
continue in the $l00-$500 million range.
Mr. Bryan said that conditions in the Sixth District for the
most part reflected stability at a generally high level, with the
exception of the State of Florida which continued to have sharp rises
in activity. He found little or nothing in the comments or suggestions
made by others at this meeting with which to disagree,
Mr. Johns agreed with the conclusion quite generally reported
heretofore that there should be no change in policy either toward

10/1/57 -21
tightening or relaxing. Some of those with whom he discussed these
problems were beginning to feel that the time might be near for dis
cussing whether a change might be necessary in policy and in the Com
mittee's directive. Mr. Johns said he would be quick to agree that
the Committee's frequent meetings and procedures for determining policy
for relatively short periods should not obscure for the Committee
developments that should be in view. For the moment, however, he could
see no need for changing the Committee's directive. In fact, he felt
the wording of the directive was perhaps better in relation to current
conditions than it had been at some previous periods.
Mr. Szymczak agreed that there should be no change in the policy
now expressed in the Committee's directive, and he also agreed that there
should be no change in discount rate at this time. However, he said that
he leaned toward a milder restraint attitude than he thought had been ex
pressed by most of the others who had commented thus far. There were
mixed elements in the economic situation, and there were the Treasury's
and seasonal needs to be considered. Because of these factors, at the
present time he would lean toward negative free reserves in the $300
$400 million range rather than in the $400-$500 million range, he would
not change the Committee's directive, would not change the discount rate,
and would lean toward more ease in the policy of restraint.
Mr. Balderston noted that Mr. Johns had indicated some concern
about the future. He also referred to Mr. Marget's report to the Board
on the overspending in recent years by France, India, Japan, and other
countries, which had added to upward price pressures on industrial

10/1/57 -22
materials and which had now brought those countries into exchange
difficulties. Mr. Balderston said he mentioned this point because,
while he say nothing that the Open Market Committee should do at the
moment because of the clouds that were appearing beyond the ocean, it
seemed quite obvious that our future export trade would be affected
adversely. There may be anticipated appeals from abroad for help by
our Government that, if granted, would add to the spending here.
Another concern was that next year when large employers
negotiate wage contracts, they not abdicate and buy peace at a price
that the economy can ill afford. Mr. Balderston said he felt that
this time vigorous bargaining might bring a period of labor disputes
and interference with production. However, he felt it important that
developments should not lead either side to have unfounded expectations
as to the future of business and as a result to press for wage advances
in excess of productivity.
As for the present, Mr. Balderston said there seemed to be a con
tinuance of pressures as had been indicated by the discussion. He raised
a question about a remark Mr. Thomas had made to the effect that the
diminished liquidity of the commercial banks would make a lower net
borrowed reserve figure as effective a restraining factor as a higher
figure previously had been. Mr. Balderston noted that a year ago he
thought this to be true, but that the lover net borrowed reserve figure
of last fall now seemed to have been a mistake. In view of last year's

10/1/57 -23
experience with net borrowed reserves of around $200 million, he urged
that the Committee keep the $400 million level as the current guide.
Mr. Thomas, in response to Chairman Martin's invitation that he
comment, said that he had nothing to add other than to say he agreed with
the conclusion stated by Mr. Balderston. His suggestion was for a lower
level of net borrowed reserves than the $500 million or more common
during the spring and summer of this year, but not for a level of $200
million or less that prevailed during the late months of 1956 and early
1957.
Chairman Martin said that there was a surprising degree of unani
mity today. He observed that he had visited with seven Ministers of
Finance and six Governors of central banks at the annual meeting of the
Boards of Governors of the International Monetary Fund and the Inter
national Bank for Reconstruction and Development during the past week.
He was impressed with the unanimity of their views that inflation in
each instance had gotten ahead of them, that it was the primary problem
in their countries, and that there would be no way of coping with the
inflation other than a little decline in business. The Chairman said
that, with two minor exceptions, he found no apprehensions concerning
that prospect, but there was a general view that the main problem was
one of public relations in dealing with the feeling in some quarters
that central banking policy was seeking a depression or was endeavoring
to precipitate a decline in business. This was the problem faced in
each of these countries, the Chairman said, and each of the individuals

10/1/57 -24
with whom he had talked was seeking ways of explaining the problem
to the people. That problem was similar to the one presented to
the Federal Reserve System, Chairman Martin said, adding that it was
interesting to get this synthesis of views, with the same awareness
on the part of each of the individuals of the inability of monetary
policy to supply a magic solution. Chairman Martin said there was
also an awareness that there would be pressure on the monetary
authorities to reverse their policies in order to prevent an adjust
ment from taking place, and an equal awareness that they did not have
a means for pulling the levers and avoiding a readjustment.
Chairman Martin then said that it appeared that the consensus
clearly was that there should be no change in policy or in the Com
mittee's directive at this time.
Mr. Robertson said that his understanding of this statement
was that the Committee desired to follow the same policy during the
next three weeks that had been followed during the past three weeks.
While the Chairman had not mentioned the volume of net borrowed re
serves, he (Mr. Robertson) would assume that the averages of net
borrowed reserves that had been sought during the past three weeks
would continue to be sought during the next three weeks.
Mr. Rouse stated that he understood the Committee's discussion
and instructions to be principally in terms of degrees of pressure
rather than net borrowed reserves, but he understood that the Committee
intended no change in its net borrowed reserve objective.

10/1/57
Chairman Martin added that this would be with a view to
seeking the same degree of restraint that had been sought before.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York until otherwise
directed by the Committees
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges
(including replacement of maturing securities, and
allowing maturities to run off without replacement)
for the System open market account in the open market
or, in the case of maturing securities, by direct ex
change with the Treasury, as may be necessary in the
light of current and prospective economic conditions
and the general credit situation of the country, with
a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in the market
to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to restraining
inflationary developments in the interest of sustainable
economic growth while recognizing uncertainties in the
business outlook, the financial markets, and the inter
national situation, and (c) to the practical administra
tion of the account; provided that the aggregate amount
of securities held in the System account (including commit
ments for the purchase or sale of securities for the ac
count) at the close of this date, other than special short
term certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to
time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall
not be increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the ac
count of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with dis
cretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue par
ticipations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such
amounts of special short-term certificates of indebtedness
as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total
amount of such certificates held at any one time by the
Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate
$500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System
account for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury
securities maturing within one year as may be necessary
from time to time for the accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such securities so

10/1/57 -26.
sold shall not exceed in the aggregate $500 million face
amount, and such sales shall be made as nearly as may be
practicable at the prices currently quoted in the open
market.
Mr. Rouse then referred to the comments Mr. Mills had made
earlier in the meeting regarding new securities offerings by various
Federal agencies. He said that during the past one and one-half years
there had been a substantial increase in the volume of such issues,
both in number and amount, and the spread between Treasury issues and
agency issues had increased markedly in order to absorb this rise.
Within the past few months the demand for the agency issues had not
increased as rapidly as had the volume of such issues and the market
was now faced with the possibility of a substantial FNMA issue. Mr.
Rouse expressed the view that such an issue probably would have to
be in the six to eight month maturity range, although there was the
possibility of a fairly long issue if it was not in a very large
volume.
Mr. Vardaman suggested that it might be of interest to the
Committee members if the Board's Division of Research and Statistics
would prepare a list showing the labor management negotiations that
might take place during the calendar year 1958 as a result of expire
tion of existing contracts.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held at 10:00 o'clock on Tuesday, October 22, 1957
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.