A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, January 7, 1958, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Allen
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Williams
Messrs. Fulton, Irons, Leach, and Mangels, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Johns and Deming, Presisents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Minneapolis,
respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Atkinson, Bopp, Marget, Mitchell, Roelse,
Tow, and Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Daane and Walker, Vice Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and
Dallas, respectively; Messrs. Balles and
Einzig, Assistant Vice Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and
San Francisco, respectively; Mr. Parsons,

1/7/58 -2
Director of Research, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis; and
Mr. Bowsher, Economist, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
Chairman Martin referred to the revised drafts of minutes of
the meetings held on December 3 and December 17, 1957, stating that
since these drafts were distributed Mr. Fulton had asked that an addi
tional revision be made on page 28 of the minutes for December 17, to
change the word "retail" to "department store" in the second full sen
tence on that page, and that in the absence of objection the minutes
for the two meetings would be approved incorporating the additional
change requested by Mr. Fulton.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meetings of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on December 3 and December 17,
1957, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York covering open market operations during the period December 17,
1957 through January 1, 1958, and a supplemental report covering commit
ments executed January 1 through January 6, 1958. Copies of both reports
have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Mr. Rouse reported that open market operations and the state of
the market had been covered thoroughly in the preliminary and supple
mentary reports that had been delivered to the members of the Committee
and that he had little to add. He did wish to call the Committee's
* Refers to mimeographed copy. In typed copy, reference should be
to page 33, fifth full sentence.

1/7/58 -3
attention to the fact that dealers' positions in Government securities
recently had been running about $1 billion higher than before the dis
count rate change in November. This suggested that there were about
$1 billion of securities in the market to be distributed, over and
above any other supplies. Mr. Rouse went on to say that he was grate
ful to the Reserve Banks for accelerating the daily wire reports on
bank reserves and float that were approved at the last meeting of the
Committee. There had been a few problems, but the wires were now
giving an accurate picture of the previous day's reserve balance.
With respect to Treasury financing, Mr. Rouse reported that
the Federal National Mortgage Association planned to announce the
terms of its $750 million financing later today or tomorrow. Meanwhile,
the Treasury planned to continue offering an additional $100 million in
each of the four bills auctions in January, and toward the end of the
month the Treasury planned to announce the terms on its February re
funding. Mr. Rouse said that he knew of no plans for a major cash
financing, but a good many Government agency financing operations were
scheduled for this month. The Treasury estimated that the net cash to
be raised in the Fanny Mae financing plus the money from the additional
bills would be sufficient to carry them through February. It might be
necessary for the Treasury to sell some of its free gold, but if this
were done, it planned to transfer the funds to the Stabilization Fund,
which would not affect bank reserves or open market operations.

1/7/58
Mr. Leach asked if the present level of dealer inventories,
with bill rates down to 2-3/ per cent, did not suggest that dealers
are carrying this thing a bit too far. Mr. Rouse pointed out that
bill rates backed up to 2.85 per cent in the auction yesterday, and
dealers acquired another $00 million bills in the auction. At the
same time, demand for bills was good and dealers reported that they
were selling about $150 million a day. At this rate, they might be
able to work off their positions without difficulty. In Mr. Rouse's
opinion, a bill rate 1/8 per cent below the discount rate was all
right; but as Mr. Leach had suggested, a rate 1/ per cent below the
discount rate was going a bit far in view of the supply of bills in
the market. Of course, he added, the drop to 2-3/4 per cent occurred
all on one day, when the dealers guessed that Chicago banks would be
bidding heavily for the new bills. Mr. Allen remarked, and Mr. Rouse
agreed, that the Chicago banks actually did not bid for or obtain an
unusual amount of those bills.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the
open market transactions during the period
December 17, 1957, through January 6, 1958,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Chairman Martin referred to the letter from Congressman Wright
Patman dated December 23, 1957 that had been distributed before this
meeting in which Mr. Patman requested that the data relating to trans
actions in the System Open Market Account during the period March 1951

1/7/58 -5
to the end of 1956, sent to Mr. Patman on November 12, 1957,be
placed on punch cards and tabulated so as to produce various sum
mary totals of figures by days and months and to compute average
prices for the respective periods at which purchases or sales of
securities were effected. Chairman Martin suggested that a letter
be written to Mr. Patman informing him of the time-consuming nature
of this task and of the expense that would be involved, that the
Committee was prepared to go forward with such a job upon the request
of the full Committee on Banking and Currency of the House, but that
in the absence of a request from the full Committee it would seem
inappropriate for the System to undertake such a large job of pre
paring data for an individual member of the Congress.
Mr. Hayes stated that this request had been discussed at some
length at the New York Bank and that he was concerned about it for
several reasons. His main concern was that the tabulations of data
specified in the request at hand did not seem likely to provide use
ful information. Apart from the expense angle, Mr. Hayes said that
he was disturbed about the handling of such requests which seemed to
put eggs, apples, and oranges together, in a manner that could not
produce significant results. His question was whether it would not
be preferable to offer, perhaps to the Chairman of the Banking and
Currency Committee, to cooperate with the Committee in finding out
what the Committee was seeking to know and in trying to help arrive
at a basis for producing meaningful results.

1/7/58 -6
Chairman Martin stated that he thought this point was well
taken and that it should be a part of the letter he had in mind.
His main point, however, was that a request of this nature should
be from the full Committee on Banking and Currency and that if that
committee wished to pursue this type of inquiry the Federal Reserve
would cooperate. It was his impression from Chairman Spence that
the full Committee on Banking and Currency might not wish to support
a continuation of the types of requests that had been received from
Mr. Patman upon numerous occasions in recent months.
Mr. Hayes said that he agreed completely with this approach
and his thought was to make clear that unnecessary labor that went
into preparing meaningless data produced no benefit either for the
Banking and Currency Committee or the Federal Reserve.
Chairman Martin called for other comments on the handling of
this letter, and no additional suggestions were made. He then sug
gested that the Secretary of the Committee undertake, with the Manager
of the System Account, to prepare a draft of reply to Mr. Patman along
the lines of the discussion with the understanding that when the let
ter was in satisfactory form for dispatch a copy would also be sent
to Chairman Spence. It was understood that this procedure would be
followed.
Chairman Martin next referred to a draft of letter to Mr.
Patman in reply to his letter of November 26, 1957 asking for further

information relating to operations of the System Open Market Account
and of dealers in United States Government securities. The draft of
reply, prepared in accordance with the discussion at the meeting of
the Committee on December 3, 1957, had been distributed by the Secre
tary on December 27, and at this meeting a memorandum containing two
suggestions for editorial revisions in the letter were presented and
discussed. Following the discussion, the letter to Mr. Patman was
approved unanimously in the following form, with the ,nderstanding
that a copy would also be sent to Chairman Spence of the House
Banking and Currency Committee.
Your letter of November 26, 1957 asking for further in
formation relating to operations of the System Open Market
Account and of dealers in United States Government securities
has been discussed at meetings of the Federal Open Market
Committee. Some of the information you request is not re
ported to the Federal Reserve and hence cannot be furnished
by us. Some is given to the System Account on a purely
voluntary and strictly confidential basis and hence it is
not within our discretion to transmit it. Some is available
to the Federal Reserve System because it is fiscal agent of
the United States, and the Treasury, rather than the System,
should be approached for such data. Finally, one major
portion of the data you request could be made available in
the detail you wish only with immense effort. In this case
we suggest an alternative which may serve your purpose
equally well. To the extent practicable from the stand
point of the amount of work involved, and with proper con
sideration for the confidential nature of some of the data,
the Committee desires, of course, that you be furnished with
information that will be useful in your analysis of System
Account operations. Your several requests are discussed in
the order in which your letter presented them.
1. Your request for copies of the record of the
amounts of purchases and sales of Treasury bills and the

1/7/58 -8
prices bid or offered by each dealer for each security on
which the System Account solicited quotations on each day
of trading over the past three years would require an im
mense amount of work, especially since it would be neces
sary to accompany such a record with memoranda explaining
the background of the operations and the reasons for the
actions taken, if you were to obtain an understanding of
the situation reflected by the data. It would appear,
however, that your purpose might be served by having the
information (with the accompanying explanatory memoranda)
for selected dates, rather than for the entire three-year
period. If this strikes you as practicable and you wish
to select a number of days for each of the three years-
say a dozen days a year--preceding December 31, 1956, we
would have the material prepared for you as promptly as
possible. You now have the photostatic copies of the
sheets showing transactions, so that you would be in a
position to select days when the Account was active.
2. Your second request refers to the tabulations
transmitted with my letter of November 12, 1957, showing
each transaction of the System Open Market Account with
each dealer in Government securities from the period of
the Treasury-Federal Reserve Accord in March 1951 to the
end of 1956. You now ask for similar records of each
transaction of the System Account for the period from the
end of 1956 through June 30, 1957.
Each year, pursuant to the requirements of the last
paragraph of section 10 of the Federal Reserve Act, a record
of policy actions taken by the Board of Governors of the Fed
eral Reserve System and by the Federal Open Market Committee,
together with the reasons underlying those actions and the
votes taken in each instance, is made public in the Board's
Annual Report to the Congress. Until that record is made
public in the Annual Report, which is published in the
spring of each year, the policy directives of the Federal
Open Market Committee are regarded as current and are
handled in the strictest confidence. It is true that weekly
statistics showing the condition of the Federal Reserve Banks
are published and that to a greater or lesser degree indi
viduals make justments on the basis of those reports as to
the policy actions taken by the Committee. My letter of
September 10 stated that the Federal Open Market Committee
felt that it would not be proper to divulge information
regarding Committee policy decisions and operations for
the current calendar year. It continues to be the
judgment of the Committee that disclosure of its policy
decisions should come in the manner that has been followed

1/7/58 -9
for many years in carrying out the provisions of section 10
of the Federal Reserve Act, namely, in the Annual Report to
the Congress covering the year most recently ended. For this
reason, it believes that it would not be desirable to furnish
the information regarding operations of the System Account
pursuant to the policy directives issued during any part of
the year in which the directives were issued. If, however,
you so request, we will undertake to prepare tabulations of
the transactions not only for the first half of 1957 but for
the entire calendar year, to be submitted at substantially
the time the Board's Annual Report is published.
3. You note that the names of foreign central banks
were deleted from the tabulations transmitted with my letter
of November 12, and you ask why the names of such banks with
which the System Account has traded in the past should be
withheld from the House Banking and Currency Committee.
To be certain that the situation with respect to the
1700 odd pages of tabulations sent with my November 12 letter
is correctly understood, I wish to emphasize that there were
very few deletions from those sheets and that all of the
names appearing on those schedules were names of dealers in
United States Government securities. In some instances,
those dealers are also domestic commercial banks. However,
the distinction between deleting and retaining names was a
distinction between investors in securities and dealers in
securities, and there was no intention of distinguishing
between foreign and domestic banks per se.
Transactions between the System Account and dealers are
in a different category from transactions between the System
Account and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting on
behalf of and under instructions from its depositors. In
the first place, many central banks and international insti
tutions maintain accounts with the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York. Such central bank accounts are operated by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York on behalf of all of the
Reserve Banks. Transactions for these accounts have
traditionally been held in strict confidence for substan
tially the same reasons that, as a matter of policy, banks
in general hold in strict confidence transactions on behalf
of any of their depositors. This confidential relationship
between bankers and depositors has been considered to be
especially necessary with respect to operations of foreign
central banks, whose deposits with the Federal Reserve Banks
largely represent monetary reserves of their countries.
Disclosure of such operations would be of interest to many
persons who follow political and economic developments in

1/7/58 -10
foreign countries, but such disclosure might well have
serious repercussions and imperil the confidence that
foreign countries place in the Reserve Banks.
Secondly, you state that you understand that "it is
no secret that the System Open Market Account trades with
foreign central banks, acting at times as agent for such
banks." Actually, this is not strictly correct, and the
relationship to which you refer is not between the System
Account and the foreign banks. The Federal Reserve Bank
of New York acts only upon instructions, specific or
standing, from its foreign depositors in handling their
accounts. Orders to buy and sell securities are given by
the depositors to the Foreign Department of the New York
Reserve Bank, which in turn transmits them to the Securi
ties Department of that Bank for execution. Such orders
usually are executed by the Reserve Bank in the open mar
ket, but the foreign customers have been notified that
they may be executed with the System Account at the discre
tion of the Manager. They are carried out with the System
Open Market Account only when the Manager of the Account
so directs for the purpose of coordinating the foreign
transactions with current open market operations that are
being executed pursuant to the directives of the Federal
Open Market Committee. The initiative in executing trans
actions with the System Account rather than in the market
in no manner lies with the foreign correspondent.
L. With respect to your request for data from the
daily reports of operations received from United States
Government securities dealers, these reports are furnished
by the dealers on a purely voluntary basis and in the
strictest confidence. It would not be within the discretion
of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York to disclose information in connection with
these reports.
5. You also request a tabulation of dealer borrowings
with a breakdown by types, sources of credit, terms, and
rate. Such data are not available to the Management of the
System Account.
6. The answer to your next request is the same--we
have no data showing dealer financing of their own customers
to carry Government securities. By way of comment, I might
say that it seems highly doubtful that dealers do finance
their customer holdings to any significant extent although
there might be an occasional transaction of that kind. The
dealers have difficulties enough in financing their own
portfolios of Government securities without assuming added
burdens in financing customer holdings.

1/7/58 -11
7. Finally, you request information concerning
dealer tenders for Treasury bills in the weekly auctions.
In handling tenders in the bill auctions, each Federal
Reserve Bank acts as fiscal agent for the Treasury Depart
ment. A request for data relating to the tenders should,
therefore, be directed to the Treasury Department.
Mr. Fulton, whose train had been delayed in reaching Washington,
entered the room at this point accompanied by Mr. Balles, Assistant Vice
President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.
At Chairman Martin's request, Mr. Young presented a summary
statement on the current economic situation, as more fully reviewed
in a staff memorandum dated January 3, 1958, on Recent Economic and
Financial Developments in the United States and Abroad. A copy of the
staff memorandum, which had been distributed before this meeting, has
been placed in the files of the Committee.
Domestically, economic activity continues to be charac
terized by general cyclical recession, comparable in pace of
output contraction to that experienced in the 1948-49 and
1953-54 recessions.
More is known now about the over-all decline in GNP after
the third quarter. Both the dollar and physical volume of
total product were off about $6 billion, annual rate. Most of
the fourth quarter's decline was associated with inventory
liquidation, since final purchases of product receded only
moderately.
With inventory liquidation a dominant feature of the past
quarter, declining sales of manufacturing industry were to be
expected. November sales were down 2-1/2 per cent from October,
with declines widespread among both durable and nondurable
lines. Sales declines outpaced inventory reduction; hence,
stock-sales ratios rose significantly further. New orders on
durable goods manufacturers in November were about the same
as in the preceding two months, but they were well below the
volume of shipments, so that order backlogs were cut back
further.
Industrial production for December, on a seasonally ad
justed basis, is given a preliminary estimate of 137. Declines

1/7/58 -12-
were again widespread, with automobile assemblies this month
working on the downside.
The automobile market generally has been disappointing
to producers, with new car sales off significantly and used
car sales off moderately from a year ago. Recently, used
car prices have slipped back some. Repossessions on instal
ment sales have reached historically high ground and seem
still to be edging upward.
Other sales at retail, after a slow start in early Decem
ber, apparently picked up sharply in the latter half of the
month. Sales at department stores, seasonally adjusted,
reached a new high, about 1-1/2 per cent above December of
last year and 4 per cent ahead of November.
Construction activity in December continued at about
record levels, with increases in residential construction
again offsetting declines in industrial construction. While
the price situation for newly constructed houses appears to
be fairly firm, recent field reports indicate that prices on
used houses continue to drift downward and also that selling
time on new and used houses has slowed perceptibly. Vacancy
rates, however, continue low and shortages of rental housing
are reported. Although the secondary mortgage market appears
to have bottomed out, no general loosening in the availability
of residential construction or mortgage money has apparently
set in as yet.
Unemployment at mid-December is reported at 3.4 million,
up 200,000 from mid-November.
A continuing high level of new claims filed for unemploy
ment benefits indicates further substantial unemployment rise
since midmonth. For the third week of December, over 550,000
new claims were filed, the highest December figure for the
postwar period. Toward the month end, some 2 million workers,
or 60 per cent more than last year, were receiving unemployment
compensation benefits.
Wholesale commodity markets in December were generally
stable, the average holding about the level prevailing since
midyear. Consumer prices for December are expected to show
some further rise, reflecting further advances in prices of
services and recent increases in retail meat prices.
Available data on international trade indicate that
further decline occurred in November. Whether the decline
in Western European industrial activity reported for October
continued in November is not yet clear. Information has only
become available for Germany and for that country activity
was up in both October and November.

1/7/58 -13-
With regard to the economic outlook, an increasing
number of observers seem to be taking the sanguine view
that recession will be mild and its duration not much
longer than midyear. This optimistic viewpoint places
great weight on the following factors; (a) adjustments
in output, inventory, material prices, and manpower
utilization that have already taken place; (b) the re
vived strength of residential construction; (c) the con
tinuing growth of State and local government expenditure;
(d) the prospect for higher armament expenditures; (e) the
strength of consumer demand in the face of declining per
sonal income; and (f) the resistance of European industrial
activity to recessionary tendencies in world trade and in
the U. S. economy. While this view of the outlook may
prove to be a correct one, it would seem premature to
accept it now. More testing of price levels, inventory
holdings, excess margins of industrial capacity, consumption
and housing demands, and international trends would seem to
be called for, as well as a more definite consensus on a
revised national security program, before too firm a commit
ment to any future pattern of economic development is made.
Chairman Martin next called upon Mr. Thomas who made a statement
on recent financial developments substantially as follows:
The picture of the economic situation portrayed by Mr.
Young shows that a lessening of restraints on credit has
been appropriate. In the financial area the response to
the reduction in Federal Reserve Bank discount rates has
been remarkable. It has been followed by two striking fi
nancial developments. The first is the sharp decline in
interest rates and the second is a substantial increase in
bank credit. The two are to some extent interrelated, but
in a sense are conflicting. Both could hardly happen con
temporaneously unless there were an easing of monetary
policy. Hence, they can be largely attributed to the policy
change and are the types of response that would tend to make
the policy effective in "cushioning adjustments and mitigating
recessionary tendencies in the economy."
The decline in interest rates, which is probably the
sharpest on record for so short a period, has been widespread
in the open markets for money, i.e.,in yields on securities
and open market paper, but has not yet been reflected in what
may be called the administered rates--bank loans to customers

1/7/58 -14-
and mortgages. Yields on outstanding long-term bonds are
back to approximately the lowest levels of last February
but still generally above levels prevailing before mid
1956. Thus it is difficult to say that rates are low by
any postwar standards, though they were not high relative
to the 1920s.
The sharpest declines have occurred in yields of those
issues that had previously risen most--particularly medium
term U. S. Treasury securities and State and local Government
issues. There was some hesitation in the declining tendency
during the mid-December period of heavy liquidity needs, but
only bill rates showed any increase and that was short-lived.
These changes in prices and yields of securities have
been due more largely to anticipations rather than to any
actual change in basic demand and supply factors. In this
sense they may be speculative. To some extent savings held
idle awaiting investment have been put to use in recognition
of the view that interest yields had reached a peak and would
fall. To a large degree the buying of securities has been
based on bank credit. Since mid-November city banks have
increased their holdings of Government securities by about
1.5 billion, of other securities by $300 million, and their
loans on securities by nearly $700 million. Much of the
increase in security loans has been to dealers in Government
securities, which have also borrowed from other sources, in
cluding $600 million in repurchase contracts at the Federal
Reserve Bank. Outright purchases in the System Account also
increased by over $l00 million.
As a result of the increases in holdings of securities
and in loans on securities, accompanied by a substantial
seasonal rise in commercial loans, total loans and invest
ments of banks in leading cities increased by over $2.9 bil
lion in the five weeks ending December 31, using partial
figures for the latest week. This is twice the increase
shown in the corresponding period of each of the two pre
vious years. While much of the increase may be attributed
to seasonal factors, the marked turnaround from the contra
seasonal declines shown in October and November is striking.
Much of it is no doubt to be attributed to a changed climate
of viewpoint. A large portion of the increase in bank hold
ings of securities and also in dealer positions has been in
Treasury bills, which have helped to meet the seasonal
liquidity demands, while the growth in other issues, which
may be considered as speculative, has been much less though
substantial.
Issues of new securities continued in fairly substantial
volume during December, although the calendar was light during

1/7/58 -15-
the holiday period. A heavy volume of issues is scheduled
for January.
Many of the funds supplied by the increase in bank credit
have gone to build up Treasury balances and it appears likely
that the private money supply failed to show the usual seasonal
growth in December. It is difficult, however, to draw definite
conclusions as to money supply figures around the end of the
year because of the wide variations that can result from dif
ferences in reporting days. Figures for the four weeks ending
December 25, for example, show a much smaller increase in de
mand deposits adjusted at city banks than for the period end
ing December 26 last year, but preliminary figures for the
five weeks ending January 1 show a much larger increase than
in last year's period ending January 2. Deposits are generally
drawn down before Christmas, increase sharply in the subsequent
week, and are drawn down again in the early days of January.
It seems most likely that the money supply will have shown
a net decline for the year 1957. Yet the build-up of Treasury
deposits in December, which is not usual for that month, may
supply the basis for a shift of funds to other deposits in the
next few weeks when the Treasury balance will be sharply re
duced. Some of the funds, however, may be used to reduce loans
at banks. If banks have adequate reserves, they will probably
endeavor to maintain the total of their loans and investments.
In brief, recent policies have established the basis for main
taining the privately-owned money supply, even though the re
sult has not yet been attained.
In the first half of January the total cash balance of
the Treasury will probably be reduced from about $3.6 billion
to $1.5 billion, notwithstanding continued new borrowing of
$100 million a week on Treasury bills and the obtaining of
nearly $200 million of cash from the new FNMA issue. Add.
tional borrowing and perhaps the use of the Treasury's free
gold will be needed around the middle of Februaryto keep the
balance from falling much below the $1.5 billion level. Be
cause of debt ceiling limitations, not much borrowing will
be possible until the middle of February, then about $1 bil
lion of new borrowing may be sufficient to hold the line until
the end of March, although at times in the early part of
February and again in March occasional borrowing on special
certificates from the Federal Reserve may be needed. The
amount of such special borrowing could be reduced by the use
of free gold or the willingness of the Treasury to let its
balance decline further.
In the six weeks ending January 1, the System supplied
over $1 billion of reserves through open market operations,

-16-
including $600 million of repurchase contracts. Reserve
needs due to the seasonal currency expansion were fully
as large as, if not a little in excess of, seasonal esti
mates, and the increase in required reserves was larger
than had been projected. Net borrowed reserves were reduced
during the course of December to negligible amounts in the
last two weeks. Member bank borrowings remained close to
$700 million, while excess reserves increased to that level.
It may be said that the System supplied abundant reserves
and that they were put to use through credit expansion.
Estimates of member bank needs for the next few weeks
based on an assumption of the changes in Treasury balances
that have been indicated and on normal seasonal changes in
money in circulation, private deposits, and other factors,
show the abundant availability of reserves usual for the
early weeks of the year.
Some of these will be absorbed by maturities of out
standing repurchase contracts of about $400 million this
week and next. Beginning in the third week of January banks
would have free reserves of $100 million or more, unless
absorbed by reductions in System holdings of bills through
sales or runoffs at maturity.
Free reserves would rise to well over $700 million in
February and March, if the Treasury borrows from the System
on special certificates in the amounts indicated or permits
its balance at the Reserve Banks to decline below $500 million.
Bills held in the System account now amount to about $900
million. Sales of $100 million will be needed this month to
reduce free reserves to around zero. Additional sales would
be required to reestablish net borrowed reserves and particu
larly to offset any special borrowing by the Treasury in
February and March. It appears that sales of half a billion
and more at times can be made without exerting restraint on
the credit situation.
If the recent attempts by banks to maintain credit
volumes should come to an end and bank credit should decline
more than seasonally, then excess reserves should be per
mitted to accumulate. The Treasury bill rate, and other
money rates, would decline further. In that event, in
order to encourage banks to make any temporary reserve ad
justments through borrowing rather than through credit
liquidation, a further reduction in the discount rate would
be appropriate.
Chairman Martin noted that we were approaching the time of year
when the Committee would be making the annual review of its several

1/7/58 -17
continuing operating policies and techniques. He felt it would be
appropriate to report this morning on the progress that had been
made by the Special Committee appointed to study Mr. Mills' sug
gestion at the meeting on January 8, 1957, that the increment in
the System Open Market Account during the year 1956 be converted
into longer-term securities. As recorded in the minutes of the
meeting on March 5, 1957, the Special Committee (Messrs. Martin,
Hayes, Allen, Balderston, Erickson, and Szymczak) had been authorized
to broaden its study to include a review of all of the operating pro
cedures that had been presented in the report of the Ad Hoc Subcom
mittee as discussed at the meeting on March 4 and 5, 1953, with the
exception of the matters relating to the housekeeping aspects of
that report. In so far as the Special Committee was concerned, Chair
man Martin said that thus far it had made very little progress. It
was hoped, however, that when it met again on January 28, 1958, it
would come to grips with the problems it had been studying. In any
event, it was the Chairman's view that there should be a complete
discussion of the problems the Special Committee had been studying
at the time of the meeting in March when the new members of the
Federal Open Market Committee elected by the Federal Reserve Banks
for the year beginning March 1, 1958, assumed their duties. In
anticipation of that, Chairman Martin suggested that it now be under
stood that a meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee would be

1/7/58 -18
held on Tuesday, January 28, 1958, that the meeting following that
would be scheduled for Tuesday, February 11, 1958, and that the
meeting at which the members of the Committee would be changed be
scheduled for Tuesday, March 4, 1958, with the understanding that
the afternoon of that day and as much of Wednesday, March 5, 1958,
as might be necessary be devoted to meetings of the full Committee
for the purpose of discussing the matters contained in the Ad Hoc
Subcommittee report and the current operating procedures and techniques
for the System Open Market Account.
Mr. Leedy said that if a Federal Open Market Committee meeting
was held on February 11, a meeting of the Conference of Presidents
would be held on February 10, 1958.
Chairman Martin also referred to the report that had been
received by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York from the New York
Clearing House Association (the so-called Temple Report) dated
October 22, 1957, copies of which had been distributed to members
of the Federal Open Market Committee by Mr. Hayes under date of
November 15, 1957. This report, he noted, was an indirect outgrowth
of the recommendations contained in the Ad Hoc Subcommittee's report,
and he suggested that Messrs. Riefler, Thomas, Rouse, and Roelse be
requested to review the report of the New York Clearing House Associa
tion with a view to having a preliminary discussion of its contents
at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee to be held on

1/7/58 -19
Tuesday, January 28, 1958. The Chairman noted that in discussing
this with Mr. Hayes, the latter had suggested the possibility of
including a representative of the Treasury Department on this staff
committee but that he (Chairman Martin), after discussing the matter
with Secretary of the Treasury Anderson, felt that it would be wiser
for the Open Market Committee to come to grips with the problem dis
cussed in the Clearing House report before bringing in a Treasury
representative. After the Open Market Committee had reached some
tentative basis for its views as a Committee, the report might be
taken up with the Treasury and after that, if it seemed desirable,
there could also be meetings with the dealers in Government securi
ties at which representatives of both the Treasury and the Federal
Reserve would be present.
Mr. Hayes said that his reason for suggesting that the Treasury
be brought into the analysis of the Temple Report at this stage was
that he understood this report dealt largely with the subject of
financing of dealers in United States Government securities by the
banks. He had not thought of the Temple Report as having grown out
of the Ad Hoc Subcommittee report but understood that it was the
result of a request by former Secretary of the Treasury Humphrey,
made on the occasion of a meeting in New York at which Mr. Humphrey
had indicated that he did not think the banks were doing their part
in financing dealers. Mr. Hayes said he did not feel strongly on

1/7/58 -20
the question, but he had been inclined to think it would be desirable
to have Treasury representatives participate in the discussion of the
Temple Report.
Chairman Martin said that, to clarify the point as to the
origin of the Temple Report, Secretary Humphrey's suggestion at a
meeting of the Clearing House Association in New York was a direct
result of a conversation that he (Chairman Martin) had had with the
Secretary on the report of the Ad Hoc Subcommittee. He had cleared
this point with Mr. Humphrey recently. Mr. Humphrey subsequently
talked with Mr. Sproul and the suggestion that resulted in the forma
tion of the Temple Committee later was made at a Clearing House dinner
which the Secretary attended.
Mr. Hayes said that he had not been aware that the background
included the Ad Hoc Subcommittee report; in any event, he said he
agreed it would be desirable for the entire Open Market Committee to
go into the details of the Temple Report. Returning to the Chairman's
earlier reference to the January 28 meeting of the Special Committee,
Mr. Hayes said there was some question whether the full report by the
staff committee that had been studying the facts of the experience
with present operating procedures would be available by January 28,
although Mr. Roelse was trying to expedite the completion of that
report. (This staff committee, which was appointed at the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee on May 23, 1956, pursuant to a
suggestion made by Mr. Sproul at the meeting on May 9, 1956, consisted

1/7/58 -21
of Mr. Harold V. Roelse, Chairman; Mr. Tilford C. Gaines, Secretary
Mr. J. Dewey Daane; Mr. Robert Holland; and Mr. Donald C. Miller,
with Mr. Riefler as Secretary of the Federal Open Market Committee
expected, ex officio, to keep in touch with the committee's work.)
Chairman Martin said that, while this was a point to be con
sidered, his suggestion was that the whole subject be moved out from
the Special Committee that had been considering it to the full Open
Market Committee by the time of the meeting in March when the new
members would assume their duties. He felt that the report of the
staff committee on experiences with operating procedures could be
sufficiently summarized by January 28 to permit at least a preliminary
discussion of the subject at that time.
After further brief discussion, it was understood that the
program suggested by Chairman Martin would be followed and that at
the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on January 28 there
would be a preliminary discussion of the report submitted by the New
York Clearing House Association, while at the time of the meeting to
be held on March 4, 1958, the members of the Committee and the Presi
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks who were not members of the Com
mittee would plan to be in Washington on both March 4 and March 5
in order to permit a full discussion of the matters that had been
under study by the Special Committee appointed pursuant to Mr. Mills'
suggestion at the meeting on January 8, 1957.

1/7/58 -22-
Chairman Martin then turned to the discussion of the cur
rent economic situation and credit policy, and Mr. Hayes made a
statement of his views substantially as follows:
It is now clear that the current recession is at
tributable largely to a decline in business plant and
equipment expenditures, aggravated by an inventory cycle.
What is not clear, however, is whether these influences
are likely to spread to consumer spending and thus to
produce a cumulative recession. There is uncertainty as
to the probable speed of inventory adjustment, particularly
by manufacturers. There is also much uncertainty as to the
amount and timing of the expected increase in defense
spending--although it does not seem probable that this will
be a significant factor for several months at least. We
should recognize the wide range of possible ways in which
the recession may develop, and we would doubtless be
prudent to assume that the next upturn may be a fairly
long way off--to be preceded either by a continuing gradual
decline or perhaps by a sideways movement after the current
decline has run its course.
I shall not try to enumerate the various statistical
developments on which these conclusions are based. Most of
the recent data have been discouraging, but consumer spend
ing in the Christmas season was well sustained and showed a
less adverse reaction of consumers to bad news than might
have been feared. Apparently one of the so-called "built
in stabilizers"--the tendency of transfer payments to off
set much of the effect of greater unemployment and shorter
hours--has been a significant sustaining influence.
Price developments in the last month or two have been
disappointing, in that the upward trend has reasserted it
self after several months of relative stability and in
spite of the general slackening in business activity.
Bank credit has expanded more rapidly in the last three
or four weeks than a year ago, thus reversing, at least
temporarily, the typical pattern of recent months. For one
thing, the growth in business loans was almost as large as
last year--possibly because during periods of seasonal
pressure, such as tax dates and the year-end, the present
low level of corporate liquidity forces a relatively heavy
borrowing program, whereas during other recent periods in
which corporations have had no unusual disbursements to
make, the lower level of business activity and prospects
than a year ago has been controlling. There is also a

1/7/58 -23
possibility that expectations of a further decline in long
term rates may have induced some corporations to shift back
to bank borrowing temporarily in the hope of obtaining still
lower rates later on, and that this shift may have been
facilitated by some easing in bank lending policies. Another
factor making for additional bank loans has been the very
high level of dealer inventories of Government securities,
with greater recourse to banks, especially in New York, and
less to non-banking corporations for financing the additions
to these inventories. Bank holdings of Government securities
have recently increased much more sharply than last year.
Nevertheless, the total money supply at the year-end was
probably about 1% less than at the end of 1956.
We are again approaching a time when our policies will
have to take account of the Treasury's financing activities.
Apart from the FNMA issue to be offered this week, I have in
mind the very large refunding to be announced probably a few
days after our next meeting--with the possibility of an
announcement of a new cash financing. Our forecasts of
Treasury receipts and expenditures make it seem more than
ever essential that the debt limit be raised by several bil
lion dollars at the earliest opportunity.
As for monetary policy, the System is faced with diffi
cult decisions as to how fast it should push the easing of
credit and as to the most appropriate sequence of use of the
various instruments of policy. Clearly the present recession
calls for a general policy directed toward assuring an ade
quate volume of credit for all potential borrowers with
economically sound credit needs. This policy would be con
sistent with the evidence that business recession exists and
that it may become more severe during 1958. To the extent
that the quest for liquidity by banks and others affects the
supply of and demand for credit, it might be necessary for
the System to lean somewhat more heavily on the side of
easier money than would otherwise be the case to achieve any
given effect on the economy. On the other hand, we should
stop short of injecting so much liquidity into the economy
that it would be hard to recapture restraint if inflation
should emerge again as the major problem--and we should
also avoid creating a sloppy money market or a needlessly
low structure of interest rates that would have adverse
longer-run effects on savings and on investment returns.
I think that our policy should be directed toward
further relaxation of restraint on bank reserves and the
money market and that open market operations should be
used to this end. It might be appropriate to think of
zero net borrowed reserves as an initial benchmark, with

1/7/58
free reserves of perhaps 100 or 200 million later in the
month, especially if our actions to absorb excess reserves
result in tight conditions in the money market. We should,
I believe, from this time forward avoid any weekly averages
showing net borrowed reserves, although daily deviations in
that direction need not be avoided. As long as the weekly
averages show net borrowed reserves, our policy can be
interpreted as one of still maintaining a restrictive credit
policy in some degree. This could be accomplished simply by
failing to push outright bill sales as aggressively later in
January as would be necessary to fully offset market factors
making for greater reserve availability. Present projections
suggest that after the run-off of repurchase agreements modest
outright sales should suffice.
As for the discount rate, I recognize that if any change
is to be made within the next few weeks, it should be done
fairly promptly to avoid confusion in connection with the ex
pected Treasury financing program. However, I feel strongly
that the recent reduction in the discount rate has already
led to a downward adjustment of market rates that, if any
thing, has proceeded too rapidly, and I can see no benefit
from our taking aggressive action at this juncture to drive
them down further. I think there is no cause for concern if
the Treasury bill rate should stay well below the discount
rate, especially during January when seasonal factors are
acting as a strong depressant of the bill rate. In my
judgment it would be best to leave the discount rate un
changed at this time. If economic conditions should continue
to worsen and should later justify a lower rate, a reduction
could be effected in February or March after the Treasury is
out of the market.
We have had occasion recently to review in the New York
Bank the question whether margin requirements under Regula
tions T and U might appropriately be reduced. It is our
opinion that the present 70% requirement is abnormally high
and that a prompt reduction to 50% would be justified both
in terms of recent stock market performance and the use of
stock market credit, and in terms of general credit policy.
I think there is wide acceptance of the view that re
serve requirements are unduly high and that some reduction
would be in order at such time as it would be consistent
with our general monetary policy. A suitable opportunity
may present itself after the return flow of funds to the
banking system early in the year has run its course. I
would suggest that the Board of Governors give consideration
at that time--assuming that recessionary tendencies are then

1/7/58 -25.
still dominant--to a reduction in reserve requirements,
including some reduction in the present geographical dif
ferences in requirements, especially between central re
serve city and reserve city banks. While some such move
would seem desirable per se, I would also hope that progress
might soon be made in reaching general agreement on a new
and more equitable over-all system of reserve requirements.
Mr. Johns said there was little for him to report from the
Eighth District that differed materially from the national picture ex
cept for the deterioration in cash farm income in certain portions of
the district, particularly parts of Missouri and Arkansas. He described
this deterioration, which had resulted largely from a decline in income
from the cotton crop, as of intense local interest and as having little
national significance, though it does have some. It had affected the
local banks, which were not receiving pay-offs of last year's loans.
With respect to Committee policy, Mr. Johns said that he was
in substantial agreement with the views expressed by Mr. Hayes. While
he continued to be reluctant to make policy recommendations in terms
of net borrowed reserves, Mr. Johns said that these figures did have
some value and that a target such as Mr. Hayes had suggested would
seem appropriate to him. More importantly, however, he would be
reluctant to see interest rates react from their downward trend and
move upward, and he would recommend that open market operations be
conducted so as to prevent that happening. He would not wish to give
any impression that policy was tightening even a little, but he was
not now prepared to say that policy should be significantly easier,
although he might have a different view at the next meeting of the

1/7/58 -26
Committee. For the present, he would like to hold about where we
are and if this meant zero or some positive free reserves this would
be satisfactory. He would not wish to have interest rates move up.
Mr. Bryan said that since the preceding meeting of the Com
mittee there had been a further rise in insured unemployment in the
Sixth District. The agricultural situation seemed to be worsening
with the arrival of new figures showing cash receipts from farm
marketings down 34 per cent as against the same time a year ago.
Deposits at agricultural banks in rural areas in the district cur
rently were well below last year and the year to year comparisons
were becoming increasingly unfavorable. Agricultural banks in the
Sixth District would have a heavy farm loan carryover, Mr. Bryan
said, with further increases in loans collateralled by real estate.
District production, trade, and financial developments, however, do
not suggest a rapid acceleration of the present recessionary movement
in the nonfarm economy.
With respect to national policy, Mr. Bryan said that the ab
sence of clear, further economic deterioration would hardly appear
to justify any policy of "pulling all the stops" at this time. Ac
cordingly, he would not favor any further downward revision of the
discount rate; and, although he believed the System should be alert
to every opportunity to reduce reserve requirements, he could not
urge such a policy in the light of the seasonal factors now operating.

1/7/58 -27-
After commenting that no further change in the Committee's directive
seemed needed at this time, Mr. Bryan continued his statement sub
stantially as follows:
At the same time, I believe that the reserve position
of the banking system needs to be eased through Open Market
policy. We end the year with total reserves actually less
than or negligibly different from what they were at the
same time last year. The meaning of this situation is that
the American banking system is less or at best no more able
to support a deteriorated economy than it was at the end of
1957, when we were faced with the boom. If allowance be
made, as I believe it must be made, for a growth factor in
the economy, then the reserve situation is in my judgment
quite unsatisfactory.
Accordingly, it would seem to me to be wise policy not
to attempt an entire offset of seasonal factors tending to
ease bank reserve positions. On the contrary, I would like
to see the Open Market instrument operated in such fashion
as would give us positive total-reserve comparisons when
measured against year-ago dates. Such a policy would mean
that we would not be primarily concerned with security
market yields--certainly not be frightened by "sloppy money"-
and pay little or no attention to free reserves. I would like
to see the situation allowed naturally to ease itself, even
if, just for a figure, the bill rate drifted to 2.50 or below.
At such a figure, I would be inclined to make sales and to
review, in another few weeks, what our total reserve position
on the year-to-year figures may prove to be in the light of
our actions.
In advocating such an objective and method of action, I
believe that it has certain advantages in avoiding dangers:
(a) It brings us back to a basis of action compatible
with our Continuing Statements of Operating Policy, which
must shortly be reviewed again;
(b) It avoids what I consider the grave danger that
an increase in free reserves may occur, not because the credit
situation has bettered but because the economic situation has
worsened;
(c) It avoids the hazard of sales based on estimated
magnitudes at a time when, aside from our usual difficulties
of estimation, the meaning and extent of market factors
seasonally affecting bank reserves are both especially
elusive;

-28-
(d) It will avoid what I regard as the greatest of
all dangers, namely, that we will underestimate the effects
of the present illiquid position of the American banking
system and thus cause us ourselves to be satisfied with a
policy inadequate to the task of making the banking system
a dynamic factor in economic recovery.
In closing this statement I would like to say that our
policy in the month of December seems to me to have been
correct in trending the free reserve position downward
towards zero. But I note that it has been inadequate in
making any measurable impact on member bank borrowing, only
a moderate impact on bank liquidity as measured by excess
reserves, and I am disturbed by the fact that most of our
policy in December has been effected by repurchase agreements.
I doubt that repurchase agreements, while a useful in
strument, have any important function as an expression of
monetary policy in combatting economic recession. At the
moment, about the only beneficial effect that I can see in
RP's is in permitting dealers to carry inventories, and it
is arguable that that permission, when carried to the extent
that we have used it, actually conceals from us the tightness
of the monetary situation and entices us into thinking that
we have done more to ease than we actually have.
Mr. Williams said that a single sentence summary of his report
was that business activity continued to slow down. Contrary to this
summary, department store sales during the four weeks of December were
five per cent higher than a year earlier, and for the first eleven
months of the year the total showed an increase of one per cent.
Factory employment continued a downward trend. Unemployment in the
State of Pennsylvania had been rising reflecting in part a seasonal
trend. Employers were not expecting this trend to change before early
spring. Automobile registrations were running below last year. In
banking and finance, earning assets and deposits rose in the three
weeks ending December 25 and business loans were up in this period
with most of the increase accounted for by sales finance companies

1/7/58 -29-
and utilities. Borrowings from the Reserve Bank were about the same
as a year ago.
The continuing slowdown in business activity indicated to Mr.
Williams that some further easing of open market policy would be de-
sirable. He would view as an appropriate target for policy during the
next three weeks a program that would keep the long-term bill rate at
about 2.8 per cent with member bank borrowings in the $400-$500 million
area and net free reserves perhaps around $100 million. Any tightening,
even temporarily, should be avoided. There should be no change in the
discount rate at this time.
Mr. Fulton said that there was a pronounced feeling of dis-
appointment in the heavy industries of the Cleveland District at this
time regarding orders and production. The steel industry was operating
at about 50 per cent of capacity, which was uneconomic. Orders for pipe
which had been sold out into 1960 had practically disappeared through
cancellations. Oil companies were not buying because of restricted
production and they were also waiting for cheaper money. Warehouse in-
ventories of steel were high at present, whereas users of steel generally
had low inventories. No upturn, either in the steel industry or in the
machine tool industry, was looked for in the immediate future, and it
probably would be the fourth quarter of 1958 before such upturn de-
veloped. Unemployment was noticeably higher, but department store
sales during the Christmas season were very good. Loan demand was
holding up although banks now anticipate a gradual diminution in their

1/7/58 -30-
loan totals during the next several months. Collections were being
well maintained except in the case of wholesale loans to automobile
dealers. There was talk of real estate money becoming more avail-
able, but portfolios were quite full. Contracts on new automobiles
for thirty-six months or longer were a substantially smaller per-
centage of the total than had been the case earlier.
Pessimism seemed to be outrunning business at this time. Mr.
Fulton said, the same as optimism earlier had outrun the statistics.
His conclusions as to policy were that the discount rate should not
be changed, that the Open Market Committee should maintain as near
zero free reserves as possible, and that it should err on the side
of ease. Some positive free reserves would be appropriate. Mr.
Fulton would also like to see the bill rate a little under the dis-
count rate.
Mr. Shepardson said that Mr. Fulton had covered a good deal
of his opinion. Certainly there were many indications of some further
down drift in business. On the other hand, we were still at a rela-
tively high level. It could not be expected that year after year we
would continue to make higher records, Mr. Shepardson said, and he
was not disturbed at some little down drift. There was a good deal
of uncertainty as to the Government's program and other spending
programs and, with that uncertainty, it would be unwise to make other
moves that would indicate a further easing of credit. Noting that Mr.
Hayes had made a statement regarding the effects of changes in

1/7/58 -31-
interest rates on future savings, Mr. Shepardson said that he would
not wish to see interest rates drop to a point that would retard
improvement in the volume of savings.
In view of the situation as he observed it and at the risk
of seeming to be a "stick-in-the-mud," Mr. Shepardson said that he
would not wish to see the Committee ease the situation materially
further. He thought the target that had been mentioned of free re-
serves around the zero level should be adequate. There had already
been a material drop. This would mean, Mr. Shepardson said, that he
would not favor a change in discount rate at this time or any material
further increase in free reserves. The zero target would seem appro-
priate.
Mr. Robertson then made a statement substantially as follows:
Since our last meeting, when I cautioned the Committee
against easing too fast--believing that there exists a
danger of exaggerating adjustments at a high level of eco-
nomic activity into a major recession--we have seen a con-
tinuation of downward movements in some areas. The index
of industrial production has moved down two points to 137,
gross national product dropped by a $6 billion annual rate
figure below the third quarter level (though in fairness,
one must point out, as did the staff in its memorandum to
the Open Market Committee, that this drop from $439 billion
to $433 billion is largely attributable to a shift from a
moderate rate of inventory accumulation in the two preceding
quarters to a modest liquidation (the word "modest" is my
own), and unemployment has increased.
At the same time we have witnessed increases (1) of
department store sales in December (to a new high), (2) of
consumer prices (.45%), (3) in bank credit (exceeding that
of December last year), (4) in residential construction
(close to the level of late '56), (5) in consumer installment
credit, (6) in rents, and (7) in outlays for construction.

1/7/58
-32-
In addition, both demand deposits and time deposits in-
creased in commercial banks during the year--e.g., time
deposits increased $5.5 billion in '57 as compared with
$2.2 billion in '56.
This does not add up to an entirely one-sided picture,
but rather one of adjustments with recessionary tendencies.
None of us wants a recession, let alone a depression--
not even to purge us of our past sins of inflation. No one
wants to see people unemployed. We should cushion economic
adjustments and mitigate recessionary tendencies in the
economy in order to avoid undue unemployment, among other
things. But we should do so with an eye to the future--a
future which, in my opinion, will present for us inflationary
problems of a magnitude greater than those of the last decade.
Any action we take should be so contrived as to preclude
(if possible) (1) the feeling on the part of industry that we
will provide all the money necessary to enable it to pass on
to the consumer the amount of additional costs resulting from
wage negotiations (as has been the case in the past), and (2)
a feeling on the part of the people as a whole that we (the
Federal Reserve) are so fearful of a recession that we will
panic at the first sight of one and yet go to any length to
put a floor under each succeeding inflationary rise, ir-
respective of the cause. No one will admit that that is what
we are doing or what we have done in the past. Certainly we
did not have that intention. But we should be aware and try
to avoid that result.
Put another way, in dealing with a business recession
of questionable magnitude and duration, we should not take
our eyes completely off the long-term problem of inflation.
We must remember that today there are in the economy many
built-in stabilizers which will tend to mitigate the severity
and consequences of economic slide-offs. For example, there
was a time when unemployment even at present levels would
have meant much more economically than it does today; witness
the fact that two million of the unemployed are receiving
unemployment benefits in dollars.
In walking the tight rope between inflation and depres-
sion the monetary authority must not have too strict a
criterion of success. A very few months ago we were "fight-
ing inflation." If there has been some pause in the necessity
for the fight, possibly we should feel gratified rather than
frantically taking steps to bring back the conditions we were
so recently fighting.
This Committee needs to guard against being unduly in-
fluenced by statements of economists in the public press.

1/7/58 -33-
These people feel impelled to say something whether they have
anything to say at all and are subject to mob hysteria. They
are particularly dangerous at this time of year when they feel
especially impelled to say something about the forthcoming
calendar year. It may be important to keep our eyes on the
current facts rather than on forecasts which have a very poor
historical record.
If rising prices be looked upon as an indicator of ex-
cessive total demand and falling prices as an indicator of
inadequate demand, we see as yet no indication of a need for
change in monetary policy. Neither wholesale prices as a whole
nor consumer prices have declined.
In the light of the foregoing, plus my personal belief
that the present recession is not nearly as serious as many
economists and many writers portray it, and that the economy
will turn around more rapidly than many seem to think, my
counsel would be to maintain an even keel position, neither
to increase nor to diminish the degree of tightness or ease
which is presently being maintained with respect to bank
reserves.
I am not urging that we take a backward step--one can
never undo what has been done--but merely that we do not move
further in the direction of ease until and unless we are more
certain than I am that the increased availability of money
resulting therefrom will be used for the positive purpose of
cushioning recessionary tendencies rather than merely for the
purpose of facilitating speculation in government bonds, the
price of which has been drastically affected by our previous
actions.
Mr. Mills said that in his opinion the admirable exposition that
Mr. Thomas had given of the movement of reserves, the level of Federal
Reserve Bank discounts, and the changes in the composition of commercial
bank assets could be taken as a proper guide for near-run System policy.
In that connection, he pointed out that negative free reserves had been
reduced from an average of $464 million last September to where there
were positive free reserves at present. This was concrete evidence that
the Federal Reserve System had made credit available in adequate quanti-
ties for the economy's needs and had also developed a supporting climate

1/7/58 -34-
to the November reduction in the discount rate.
It could be important in policy formulation, Mr. Mills sug-
gested, to bear in mind the System's experience that there is a very
definite lag from the time reserves are made more freely available
until the time that their effects begin to work through the structure
of commercial bank lending and investment activities and on through
the general economy. On that thesis, and emphasizing that the month
of December always produced marked temporary fluctuations in the de-
mand for bank credit that cloud the credit picture, the System's
earlier actions might not be reflected fully before probably the
latter part of this month. It could then become apparent that the
effect of the System's previous actions had produced a greater degree
of credit ease and maneuverability for the comercial banking system
than the actual reserve figures before us might themselves indicate.
Mr. Mills cited the over-all willingness of commercial banks
to retain U. S. Government securities in the face of a rather high
level of borrowings at the Federal Reserve Banks as a development
that gave promise of what should be the ultimately sustaining effects
of the System's actions on the money supply. If bank loans should
run off rather rapidly in January, it would then be in order to
supply reserves so as to encourage commercial banks to expand their
investments in U. S. Government securities and hence to nourish the
money supply.
In accordance with his reasoning, Mr. Mills felt that if
free reserves were held at around the zero level, they would be

1/7/58 -35-
adequate to maintain the money supply and to permit reasonable
freedom in commercial bank loan and investment activities. On
that basis, he also thought that the interaction of the supply
of reserves on interest rates might positively confirm an interest
rate structure by the end of the month that had not been colored
by the speculative factors that have influenced interest rate
movements in recent weeks. If it was then reasonable to believe
that the general interest rate structure had stabilized at a level
below the present 3 per cent discount rate, a further quarter per
cent reduction in the discount rate might be considered.
Mr. Leach said that the Fifth District economy continued in
a recessionary movement. Production of textiles was curtailed in
December, with shutdowns at Christmas of as much as a week. Prices
in the hosiery industry continued on the weak side, and it was ap-
parent that further elimination of production facilities must occur
before the industry would be on a solid footing. Bituminous coal
production in the district for the four weeks ended mid-December was
8 per cent under the previous four weeks and 12 per cent under a year
ago. Declining employment and hours worked and increased unemploy-
ment claims corroborated signs of weakness in individual industries.
Further corroboration was to be found in the behavior of business
loans of district reporting member banks which had increased $20
million during the last four weeks of 1957, compared with $50 mil-
lion in the corresponding period a year earlier.

1/7/58 -36-
Mr. Leach went on to say that in such a recessionary period
as Mr. Young had described there should be no doubt as to the System's
posture. He favored a flexible credit policy and he felt we had one.
Such a flexible policy should find expression in easier credit condi-
tions. Interest rates have declined sharply, Mr. Leach noted, and
if they were the sole indicator of credit conditions one might say that
the System had eased sufficiently. The decline in rates had clearly
outrun reserve availability, however, and some further easing in re-
serve positions seemed appropriate. He did not know how long the
recession would last or how severe it would become, but he had the
definite impression that more easing would be required and he saw
some advantages in increasing reserve availability at this time rather
than later. Mr. Leach said that he was not talking about much more
ease, but as a bench mark he suggested $150 million of free reserves,
and he would favor moving to this position well in advance of the
forthcoming Treasury financing. While he advocated a little more
easing in the reserve position of member banks, Mr. Leach said that
he wished to make it clear that he would not want the System to be
excessively easy and thus to compound the problems of the future
when we would again be combatting inflationary pressures. He could
see no need to change the Committee's directive at this time, and he
would not favor a reduction in the discount rate now.
Mr. Leedy said that a few developments in the Tenth District
were contrary to the national trend. Tenth District cash r eceipts

1/7/58 -37-
from farm marketings were up slightly this year over 1956, in contrast
to the small decline in the nation. The explanation for the rise in
the Tenth District was to be found in cattle marketings: increased cash
receipts from livestock marketings had more than offset a decline in
returns from crops. There had been a marked reduction this year in the
Soil Bark Program and winter wheat acreage seeded was 26 per cent
higher than a year ago with a preliminary crop estimate 49 per cent
higher.
In banking developments district business loans continued to
rise in the last few weeks of 1957. The reserve position of banks
improved materially and borrowings from the Reserve Bank were reduced.
Unemployment in the Tenth District had continued to rise but the rate
seemed to be significantly lower than the national rate. Department
store trade during the Christmas season was higher than in 1956.
As for System policy, Mr. Leedy felt that a program of ease
should be continued in the period ahead although the System Account
should offset the accumulation of reserves that would result from
the seasonal developments this month. The aim should be for something
better than a zero reserve position and should continue on the plus
side, but the System should not contribute to any further sharp
decrease in interest rates. The large holdings of Government securi-
ties dealers indicated some speculative activity in anticipation of
a further decline in interest rates. Mr. Leedy felt that before too

1/7/58 -38-
long it might become necessary to reduce the discount rate, but he
would not suggest a change at this time.
Mr. Allen said that the development most worthy of mention
at this time was in the retail trade field. Preliminary data in-
dicated an upsurge in buying in the last few weeks before Christmas
which carried sales for December well above the same month in 1956.
This was true not only in major Seventh District cities but in the
United States as a whole. While these preliminary figures covered
only one economic area, they indicated a change in direction for
the first time in four months and showed that the American people
at this point were not frightened to the extent of curtailing expendi-
tures.
Mr. Allen noted that leading figures in the automobile in-
dustry were reducing their 1958 production estimates downward in
their public utterances, and he said that the downward reductions
were even greater when they were speaking privately. One leading
figure in the industry said privately last week that before the
winter was over General Motors would undoubtedly cut production as
Ford and Chrysler already had done. This individual had expressed
the belief that the automobile business could improve by the end of
the year if the Federal Reserve and Walter Reuther would relax, and
he did not expect Mr. Reuther to relax. Mr. Allen said that Seventh
District information on automobile credit differed from the situation

1/7/58 -39-
found by Mr. Fulton, with reports from Seventh District bank lenders
indicating a further softening in terms during November. The pro-
portion of long-term contracts was continuing to increase, and avail-
able data on collections suggested a further rise in delinquents.
After pointing out that for the country as a whole business
loans of weekly reporting member banks had risen 3.4 per cent in 1957
compared with 18.1 per cent in 1956, Mr. Allen said that in the Seventh
District, the increase was 4.6 per cent in 1957 compared with 20.6 per
cent in 1956. While business loan growth had been slow, investments
in Governments and other securities and loans on securities had taken
up the slack, at least at the large banks. In December, total credit
growth at weekly reporting banks for the entire country amounted to
$2.4 billion, $700 million more than a year ago, while in the Seventh
District the net increase was only slightly above December 1956.
While on the subject of banks, Mr. Allen stated that from time
to time during the past year several of the Reserve Bank Presidents had
told him that policing of their discount windows had been made more dif-
ficult by complaints on the part of their larger banks that one of the
large Chicago banks was a continuous borrower. Mr. Allen said that if
as appeared likely that bank did not borrow or buy Federal funds today
or tomorrow, it would mean that for four consecutive periods it would
not have borrowed or purchased Federal funds, but on the other hand
had sold Federal funds in substantial amounts.

1/7/58 -40-
Turning to the question of Committee policy, Mr. Allen said
he was still much concerned about the increase in consumer prices.
He did not think this Committee or its actions had caused that rise
and he did not think the Committee could take actions which would
eliminate the other factors that had caused it, but he considered
this rise so much more important than anything else that he would
not like to see the Committee take any action that would contribute
to a further rise in consumer prices. He would go along with the
comments of several others in that he would dislike any further
easing of the situation. At the preceding meeting, the Committee
had decided on a target of zero negative free reserves and he would
like to continue with that target.
Mr. Deming said that a lazy downward drift continued to
characterize the Ninth District economy. There was no evidence that
this downtrend had quickened in the past few weeks. Banking develop-
ments reflected the general economic situation. Credit had become
somewhat easier. The largest savings bank in the district had reduced
its rate on conventional mortgages and in general mortgage money was
more available.
As to prospects, Mr. Deming said that the farm picture was
bright: winter conditions had been good and the outlook for the
winter wheat crop was excellent. Present estimates indicated a
wheat crop in Montana 31 per cent larger than in 1957. Mr. Deming
also reported two other developments which he thought worthy of note.

1/7/58 -41-
First, one major manufacturing concern which had furloughed its
workers called a substantial number back earlier than had been
expected at the time the furlough began. Another major concern
now contemplated something less in the way of layoffs than had
been expected. The second factor that he thought worthy of note
was that the largest bank in the district, which was organized
along divisional lines, had just finished its divisional roundup
on loan prospects, and the conclusion was that the total loan in-
crease in the first part of 1958 would be as great as in the first
part of 1957. Mr. Deming added the comment that this bank's
management suspected the total result even though it did not partic-
ularly question the divisional estimates.
On the policy side, Mr. Deming said he also felt that the
interest rate movement had gone a little too far a little too fast.
Consequently he would not follow a policy at this immediate time
aimed at or resulting in an even lower rate structure. He would
not like an immediate change in the discount rate. However, he
believed that open market operations should be conducted so as to
leave a small positive free reserve level. If the downturn in
rates that we had seen thus far represented more adjustment than
would normally have been expected as a result of credit action, a
positive free reserve position would not be inconsistent with no
further decline in rates.
Mr. Mangels said that basically the Twelfth District was
not as pessimistic as reports indicated for some other areas. The

1/7/58 -42-
district had been experiencing a continuation of activity on the down
side, but there was some indication of modification in the downward
movement although no firming was yet apparent. The downtrend may have
been overemphasized, he said, noting that in general the level of
activity was still high even in some of the weaker areas. As to un-
favorable factors, Mr. Mangels noted reductions in nonagricultural
employment because of layoffs in the aircraft and related defense
industries, adding that probably there would be further reductions.
This had been mainly from natural attrition and lack of replacement
of workers rather than from wholesale layoffs. Steel operations in
the district were at 79 per cent of capacity. Mining companies had
reduced production, some by lowering hours worked and others by
reductions in the number of persons employed. In November, building
permits declined from October and were below a year earlier. On the
favorable side, Mr. Mangels reported that between October and November
there was no change in unemployment in the district. For the first
time in four years there had not been a seasonal increase in prices
of Douglas fir lumber and one large plywood manufacturer had just
announced a $2.00 a thousand reduction in prices. On the whole, Mr.
Mangels said that the lumber industry in the Northwest was considerably
more optimistic at present than it had been a year ago about the next
year's outlook. Department store sales in December were at the
December 1956 level. Automobile sales were holding up fairly well,
and agriculture was in very good shape although prices were down

1/7/58 -43-
somewhat. The shipbuilding industry in both the Pacific Northwest
and in southern California had shown considerable improvement.
With respect to banking, Mr. Mangels noted that a year ago
bankers did not know too well what their borrowers' requirements
would be and were conservative in their attitudes. Now they feel
they have adequate loanable funds and are in position to take care
of their customers in meeting expected demands during the next 30 to
60 to 90 days. One large San Francisco bank was now planning to
expand its real estate mortgage portfolio by $15 to $20 million in
the coming year. Pressure for loans was not nearly as great as a
year ago according to some reports, Mr. Mangels said, although banks
expect that the total outstandings will stay fairly close to the
existing level. There was some talk of a reduction in the prime
rate within the next 30 days and large corporations were currently
operating on a hand-to-mouth basis, hoping to take advantage of any
reduction that might come.
Although there were indications that there might be a little
further slowdown, Mr. Mangels said that the problem seemed to him
to be whether further credit ease would be constructive in the over-
all situation or whether the injection of more funds would merely
generate speculation. His feeling was that the System should be
cautious in supplying additional reserves; he would keep the free
reserve level around zero but would prefer small amounts of negative
free reserves rather than to have positive free reserves. He would

1/7/56 -44-
make no change in the discount rate at this time, and he thought the
Committee's directive was satisfactory in its present form.
Mr. Irons' appraisal of the national situation was that there
had been further tapering off. This had been reasonably moderate in
amount and the picture was not showing signs of cumulating. It was
more in the nature of a rolling adjustment. He could see no disturb-
ing dangers of an accumulating movement as of the moment.
As for the Eleventh District, the confidence quotient was not
on the pessimistic side. A substantial majority of businessmen with
whom this had been discussed in the past few days anticipated that
1958 would be a better year than 1957. A minority of perhaps 25 to
30 per cent anticipated a less satisfactory year. Most businessmen
reflected a cautious optimism for the coming year. Those who were
quite pessimistic were usually ones who were suffering substantial
paper losses in the stock market, Mr. Irons noted, or ones who
recently had traveled east of the Mississippi River.
Eleventh District department store sales in 1957 were 2 per
cent ahead of 1956. Employment in December was above a year ago and
above November but the increase was not as much as it had been a year
ago. The number of insured unemployed had continued to increase some-
what. Construction activity had been maintained at a high level
throughout 1957 and in December was 25 per cent ahead of November.
Mortgage bankers were optimistic and felt that funds would be more
available in the next year than they had been in the past year.

1/7/58 -45-
Residential builders were particularly optimistic as to the outlook
for $10,000-$12,000 houses. The oil industry felt that there might
be improvement in 1958. Agriculture was in reasonably good shape.
In summary, Mr. Irons found the outlook good or better in most areas.
Banks were in a strong position and expecting strong loan demand.
Deposits were up as of the most recent call date except in Dallas
where a decline was shown because banks did not do so much window-
dressing this time. Mr. Irons went on to say he did not mean to be
painting a picture of another boom in the offing, but his was not a
pessimistic report as had been indicated for some other parts of the
country. Recent changes in the defense program were beginning to be
felt with new orders having been received by Dallas District firms
within the last ten days.
Mr. Irons said he would not advocate pressing ease or shift-
ing further in the direction of ease at this time. Neither would he
like to see a change in the discount rate or in reserve requirements
in the immediate future, although he recognized it might be a diffi-
cult three or four week period. He had been satisfied with the
degree of restraint achieved in the past three weeks, and he would
hold a steady hand for the next three weeks, hoping that about the
same degree could be continued for the present. The Desk should
operate on the feel of the market. If possible, he would like to
see the short-term interest rate structure somewhere around the

1/7/58 -46-
discount rate. He agreed with the statements of Messrs. Robertson
and Mills on that point.
Mr. Szymczak said that he felt the Federal Reserve had been
pursuing the correct policy and that it should continue to pursue
that policy, leading to zero free reserves and, as required, to a
small amount of positive reserves. He did not think there should be
a change in reserve requirements at this time. He did not think the
Open Market Committee should move too fast because it would be dis-
turbing to the interest rate structure and to the market, but it should
not tighten up on the policy that it had been pursuing recently. With
respect to margin requirements, Mr. Szymczak thought it would be de-
sirable for the Board of Governors to undertake a discussion of that
subject at an early date with the view to finding out whether this
was a time for any change as had been mentioned by Mr. Hayes. Mr.
Szymczak also said that he thought eventually the discount rate should
be changed but that we were foreclosed from any such move for several
weeks.
For the long-run, Mr. Balderston would like to see the money
supply increasing again as an aid to fostering economic growth. This
goal seemed to him to become more important as deposit turnover de-
clined. The problem, however, centered in the timing of actions to
achieve this objective.
The dilemma was that on the one hand the System should pre-
vent the forces of recession from accumulating or from feeding on

1/7/58 -47-
each other, especially in view of our adverse position in the cold
war. On the other hand, Mr. Balderston felt that the economy could
scarcely have purged itself of the wastes that had emerged from 1955-
1956. This would be true even if the current recession were just an
inventory recession. It was his belief, however, that the causes of
the present difficulties extended beyond inventory imbalance and in-
cluded excess capacity, compounded by foreign difficulties. In addi-
tion, wage negotiations in the coming months should be conducted in
a noninflationary atmosphere without the illusion on either side as
to the possibility of wage increases being passed on as price in-
creases. Moreover, the sudden change in interest rates may have
brought on expectations that the System would not wish to foster.
Mr. Balderston favored no change of discount rates and a zero
target for negative free reserves for the immediate future. He sup-
posed, however, that as in January of 1957 the free reserves would be
substantial during the January return flow of funds, whatever the
Account Management tried to do.
Chairman Martin said he thought the go-around had posed the
problems for the Committee very clearly. We were dealing in small
degrees. The Chairman regretted again that we had gotten into the
use of net borrowed reserve figures. We talked about zero, $50,
$100, and $150 million, but under present conditions he thought
these figures were quite meaningless. He agreed with Mr. Szymczak

1/7/58 -48-
that the Committee had been pursuing the correct policy, and he
certainly did not want any additional ease at the moment, but he
also did not want to see the policy we had been following vitiated.
That would confuse the public by making them think that the System
might be returning to a tighter policy than had been followed in
recent weeks. Mr. Balderston had pointed up this problem. Mr. Leach
had expressed the feeling that we probably would get to an easier
position. Chairman Martin said he would not put it in figures, but
if we were pursuing a correct policy his personal preference would be
to err on the side of ease rather than tightness, and he thought that
would be consistent with the present position.
The Chairman suggested that the Committee should also bear in
mind the projections with respect to the Treasury. While we could not
forecast what the future would hold, there seemed to have been a re-
surgence of confidence around the end of the year. When he came through
New York last week he observed a resurgence of confidence--even an im-
pression that there might be a boom--because deficit financing of the
Federal Government might become a factor soon. Some of the stock
market operators had turned their sights around, although the Chairman
said that he personally thought they were wrong.
In this connection, Chairman Martin suggested that all of those
connected with the Committee should study the reports of the British
Bank Rate Tribunal on the alleged leak very carefully. Events were
moving very rapidly and the System could be subjected to sudden

1/7/58 -49-
pressure to reduce the discount rate when the Treasury was about to
go to the market. The only consistent position for the Committee,
he felt, was to try to maintain a reasonably even keel during a period
of a Treasury financing. The Federal Reserve must be very careful to
do what it could to protect the bankers who were on the boards of
directors of the Reserve Banks from being in a position of having
inside information that could be used in this type of a market. This
applied to margin requirements also. We must realize that speculators
can profit or appear to profit if a leak or a charge of a leak gets
out. He believed the best way to handle this situation would be to
think of this in terms of an even keel for the System, even though
there might be violent forces of gloom or the reverse, in the period
of the Treasury financing which was not too far off.
The Chairman's reason for highlighting this point was that a
number of the comments this morning had projected policy forward. It
could be argued that it would have been better not to have changed the
directive at the November meeting of the Committee before the last
Treasury financing and to have tried to maintain about the same money
market conditions during the period of the financing as before. How-
ever, we had done what seemed necessary, and what he was saying now
was that it was necessary to bear in mind the Treasury's problem in
the light of what had ensued at that time. He felt it very fortunate
that we did not have a British bank rate leak, considering the people
who were roaming around Washington at that time. He did not think we

1/7/58 -50-
could approach the Treasury financing without realizing that these
movements come very sharply and quickly.
With further reference to Committee credit policy, Chairman
Martin said he recalled no one suggesting a change in the directive
at this time. In implementing policy, he would be disposed to follow
what he took to be the views of Messrs. Hayes, Leach, and Bryan, al-
though he did not wish to pinpoint a figure. He thought there should
be positive free reserves because this seemed to be the only consistent
position. However, he would not want free reserves to be so positive
as to indicate that the Committee was actively pursuing a more easy
policy than it had been pursuing to date. The Chairman said that he
recognized this was a difficult order to give to the Manager of the
System Account in the light of the magnitude of funds floating around.
He then asked for other suggestions as to the matter of degree and how
to clarify the Committee's views, calling specifically on Mr. Rouse for
his comments on operations.
Mr. Rouse said that both the Board's projections and those of
the New York Bank indicate that this period should not be as difficult
as last year. As of now, it looked as though the reduction in the
System Account would have to be in the range of 1/4 to 1/2 billion
dollars, largely through runs-offs rather than through sales, in order
to maintain about the current position. The projection of average
free reserves for this statement week was shown as plus $30 million,
but during the week the range might be from negative $300 million to

1/7/58 -51-
as much as positive $330 million. Mr. Rouse said he thought the
Desk could operate along the lines the Committee desired.
Mr. Allen noted that the Chairman had made the point that
we should maintain an "even keel" during the Treasury financing.
He inquired whether this indicated that, since we had eased up a
little for some time, we should continue to ease.
Chairman Martin said this was not quite what he had in mind.
What he was trying to say was that if there was to be additional ease,
it had to come in the next couple of weeks on the positive side rather
than waiting until after the Treasury financing was announced, or
perhaps until the meeting to be held on January 28. Things are moving
very quickly, he noted, and it might be that by January 28 a majority
of the Committee would want to change the directive. He did not think
we could make a change at that time in view of the Treasury financing.
If he were carrying on the operation, he would operate with a little
more positive reserves in the next couple of weeks but thereafter he
would be moving toward an "even keel" right straight through the
Treasury financing.
Mr. Allen said that he did not disagree, and he inquired as to
how long the Chairman had in mind for this period of the Treasury
financing. Chairman Martin responded that he thought it would be
necessary to consider the period from the time of the Treasury's an-
nouncement of the refunding to several days after payment for the
securities, and he asked Mr. Rouse for his views.

1/7/58 -52-
Mr. Rouse said that he thought it would be necessary to allow
a week or 10 days after the payment date. There was a certain amount
of underwriting that would have to be done, and this should be the
minimum period to allow for distribution of these securities to be
completed. He went on to say that he thought the Treasury announce-
ment on the refunding might come about February 1 and the new financing
announcement might be simultaneous with the refunding.
Mr. Hayes commented that he thought the Committee had a pretty
free rein for the next couple of weeks.
Chairman Martin said he might be overly sensitive, but since he
might be up on the Hill at any time during the next couple of months he
thought it very important not to be in a position of having taken de-
cisions on actions to be taken in the future. In view of the specula-
tive nature of this period, it was not only very important to avoid any
leaks but also situations subject to leak.
Mr. Leach remarked that, in effect, we were fixing policy for
the next five weeks, and Chairman Martin replied that it amounted
pretty much to that.
Mr. Allen said that he would go along with making free reserves
available in the plus $100 million area during the next two weeks, con-
trary to what he had said earlier. However, he questioned whether at
this time the Committee wished to determine that it will neither add
to nor subtract from reserves in the period following our next meeting.

1/7/58 -53-
Mr. Hayes suggested that the "even keel" of January 28 would
be to stay where we were at that time.
Mr. Shepardson said that this was not the way he had under-
stood the Chairman' s statement. His impression was that the Chairman
had in mind a line or a direction for continuing ease.
Chairman Martin stated that this was not what he intended.
This could not be measured precisely, he said, but he did not think
that during the Treasury financing the Committee should be either
increasing or decreasing the degree of ease.
Mr. Shepardson inquired whether the Chairman felt that between
now and the Treasury financing announcement there should be some further
easing and, if so, whether it was correct that he would rather do it
now than two or three weeks later.
Chairman Martin stated that this was correct. He would rather,
in a moderate way, continue the policy we were now pursuing by having
moderate positive reserves. He did not wish to cite a figure, but he
did not think this was a status quo period. The return flow of currency
started too many eddies in the stream and he thought that we were dealing
with a rushing torrent.
Turning specifically to the Committee's directive and instruc-
tions to the Account, Chairman Martin said that it was clear that all
agreed there should not be a change in the directive at this time. He
thought that the Manager of the System Account could be given some
further guidance with respect to operations in this periods and he

1/7/58 -54-
suggested that the majority appeared to be on the side of slight
positive reserves. This was not a very firm majority, however, and
if the question were put to a vote it might be by a majority of only
one or two. He questioned whether this was the type of thing that
the Committee should be voting on but he had no desire to keep any-
body from putting anything into the record to express his views. He
noted that the minutes would show the statements that the individuals
had made during the meeting.
Mr. Hayes stated that he thought the System Account could
operate along the lines of the Chairman's comments.
Mr. Robertson said that he would like the record to show that
he was in complete agreement with respect to maintaining an "even keel"
during the Treasury's financing operations. The comments he had made
heretofore would go to the immediate future; he would not ease off in
the next two weeks.
Chairman Martin stated that he thought that this had been a
good go-around and that if there were no further comments the directive
would be approved in its present form.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Committee voted unanimously
to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York until otherwise directed by the Com-
mittee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (in-
cluding replacement of maturing securities, and allowing
maturities to run off without replacement) for the System
open market account in the open market or, in the case of
maturing securities, by direct exchange with the Treasury,

1/7/58 -55-
as may be necessary in the light of current and prospective
economic conditions and the general credit situation of the
country, with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in
the market to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to
cushioning adjustments and mitigating recessionary tendencies
in the economy, and (c) to the practical administration of
the account; provided that the aggregate amount of securities
held in the System account (including commitments for the
purchase or sale of securities for the account) at the close
of this date, other than special short-term certificates of
indebtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be increased or
decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the ac-
count of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion,
in cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to
one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special
short-term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the
Treasury; provided that the total amount of such certificates
held at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not
exceed in the aggregate $500 million;
(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from the System ac-
count for gold certificates such amounts of Treasury securi-
ties maturing within one year as may be necessary from time
to time for the accommodation of the Treasury; provided that
the total amount of such securities so sold shall not exceed
in the aggregate $500 million face amount, and such sales
shall be made as nearly as may be practicable at the prices
currently quoted in the open market.
The Chairman noted that the next meeting of the Committee would
be held on Tuesday, January 28, to be followed by a meeting on Tuesday,
February 11. On March 4, the Committee would meet at the time the
newly-elected members assumed their duties and would plan to stay over
on March 5.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary