A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, September 30, 1958, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Irons
Mr. Mangels
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Erickson, Alternate for Mr. Leach
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Allen, Johns, and Deming, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Mr. Bopp, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Daane, Hostetler, Marget, Wheeler, and
Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Molony, Special Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Associate Adviser, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Keir, Acting Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York

9/30/58 -2
Mr. Wayne, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond; Messrs. Ellis,
Roosa, Mitchell, Jones, Tow, and Rice,
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of Boston, New York, Chicago, St.
Louis, Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively;
Mr. Anderson, Economic Adviser, Federal Re
serve Bank of Philadelphia; and Mr. Parsons,
Director of Research, Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis
Chairman Martin stated that in the absence of objection Mr.
Molony, Special Assistant to the Board of Governors, would attend the
meeting. There being no objection, Mr. Molony entered the room.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on September 9, 1958, were
approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York covering open market operations during the period September 9
through September 24, 1958, and a supplemental report covering the
period September 25 through September 29, 1958. Copies of both reports
have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Reporting on open market operations since the last meeting, Mr.
Rouse stated that an even situation had been maintained in the money
market. The System's holdings of bills declined by somewhat over $250
million, while the money market was generally firm. A tendency for
some over-borrowing to occur early in the statement week has led to

9/30/58 -3
temporary easing of the market in the middle of the week; on the
whole this has been helpful.
Mr. Rouse said that two weeks ago he was quite concerned
about the state of the market on the eve of the Treasury's financing
operation. For a time he began to think he was wrong, because some
stability seemed to be developing a better atmosphere in the market.
However, he then attended the meetings of the Treasury's advisory
committees in connection with the financing. The ABA Committee had
recommended to the Treasury that the 3-1/2 per cent notes of 1960
be reopened for $1 billion and that a special bill to mature next
May be auctioned to raise $2.5 billion. Shortly thereafter the IBA
Committee, consisting of dealers and the portfolio managers of large
banks, met with the Treasury and the picture they painted was grim.
They gave the Secretary of the Treasury no encouragement unless he
placed very generous rates on the offering. The first recommendation
of the IBA Committee was for a June tax bill in the amount of $3.5
billion at a 3-1/4 per cent rate. The Secretary asked for the Com
mittee's views concerning the possibility of reopening the 3-1/2's
of 1960, but the group did not think that this issue would be at all
well received. When asked what they thought subscriptions would be
for a 3-1/2 per cent 1-year obligation, they replied about $1 billion.
The majority of the Committee felt that the Treasury would have to

9/30/58 -4
place a rate of up to 3.25 per cent even on a June tax bill in
order to have a successful sale, and a substantial number thought
3-3/8 - 3-1/2 per cent would be necessary. Mr. Rouse pointed out
that there is wide representation of the underwriting community on
the Committee of the IBA. In general, he said, the Committee
reflected the attitude that underwriters are in no temper to take
losses voluntarily. It was indicated that the Treasury would have
to buy back their underwriting good will by placing very generous
terms on the new issues if it was to look forward to successfully
financing its needs later in the year.
Mr. Rouse went on to say that the market's reaction to the
new issues on Friday was satisfactory but that it deteriorated on
Monday. Some transactions in the special bill by commercial banks
had been reported while the books were open, despite the required
certification, at rates up to 3-1/2 per cent, and the bill was quoted
this morning at 3.45 to 3.40 per cent; the new 3-1/2 per cent note
also was quoted at a discount this morning. In the regular Treasury
bill auction yesterday, the average rate was 2.92 per cent and the
stopout price was slightly over 3 per cent.
Mr. Mills noted a difference in estimates of required re
serves between the Board and the New York Bank and inquired whether
this difference reflected different assumptions as to the amount of
the new issues that will be taken up by commercial banks. If so,

9/30/58 -5
he suggested that some effort should be made to reconcile the
difference, for a knot might develop in the market on payment
date for the new issues if the requirements of the banks are
seriously underestimated. Mr. Thomas replied that the difference
in estimates of required reserves mostly reflected differences in
estimates of changes in other deposits, and not differences in
estimates of the amount of the new issues to be purchased by com
mercial banks. Mr. Rouse commented that there would soon be good
data from the Treasury concerning commercial bank subscriptions.
A complicating factor, however, is the rate at which the new issues
will be distributed into private hands. Mr. Mills observed that
because of these uncertainties the Manager of the Account must be
given adequate latitude in operating the Account. Mr. Rouse pointed
out that nonbank subscriptions might well be reduced because of
reports that banks have arranged to sell the special bill to nonbank
investors at a discount, despite the banks' certification that
customers have no beneficial interest in their subscriptions. He
observed that there appeared to have been some breakdown of ethics
in this connection.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the open market transactions during the
period September 9 through September 29,
1958, were approved, ratified, and con
firmed.

9/30/58 -6
The staff economic and financial review at this meeting
was in the form of a visual-auditory presentation devoted to the
consideration of questions regarding the nature of the current re
covery. Participants included Messrs. Thomas, Young, Marget, an
Koch along with Messrs. Garfield, Williams, and Brill of the Board's
research staff.
The introductory portion of the script of the economic pres
entation was as follows:
Monetary authorities are faced with policy questions at
all times, not just at peaks or lows. But the most important
questions relate to how soon and how much to influence credit
and monetary conditions when there are basic changes in the
course of business, as in the autumn of 1957 and the spring
of 1958.
In one view, easing of restraints on bank credit and.
monetary expansion should be started immediately when it is
determined that the crest of a boom has passed, while action
looking toward restraints on expansion may be needed only
after some time has elapsed for recovery to gather momentum.
In another view, giving greater weight to the risk that in
flationary forces may accentuate instability, the authori
ties in booms should retain restraints until inflationary
pressures have clearly receded and in recoveries should
begin early to reimpose restraints in order to avert
emergence of an inflationary spiral that might intensify
ensuing boom and subsequent recession.
In the postwar years, contrary to expectations based
on the experience of the 1930's, the central continuing
problems of monetary policy have stemmed from excessive
demands which have tended to push prices up and to increase
activity to levels not sustainable. At first, high levels
of demand could be attributed to backlogs of needs and
funds accumulated during the long, world-wide war. Later,
developments of the cold war, and in particular the Korean
episode, stimulated demands. A tenth of gross product is
now being absorbed in the defense program, in contrast to

9/30/58
less than 1 per cent after the First World War. Meanwhile,
in contrast with the late 'twenties and 'thirties, population
has been increasing right along at a rapid rate. Technological
advance has proceeded apace, making possible introduction of
many new products, application of new processes that increase
manhour productivity, and stimulation of demand for both con
sumption and capital goods.
Abroad since the war, economic advance has been substantial
and fairly steady. In the past year, however, output in
Western Europe has levelled off rather than rising as in 1953
54. In the United States, postwar recessions in activity have
been moderate as compared with the 1920-21 recession after
World War I or the devasting depression after 1929, but it can
not be said that growth in activity has been steady. In all
industrial countries of the free world, postwar price levels
have moved irregularly higher.
The most recent domestic decline in industrial production,
amounting to 13 per cent, was greater than declines reported
in 1949 and 1945. Since April industrial production has risen
sharply and in September, according to a preliminary estimate,
it was only 4 per cent below the level of August 1957.
Unemployment remains at a level close to the maximum reached
during the recession, lagging as it often does in recovery.
The rise in output has been achieved in part through increased
employment but much more through increased hours of work and
increased productivity.
Wholesale prices of commodities and consumer prices of goods
and services have risen somewhat further during recent reces
sion and recovery. But price developments have been more
selective than the broad indexes suggest.
Last autumn and early this year, prices of industrial com
modities eased, with a sharp decline in sensitive industrial
materials, and the rise in the total index of wholesale prices
then mainly reflected advances in prices of farm products.
More recently, industrial material prices have been strengthening
while farm product prices have been declining.
Farm land values have continued to advance through recent
recession and recovery, accompanying a sharp rise in farm in
come resulting from higher livestock prices and the combination
of unprecedented crop yields and price supports. Through ear
lier postwar cycles, farm land values had generally advanced,
while incomes drifted downward, reflecting in part growing
confidence that the sharp income increases of the war period
would be held much more than after the First World War, when
both incomes and land values declined markedly.

9/30/58
In some financial markets, adjustment to revival in
economic conditions has been anticipatory. Stock prices
began to decline before the downturn in industrial pro
duction and, from mid-July to year-end, dropped one-fifth.
In January, they began to turn up and are now close to their
all-time peak, while production and profits are still well
below earlier highs. Stock market trading activity lately
has been unusually heavy.
Adjustments in bond markets have been later than stock
prices in coming about, but have come sooner than in earlier
cycles and have been very sharp. Bond yields remained at
high levels through mid-November 1957, then dropped one
seventh in two months. Long-term yields stabilized at this
reduced level until early summer. Since then, reflecting in
part a spreading acceptance in financial circles of the in
evitability of creeping inflation and investors' need for an
inflation premium in long-term interest rates, they have
risen rapidly to levels close to the highs of 1957. Thus,
with re-emergence of inflationary expectations, stock yields
and bond yields have completed a swing of marked amplitude
since the crest of 1955-57 boom. While recovery in most
fields is by no means complete, the relationship of bond and
stock yields is now similar to that of mid-1957 when creeping
inflation psychology was also dominant in financial markets.
With bank reserve positions eased last winter, banks were
able to provide additional funds to the market on terms rela
tively favorable to borrowers. Until very recently, business
borrowing at banks has lagged as inventories declined, but
other bank lending increased moderately and bank investments
rose rapidly. As a result, the money supply--seasonally
adjusted--has risen sharply this year. It is now about 2 per
cent above a year ago.
Moreover, time deposits at commercial banks until recently
have risen sharply, partly swollen by a recession shift of pre
cautionary and speculative balances from a demand to a time de
posit category. Time deposits are currently 15 per cent above
a year ago. Turnover of demand deposits outside New York is
about 2 per cent below highs reached last year but turnover in
New York is up considerably.
In the light of these key facts, how is the currently
developing economic situation to be interpreted? Are we really
not emerging from recession, as unemployment figures might
suggest? Or is this about the middle of a period of rapid
recovery, as the industrial production figures might indicate?
Is this a normal type of recovery? Or is this some unusual

9/30/58
combination of recovery-boom developments with half
recovery in output accompanied in financial markets by
so much discounting of possible inflationary developments
as to impair chances of a flowering of recovery into
vigorous economic advance? And what should be the posture
of monetary policy in the face of an uncertain recovery
outlook?
Following analyses of business and financial developments during
the recent recession and subsequent recovery which included references
to business cycle theory and comparisons between recent developments
and the pattern of earlier business cycles, the staff presentation con
cluded with the following statement:
Recovery from the April lows has been something of a
surprise, challenging economic analysts to fresh study.
Is this the middle of a normal recovery, with the usual
problems of overexpansion in demand and rising prices in
the period ahead? Will legacies of excess capacity from
the preceding investment boom and of unused labor resources
perhaps check price advances? Or, on the other hand, will
faster than usual recovery perhaps lead to greater than
usual inflationary pressures? In what ways can monetary
policy assist in shaping a sustainable recovery? Specifically,
at what rate should the economy's holdings of cash balances-
the money supply--be permitted to increase?
After eight months of decline in industrial production,
just at the time when business expectations were being in
fluenced by the idea of a levelling-out period such as occurred
in 1948-49 and 1953-54, rapid recovery in the economy was in
fact beginning. Thus, once again it appears that the normal
course of every cycle is a unique course.
Going back before the war, it is evident that after the
1937-38 decline recovery also started promptly but the pre
ceding decline had been much greater and the background
circumstances were different in major respects.
Considering this cycle then as another unique cycle, why
did the rise come so quickly and why was it so sharp? Clearly
there was no single event, domestic or international, to
explain the early, general rise.

9/30/58 -10-
One factor was an overshooting of the mark on the down
side, creating a situation favorable to quick reversal. Thus,
inventory liquidation was at a rate in some sense too fast,
especially considering the maintenance of most types of con
sumer expenditures and the revival of defense procurement.
The rate of decline in capital outlays was also very fast.
One element counteracting the rapid decline in domestic
private investment and helping to sustain consumption was the
large shift in Federal finance from surplus to deficit posi
tion--reflecting a substantial rise in defense and other
payments to the public.
Furthermore, aggressive monetary actions were easing
credit conditions and by early 1958 the money supply was
increasing at a rapid rate. The active money supply rose at
an annual rate of 7 per cent from January through July and,
adding time deposits, the rate of increase was 10 per cent.
In the past two months, however, changes in deposits have
conformed to the usual seasonal pattern.
One of the recurrent news items of the recession months
last winter and spring was the announcement that, contrary to
earlier expectations, consumer prices had again reached a new
high. This certainly encouraged the view that values were
not being undermined by the recession and that prices were
bound to go up further over the longer term.
The various developments just noted encouraged the
irregular rise in stock prices before the advance in economic
activity and this rise in turn was a factor in changing
business attitudes.
Now, what do the observations already made concerning
the nature of this recovery since April suggest with respect
to the direction of business and credit developments and of
appropriate monetary and debt management policy? It seems
evident that the behavior of prices during the recession,
the speed and generality of the recovery, the pace of mone
tary expansion since spring, and the size of the Federal
deficit in prospect have brought new support to the proponents
of the theory of the inevitability of creeping inflation.
Once again, as in most of the postwar period, the central
problems of the years ahead may well be those of unsustainable
demands and widespread price advances. Prices are already
being raised for some industrial products, including steel,
whose output has yet to reach 70 per cent of capacity.
While the price experience of the recession and of the
recent recovery have encouraged the view that price levels

9/30/58 -11-
were bound to trend upward, it need not even now be taken
as decisive. Prices did show some selectivity in movement
during the recession, with sensitive industrial materials
down sharply. Also the rise in consumer prices, in so far
as it depended on the vagaries of the weather and the
biology of the cattle cycle, was in part fortuitous.
Furthermore, question may still be raised as to the
possible effect of excess capacity in helping to check any
broad price advance. The latest survey of plant and equip
ment plans does suggest that present capacity is not so large
as to prevent some recovery in capital equipment outlays
later this year. Also, current sharp increases in profits
may stimulate expansion in such outlays and provide some of
the needed funds. But present capacity and other resource
availability may, nevertheless, be large enough to cushion
the effects of increasing demands on prices and facilitate
effective operation of such credit restraints as may be
needed.
The totally different behavior of U. S. exports in the
last two cycles raises the question of what effect changing
foreign demands may have on domestic activity and prices.
As noted earlier, the moderate export expansion this spring
was mainly confined to agricultural products. Exports of
machinery to nonindustrial countries were falling.
While there has already been a considerable recovery in
Canada, prospects for resumption of general expansion abroad
depend partly on maintenance of world trade, and partly also
on resumption of growth in investment expenditures. In Canada,
a bottoming out of the decline in investment outlays is now
expected. But in Britain some decline in capital expenditures
is expected this year, after a rise that extended right into
the first quarter of 1958. In Canada and also in Germany,
growth of residential construction activity, stimulated by
ample availability of mortgage funds, has been a strong force
for general expansion. But indications of cyclical upturn in
steel and textiles in Europe are still scanty and tentative.
Following a period of sharp drains on the gold and foreign
exchange reserves of some countries, there have been renewed
gains in reserves for most industrial countries and these have
led to easing of the credit policies of central banks in
Europe and Japan, although this easing has been done with
caution. The International Monetary Fund has helped relieve
foreign exchange strains for many nonindustrial countries,
and has exerted an important influence for tighter internal

9/30/58 -12-
policies in countries still suffering inflation. A con
tinuing large outflow of private U. S. capital has helped
to sustain foreign reserves and U. S. exports.
Altogether, assuming that international political
developments do not have major economic repercussions, it
would appear that demand on the U. S. economy from abroad
in the near future may continue near recent levels.
In the domestic financial area, developments have been
so rapid and so much influenced by actions to provide pro
tection against inflation that financial markets, in some
sense, may be out of touch with underlying forces. The
current relationship between bond yields and stock yields,
for example, may not be indefinitely sustainable. While
total demands for financing are increasing and restraints
have been placed on further bank credit expansion, the
total supply of loanable funds in the economy is still very
large. Further expansion in economic activity to earlier
peaks is not likely to be seriously hampered by lack of
funds, although it might be retarded by the recent sharp
rise in interest rates, which appear to have been excessive
in view of basic demand and supply factors in credit markets.
Under these circumstances, considering the importance
of curbing inflationary and speculative developments before
they gain headway, the central policy issue would seem to be
how much monetary restraint should be exercised at this time.
Clearly, this issue should be resolved with reference to the
System's responsibility for maintaining in a growing economy
reasonable stability of the value of the dollar, as well as
in employment. Taking into account the monetary expansion
already experienced this year, the currently accentuated
problem of Federal deficit financing, and the inflationary
psychology pervading financial market; the appropriate course
would seem to be along the following lines: To permit further
expansion of credit and the money supply only on terms which
would indicate the System's continuing awareness of potential
inflationary risks in the present situation and its determina
tion to prevent them from stimulating speculative excesses in
the use of credit.
In view of the current disturbed conditions in bond mar
kets, the effect of declining securities prices upon bank
liquidity when they are facing seasonal credit demands and
large scale Treasury financing needs, and the slackening of
credit expansion in the past two months, continuation of the
recent degree of restraint may be appropriate. Yet the
prevalent speculative fever and inflationary psychosis, together
with the underlying liquidity of the economy and the genuine

9/30/58 -13
stimulants to expansion call for the imposition of severe
restraint on any tendencies toward undue expansion.
Copies of the text of the economic presentation and reproduc
tions of the accompanying charts have been placed in the files of the
Federal Open Market Committee. Copies likewise were sent following
the meeting to the members of the Committee and to the Reserve Bank
Presidents not currently serving on the Committee.
Mr. Rouse reported having learned that total subscriptions
received in New York for the new Treasury issues, including those
received yesterday, now amounted to $1.6 billion for the bills and
$846 million for the notes. The market seemed to be reasonably stable
after an unsteady opening, and the System Account had purchased $44
million of Treasury bills this morning. The reported subscription
figures, Mr. Rouse said, indicated that the Treasury financing would
at least be covered.
Mr. Treiber then made a statement substantially as follows
The economic recovery has been proceeding nicely.
Further improvement may be expected during the fourth
quarter, but probably not at the rapid rate of recent
months. The most important item pressing upward is the
prospect of increased Government spending.
Consumer spending is high but is conservative in
relation to consumer income.
While residential construction has reached the
highest level in three years, recent gains have been
modest, and anticipatory figures such as FHA appraisals
and VA applications do not suggest further increases.
The less favorable position of mortgages in relation to
other alternative investments is raising questions as to
the prospect for residential building beyond the current

9/30/58 -14-
year. The decline in plant and equipment expenditures
seems to be over, but there is no basis for expecting a
strong upturn soon. While in June all the major component
series in the index of industrial production were rising
from the preceding month, the rise was not so general in
August. Unemployment is still high; in fact it rose
slightly in August to 7.6 per cent. Unemployment of long
duration also rose.
Certainly, near-term profit expectations don't justify
the recent rise in the prices of stocks to record levels.
No doubt the desire to own equities rather than debt obliga
tions has been an important factor in the behavior of the
stock market.
As for prices other than of stocks, spot and future
prices of basic commodities continue to decline. The whole
sale price index declined in August after showing little
change for several months. The consumers' price index ap
pears to have entered a period of stability.
To summarize our views on the economy: Recovery is
likely to continue at a reduced pace, without generating
bottlenecks and unusual demand pressures. Rising productivity
is likely to reduce labor requirements generated by a growing
physical output, so that unemployment may continue to be large.
The rapid expansion of bank credit of earlier months has
been checked. Holdings of Government securities by the
reporting member banks have declined to the lowest levels since
early June, suggesting that Treasury deficit financing does not
necessarily involve rapid expansion of credit.
The yields on long-term securities--U. S. Government,
corporate and municipal--have risen with extraordinary rapidity
in recent months. The yield on Treasury bonds due or callable
in 10 years or more is now higher than the October 1957 peak.
Aaa corporate bonds are very close to their 1957 high, while
Aaa municipal bonds are back to November 1957 levels. Thus in
an early stage of recovery we find long-term interest rates at
about the same level they were at the peak of the boom. This
is disturbing, especially in view of the current amount of
unemployment.
Short-term interest rates also have risen very rapidly in
the last two months. Indeed the rates on bankers acceptances
and commercial paper have risen another 1/4 per cent this
morning. It seems to us that a pause in the rise would be
beneficial at this stage of the business recovery.
The Treasury has just offered for cash subscription two
short-term issues totaling $3-1/2 billion. Attractive
interest rates were fixed by the Treasury--3-1/ per cent on

9/30/58 -15-
a seven-month fixed-price bill and 3-1/2 per cent on a
thirteen-month note, but the market has adjusted quite
fully to these rates so that at present no premiums on
the new issues are indicated. Since the subscription
books closed only last night, it is too early to know
the amount of subscriptions.
We are not quite six months from the bottom of the
recession and the Treasury can borrow only with great
difficulty at high rates. In the last quarter of 1958
not only will the Treasury have to refund $12 billion of
securities but it will have to borrow about $2-1/2 to $3
billion for cash in addition to the $700 million it ex
pects to raise through increasing the weekly Treasury bill
issues to $1.8 billion. The Treasury will have to raise
further substantial sums in cash during the first half of
1959, beginning in January; this will be quite different
from previous years when the first six months of the calen
dar year were marked by surpluses.
The difficult financial operations confronting the
Treasury raise again the question of the responsibilities
of the Federal Reserve in connection with Treasury financing.
The policies of the Federal Government with respect to in
come and spending are determined by the Congress. The
Treasury is bound by these policies. The Government must
be financed.
There is, of course, some latitude in the details of
Government financing, and the Treasury has the primary
responsibility for determining those details. It seems to
me that our administration of credit policy must pay
appropriate regard to the Government securities market and
to the financing requirements of the Treasury, within the
limits set by essential monetary policy.
There must be a maximum of coordination between the
System and the Treasury consistent with the primary
responsibilities of each. The Treasury should price its
securities adequately in relation to market rates, and it
has done so in its current financing. The Treasury having
done so--having submitted itself to the discipline of the
market--the System has a responsibility to avoid action
that may jeopardize the current financing or future
financing.
As underwriters of the new issues the commercial banks
will be large buyers. Reserves should be supplied to enable

9/30/58 -16
the banks to acquire the securities in the first instance,
and the reserves should be there for a reasonable period
to facilitate the completion of the underwriting. As the
securities are sold to nonbank investors the reserves re
leased thereby will be available to meet seasonal business
needs. Experience in the current underwriting will be an
important factor in the willingness of the banks to perform
the underwriting function in connection with future reasury
T
issues.
The extent of the recovery to date and the prospective
rate of continuing recovery do not call, in our opinion, for
further restrictive action at this time. The Treasury's
financial operations call for market stability not only
through the dates for payment of the new issues but for a
reasonable period thereafter, say to November first.
In our opinion the System should seek to maintain an
even keel at least through the period until the next meeting
of the Committee. Such a policy would involve avoiding, by
act or word, anything that might cause a deterioration of
market atmosphere. Such a public policy would include:
(a) no change in discount rates;
(b) no change in the directive; and
(c) probably the maintenance of free
reserves at something like the
present level.
Perhaps we should consider offering resistance to further
rises in short-term rates, particularly if expectations by the
market of further tightness on our part continue and seem to
be the major force in the deterioration of the market.
We should not at this time undertake to decide or predict
what action should be taken at the end of the "even keel"
period, but should make that decision when the time comes in
the light of economic and credit conditions at that time.
Mr. Erickson reported that there continued to be evidence of re
covery in the First Federal Reserve District. In some respects the cur
rent pace in the district seemed to be faster than for the nation as a
whole while in other respects the district seemed to be lagging. The
manufacturing index for New England in July did not move up from June but
in August it moved up 4 points, due primarily to metals. In States for

9/30/58 -17
which reports were available, the employment trend from July to
August was stronger than in 1957, although weakness was still seen
in durables. The States of Connecticut and Rhode Island had their
first gains in manufacturing employment for many months. Construction
contract awards in August were 33 per cent ahead of August 1957, due
primarily to public utilities. On the other hand, there was still
weakness in residential construction which was running far below the
national average. Electric energy output, department store sales,
and savings bank deposits were still moving up.
Turning to policy, Mr. Erickson said he thought there was a
great deal in what Mr. Treiber had said. He felt that the System
should maintain as even a keel as possible; that it should continue
the degree of restraint which had been maintained during the last
three weeks. In his opinion the present situation called for no
change in the directive or in the discount rate, and to the extent
possible free reserves should be held between $400 and $200 million.
Mr. Irons said that there was nothing new to discuss in
regard to developments in the Eleventh District. Conditions were
good and the situation was generally favorable. With regard to
credit policy, it seemed to him that during the past three weeks
the Account had been reasonably successful in maintaining an even
keel, that is, in maintaining a sort of static position in regard
to reserve availability. At this time, he felt that there probably

9/30/58 -18
should be no significant change in monetary policy. There should not
be a lessening of restraint; rather the System should attempt to main
tain about the degree of restraint already achieved. Under the
prevailing circumstances, this would mean giving considerable leeway
to the Management of the Account to take care of day-to-day situations
that might come up and had not been anticipated. As to the discount
rate, he had nothing particular in mind but he felt sure that a change
in the rate should not be long deferred. The Treasury in its offering
and its rate, and the market in its reaction to the rates, have pretty
well taken the action for the System if the rates on bills and other
short-term securities are any indication. With the bill rate in the
neighborhood of 2.80 or 2.90, with the discount rate at 2 per cent,
and with the market having responded to the Treasury issues, some
thought might well be given to the matter of a discount rate change.
However, Mr. Irons said, he was not pressing for a change at any
particular time. Furthermore, he doubted whether it would be desirable
for a rate change to be made by any one Bank in isolation.
Mr. Irons said he fully recognized that it was necessary to
give support to the Treasury as far as the present issues were con
cerned, This meant that the System should be reasonable about the
availability of reserves and that it should not tighten appreciably,
perhaps not at all right now. However, one of the reasons for the
Treasury's situation was to be found in what appeared to be a very

9/30/58 -19
strong inflationary fear or psychosis. Until that fear had been
dispelled by one means or another he did not believe that the
market would be ready to go into Treasury securities, at least until
the market believed that the threat of inflation was going to be
combated. If there could be no real confidence in the continuity
and soundness in policy, Mr. Irons said, there were not many people
who were likely to become heavy buyers of Government securities. If
the fear of inflation was an important factor in the market, this meant
that sooner or later the market had to be convinced that it was not a
factor, and until such time it was hard to blame people for going into
equities. The problem was certainly a difficult one but sooner or
later--whether now or a month from now or two months from now--the
decision would have to be faced up to by the System.
Mr. Mangels reported that from preliminary figures the West
Coast continued to show an expansionary trend in early September.
However, it was noticed that two areas--agriculture and construction-
which earlier were principal factors in.the expansion were now beginning
to level off. While farm returns continued to exceed those of 1957,
the margin was narrowing. Thus, while Twelfth District gains were
greater than the national average in the first part of 1958, in the
past two months farm returns in the district were only 7 per cent above
a year ago as compared with an increase of 11 per cent nationally. In
the construction field, heavy engineering contract awards for the first

9/30/58 -20
eight months of the year were six per cent above the similar 1957
period but August figures showed a rather sharp drop. Similarly,
awards for public construction, particularly public buildings, were
lower in August than in any month since January and February of this
year. In addition, there were indications that some large institutional
investors who put funds into West Coast mortgages had now withdrawn
from the market. However, most residential builders felt that they
were well equipped with commitments for mortgage funds to carry
through programs to the end of the year.
Continuing his resume, Mr. Mangels said that lumber orders for
the first half of September were better than for August and for a year
ago. Lumber production was below the volume of orders received and
the volume of shipments made, with producers working down inventories.
The lumber producers had avoided a strike by signing new contracts
with the labor unions calling for an increase of 7-1/2 cents per hour.
At the same time they had reduced lumber prices, reflecting partly a
seasonal adjustment but primarily the feeling of the industry that
prices had gone up too rapidly for current market conditions.
Steel mills in the district were operating at about 80 per cent
of capacity and producers were looking forward to good business during
the remainder of 1958. Nonfarm employment continued to move up and
was now only 1 per cent below the April 1957 peak. There had been
further increases in aircraft, machinery, and ordnance employment but

9/30/58 -21
word had been received that the aircraft firms anticipated some
decline in employment between now and the end of the year. Un
employment declined less than seasonally in August.
Mr. Mangels said that bank loans in the district were up
slightly in the three weeks which ended September 17 due to a $34
million increase in real estate loans. On the other hand, business
loans were down $17 million for the period as compared with a $98
million increase during the similar period a year ago. This drop
might be noteworthy because business loans usually expand at this
time of the year. Two or three San Francisco banks indicated a
slight pickup in loan demand but it was not pronounced as yet, and
some banks reported that deposits had not increased to the extent
anticipated. While demand deposits were up $178 million, time
deposits declined for a second straight period, this time by $40
million. There had been some increase in member bank borrowing
from the Reserve Bank, with banks in each of the reserve cities of
the district except Portland having been in and out during the past
three weeks. The banks of the district were substantial buyers of
Federal funds whereas usually they are net suppliers, and it was
anticipated that they would continue to be in the market for Federal
funds.
Mr. Mangels said that, while the recovery did appear to be
proceeding with considerable vigor, there might be some question as

9/30/58 -22
to how long the rapid pace of that recovery would continue. There
had been some rumblings about a slowing down in residential construc
tion activity, attributed partly to a tightening of monetary policy.
Plant and equipment expenditures did not indicate immediate pickup
and the future of automobile sales was not particularly certain.
Demand for bank credit was not heavy but in some instances banks had
already become a little more restrictive in making credit available.
Also, the Treasury would have some major problems in connection with
its future financing.
Mr. Mangels noted that average free reserves for September had
been about $150 million, ranging up to $221 million and down to $120
million. He agreed with those who had suggested that a range of free
reserves between $100 and $200 million would be a proper objective;
he would not favor going down to a zero level. He regarded the policy
directive as satisfactory and he would not favor a change in the dis
count rate just at this time.
Mr. Deming said that there was little new to report from the
Ninth District. In general, the district economy continued to recover
from its rather mild recession low. The farm picture remained favor
able, the mining situation continued to be weak, and total nonfarm
employment was still running below last year's levels. Perhaps the
most noteworthy development was in business loans at city banks. The
gain in such loans in September through the 24th of the month was

9/30/58 -23
broadly based and was substantially larger than in any comparable
period during 1957 or 1958. In the first quarter of this year
business loans at city banks dropped slightly in contrast to a small
gain in the like period of 1957, while in the second quarter they
gained about the same amount as in the second quarter of 1957.
However, in the third quarter the gains had been stronger than a year
earlier. Whether those gains would continue was problematical, since
bankers seemed to feel that no more than a normal seasonal increase
was in prospect for the rest of the year.
Mr. Deming said that on the national scene he was impressed by
three things. The first was the continued high level of unemployment
and the probability that it would continue for some time, the second
was the apparently strong prospect of higher productivity and perhaps
even of increasing gains in that area, and the third was the very
sharp increase in debt security yields and the contrasting decline
in equity yields. The first two of these developments would seem to
point to the probability of further expansion without very much price
pressure; the third seemed to indicate in part a rather substantial
increase in money tightness, in part a strong belief in future economic
expansion, and in part some fear of future inflation. At the last
Committee meeting, Mr. Deming recalled, Mr. Thomas spoke of the
possibility of following a policy which would aim at putting sufficient
reserves into the market to take care of seasonal needs and letting

9/30/58 -24
the market tighten or ease in reflection of more or less than normal
seasonal demands. Leaving aside the question of just what represents
normal seasonal needs, he found this broad approach most appealing.
It would mean a very careful appraisal of seasonal needs, reasonably
close timing of reserve injections, and almost complete abandonment
of free reserves or net borrowed reserves as a guide. Assuming a
reasonably accurate appraisal of needs and good timing, and assuming
a normal seasonal increase in needs, it would also mean that the
present state of conditions in the money market should be preserved-
no greater ease and no greater tightness-with interest rates becoming
the chief measure of such conditions.
Mr. Deming said he believed that the discount rate should be
advanced as quickly as possible by one-half per cent, primarily as a
technical move rather than a restrictive move. It might well be that
a further advance would be desirable in the latter part of the year,
but that would depend on developments. If demand did not increase as
anticipated, there would be no need to move further; if it grew more
than expected, further rate increases might be in order. Mr. Deming
concluded by saying that he saw no reason to change the directive at
this time.
Reporting on the Seventh District, Mr. Allen said that perhaps
the most significant economic development was the evidence that in
this district, too, the downward trend in capital expenditures had
been halted and might soon be reversed. In fact, an important factory

9/30/58 -25
locating service in Chicago indicated that their current work-load was
the greatest in their history. To mention scattered reports, two new
steel expansion programs had been announced for the Chicago area and a
well-known food processor Was understood to be reactivating a program
for replacement of all old facilities. Virtually all Seventh District
centers which furnish employment information were reporting either the
beginning of a rise, after adjustment for seasonal trends, or an ending
of the deterioration. There had been no change in the prospects for
crops, which continued very favorable. Loans of district reporting
banks had increased substantially since the month of August, with
most of the expansion in business loans, while investments had de
clined. Although the rise in business loan figures at district banks
in the past six weeks exceeded that of the nation, the decline in the
district from October 1957 through July 1958 was considerably greater
than that of the nation. The large Chicago banks, after being net
sellers of Federal funds for an extended period, last week were net
purchasers, but they still were not borrowing at the discount window.
On the other hand, Detroit banks had not only been net buyers of
Federal funds but had been borrowing in substantial amounts at the
Detroit Branch, largely because this is the time of year when their
largest depositors--the automobile companies--are making substantial
outlays with relatively little income.
Speaking of the automobile business, Mr. Allen said it was
difficult to interpret current sales data because this year the model

9/30/58 -26.
clean-up period was earlier by the calendar than last year. The
daily rate of sales for the period September 11-20 was only half
of the rate a year ago but last year the sales dip did not come
until October. Dealers' stocks of new cars on September 20 were
417,000-around 332,000 1958 models and 85,000 [] models--so it
appeared certain that the goal of 400,000 new cars on the first of
October would be attained. In fact, current labor difficulties
might result in a lower figure. Meanwhile, used car inventories
were at the lowest absolute levels since 1952. An acute shortage
of one- and two-year old cars was attributed to the low new car
sales in the last year and the resulting drop in used car trade-ins.
Used car prices firmed several months ago and were still rising, and
with the shortage of later model used cars more upward pressure on
prices could probably be expected. This could be a stimulus to new
car sales. In Detroit there was widespread but cautious optimism
about the reception of the 1959 models. Most forecasts for 1959 sales
were around 5 to 5-1/2 million for domestically produced cars and
around 400,000 for imports, which would be close to 25 per cent above
the level estimated for 1958. Automobile production in September had
been low because of the changeover shutdowns and because of numerous
walkouts incidental to labor negotiations. On the Ford contract, the
first-year cost of the package was estimated at between 12 and 16
cents per hour on an annual basis. However, even with the contract

9/30/58 -27
signed many thousands of Ford hourly workers had not yet returned to
work because of dissatisfaction with the provisions, and conditions
at General Motors and Chrysler were even worse.
With regard to policy, Mr. Allen said that despite all of the
crosscurrents and difficulties encountered in determining direction,
the course for at least the next three-week period seemed quite clear.
The pause to which Mr. Treiber had referred actually appeared to have
begun three weeks ago and he (Mr. Allen) felt that it should continue.
If the Committee were to aim at maintaining the current level of free
reserves, that would mean that it was providing what the banks would
require to take on the new Government securities. Of course, the
Committee did not yet know how many of those securities the banks
would take or how long it would require for the banks to market them.
In the circumstances, for the next three weeks he would aim at main
taining the current level of free reserves, which would in effect mean
maintaining an even keel. However, before the end of that three-week
period the Open Market Committee might want to hold a telephone meet
ing if developments seemed to warrant. Mr. Allen concluded by saying
that he would not favor changing the discount rate at present.
Mr. Wayne stated that the Fifth District continued to follow
about the same course that it had been following for the past several
weeks. The upturn was real and not illusory in the district but the

9/30/58 -28.
pace was not as rapid as indicated by the national figures. There
were one or two spots in the district that were causing a bit of
concern. The textile industry, which is the largest manufacturing
employer in the district, continued to operate on a fairly full basis
but inventories at mill level were rising slightly. Orders had not
been keeping pace for the last couple of weeks and efforts were being
made in the cotton sector of textiles to extend the usual Thanksgiving
and Christmas holiday periods in order to work off some inventory at
mill level. There was, however, no expectation of any shutdown and
the real problem of the industry related to profits; in output and
employment the industry was running at a fairly even rate not far off
bottom, which was where it had been for the last year or so. Another
somewhat disturbing note was that contacts in the southern bituminous
coal areas expressed the conviction that a wage agreement had already
been reached between the United Mine Workers and the northern bi
tuminous coal industry, the natural consequence of which would be a
demand upon the southern producers. This would result in increases
in coal prices of from 4O to 60 cents per ton and the ultimate effect
might be to destroy the important utilities market. The concern was
with the long-range effect on the district, particularly in the
depressed areas of West Virginia which were running at their customary
low level. However, the rest of the district's economy seemed to be
holding up well. The outlook for agriculture over the rest of the

9/30/58 -29
year was encouraging and on the whole economic activity in the
district was definitely moving up.
Mr. Wayne reported a consensus at the Richmond Bank that
the degree of restraint the System had been applying in the last
three weeks was appropriate to the circumstances. The district's
reserve city banks were apparently feeling some effects of this
restraint on their reserve positions and some erratic upsurge in
borrowing at the reserve city level had been observed. This, no
doubt, would continue since financing needs would affect the reserve
positions. There was an unwillingness to take security losses if
they could be avoided and the lack of availability of Federal funds
was likely to send the banks to the discount window.
Mr. Wayne expressed the view that the present degree of re
straint should be maintained, certainly for the next three weeks. He
would not be inclined to change the discount rate at this time but
felt that an upward movement in the rate might be appropriate in the
not too distant future.
Mr. Mills said that he had found the staff economic presentation
illuminating, particularly from the standpoint of its historical per
spective and the questions it raised regarding economic movements as
they might develop in the near future. His own remarks, he said, would
be confined to the financial factors that the System must grapple with
in the near future. Mr. Mills then made the following statement:

9/30/58 -30-
A monetary and credit policy dedicated to maintaining
an appropriate availability of credit must be followed.
Credit availability in this sense means the provision of
an adequate supply of reserves in support of legitimate
demands for commercial bank credit. Even though some over
flow of expenditures may occur as the result of rising
Federal disbursements, concern over this possibility should
not be permitted to cause Federal Reserve policy-making to
overallow for such expenditures by an offset in the way of
an unnecessarily severe restriction on the expansion of
commercial bank credit.
The diversified effects from the use of commercial bank
credit are essential to economic recovery and stability and
cannot properly be curtailed on the premise that the more
limited economic coverage of Federal expenditures can be a
substitute.
Consequently, Federal Reserve System policy should lean
on the side of supplying reserves in a quantity that will
support all visible demands for the legitimate use of com
mercial bank credit. A by-product of this policy contention
is reiterated--namely, that a parsimonious policy of supplying
reserves, by damaging the market for U. S. Government securi
ties may subsequently compel the Federal Reserve System to
supply a greater quantity of reserves in support of Treasury
financing programs than would otherwise be the case. An
approach toward bringing about a continuous condition of
negative free reserves should be very cautious and exploratory
as to effects. In that connection, I am relieved to see that
there seems to be no disposition to press the supply of re
serves too strongly in that direction. Along the same line,
attention should be paid to the fact that the demonstrable
thinness of the U. S. Government securities market has produced
an element of artificiality in the interest rate structure that
gives the appearance of a supply-demand inspired increase in
longer term interest rates that did not occur in reality. On
the contrary, the lack of two-way trading in U. S. Government
securities by putting upward pressure on interest yields has
compelled other public and private borrowers of long-term
funds to hurry to the market to provide themselves with funds
at constantly higher interest rates in order to compete with
increasing interest yields forced upon U. S. Government bonds.
Therefore, in the absence of orderly market developments for
U. S. Government securities it may well be that economic
historians of tnis period will discover an abrupt upward
distortion in interest rates that had not been the consequence

9/30/58 -31
of movements in an appropriately free securities market,
but had been caused in part by the restricted market
activity of the commercial banks, the depreciation in
whose bond accounts prevented their trading except as
necessitous sellers, which transactions acted as an
additional market depressant.
Mr. Mills said that according to his concept of Federal Reserve
System policy the System should stand ready under present conditions to
supply reserves to serve as an equilibrating factor between the demand
for long-term capital funds and the demand that is even now in evidence
for term loans from the commercial banks. The latter could produce an
unwanted expansion of bank credit. An appropriate well-gauged pro
vision of reserves might conceivably bring these two kinds of demands
for funds into reasonable balance and, by fostering some measure of
stability in the capital markets, prevent an unnecessary demand for
term loans from being pressed upon the commercial banks.
Mr. Mills said that he would not care to propose any change
in the policy directive. As to the discount rate, he would hope that
it would not have to be changed. However, developments--in some part
of the System's own making-- might force an increase in the discount
rate to align it more closely with market rates. He hoped the rate
would not be changed unless there was a disposition to allow the
member banks to borrow more liberally at the Federal Reserve Banks
as a means of permitting them to obtain the differential in earning
power between the discount rate and the rate available to them on
bills and in other areas of investment. The only conceivable

9/30/58 -32
advantage of such a development would, of course, be to provide
reserves at the initiative of the member banks as an element for
working toward stability in the Government securities market and
the capital markets. On the other hand, a movement of that sort
would involve policing problems from the standpoint of the appro
priate use of Federal Reserve Bank credit and that could prove
extremely difficult.
Mr. Robertson stated that the big problem today was to con
tinue to combat--and to dispel if possible--the widespread expectation
of inflation. In his opinion, monetary policy could do that best in
present circumstances by exerting a continued pressure. By this, he
did not mean additional pressure but the continuation of pressure
such as had been maintained during the past few weeks. This would
mean a difficult job for the Manager of the Account because of the
additional tightness that would be created when banks paid for the
Treasury securities that they purchased. It would also mean a diffi
cult job in the following weeks when more of the money obtained by
the Treasury went back into the economy. Nevertheless, he would hope
that the Account Management could maintain approximately the same
degree of pressure as had been maintained during the past few weeks.
Although it was appropriate to consider within the System the raising
of the discount rate, he could not see any possibility of making that
move in the next few weeks. On the other hand, it was his opinion

9/30/58 -33
that the rate should be changed at the earliest possible time. He
would not favor a change in the policy directive at present.
Mr. Shepardson said that he found no need to comment further
on the general economic picture that had been presented. His think
ing on policy, he said, was much in line with the thinking of Mr.
Robertson and also that of Mr. Irons. The problem of the Treasury
in the months ahead would be affected materially by the psychological
atmosphere and some way must be found as expeditiously as possible to
minimize the fear of inflation. Like Mr. Treiber, he felt that in
order to obtain the participation of the commercial banks in under
writing the Treasury flotations there should be a period of reasonable
stability until the present offering was digested. This would contemplate
that the Account Management should try to maintain the present degree of
restraint--not increase it in any way--in order to take care of the
digestive period. However, the nature of the job to be faced at the
end of that period should be kept in mind. It should also be remem
bered that it would be a relatively short time before the Treasury
would be in the market again. Plans, therefore, should be laid in
the direction of a greater degree of restraint and adjustment of the
discount rate in order that the System might make its full contribu
tion to allaying the fear of pending inflation. He would not be in
clined to make any change in the directive at this moment.

9/30/58 -34
Reporting from the Fourth District, Mr. Fulton said that
there was an aura of optimism in the business community. The manu
facturers had felt for some time that the liquidation of inventories
was overdone, and the buying now taking place was sound and necessary
rather than speculative. In steel, the rate of production had in
creased in the district more than in the nation as a whole and orders
were up about 10 to 15 per cent in the last month. They were not
particularly heavy from the automotive industry; instead they came
from a broad segment of users, including the appliance industry.
Steel operations were now at about 64 per cent of capacity in the
district against April production of around 4O per cent. A dis
turbing note, however, was the belief in the industry that steel
prices were going to go up again in early 1959. The steel contract
is scheduled to expire next June and it is feared that a large package
is being prepared by the union. As evidence of the apprehension,
steel fabricators were now taking orders for delivery in 1959 at
increased prices ranging from $3 to $5 per ton.
The machine tool industry, Mr. Fulton said, showed a modest
increase in orders but backlogs were diminishing. Unemployment had
been reduced slightly but the picture was affected by the strikes
and the model changeover in the automobile industry. In general,
unemployment was still substantial and there was no upward movement
in employment commensurate with the upturn that had taken place in

9/30/58 -35
production. Department store sales were up somewhat but for the year
to date were down 4 per cent from last year, while auto sales were very
low--30 per cent below a year ago. Agricultural income in the district
had been hurt rather badly by incessant rains; the hay crop spoiled to
a large extent and it appeared likely that in many cases the grain
crop would be left in the fields. From an agricultural standpoint,
therefore, the Fourth District would not do very well this year.
Mr. Fulton said that bank loans rose in September, this being
the first gain since June. Banks reported an increasing number of
inquiries about term-loan credit, with borrowers apparently trying to
work the capital markets against the bank loan rates. Banks had been
borrowing at the discount window without hesitation and discounts this
month were 13 to 17 per cent of the national total. The discount
window was in frequent use and the discounts were of good size.
Turning from district developments to policy considerations,
Mr. Fulton said that the System had to face up to the threat of in
flation and the problem of increasing prices all along the line. He
would not like to see any backing up from the pressure that the System
had been exerting in the market. Although the System might have a
difficult time trying to prove itself, he felt that it should stand
fast and keep a pressure on the market such as to give an adequate
signal that the System was firmly of the belief that inflation should
not prevail. He also believed that the discount rate should be raised

9/30/58 -36
by 1/2 per cent as soon as feasible so as to bring it into better
alignment with money market rates. He saw no reason for changing
the directive at this time.
Mr. Bopp said that the Third District was showing some modest
improvement. Continued claims for unemployment compensation were down
somewhat in recent weeks, although they continued to be significantly
above year-ago levels. Loans of weekly reporting banks were up during
the past few weeks but, on the other hand, were down from correspond
ing periods last year. In this connection, he noted that year-to-year
comparisons from now on would be likely to become more favorable be
cause of the trends that began to develop about this time last year.
With regard to System policy, Mr. Bopp said that in his
opinion the problems confronting the Treasury were such as to dictate
maintaining an even keel during the next three-week period. He would
not favor any change in the directive at this time, or in the dis
count rate.
Mr. Johns reported that the cotton crop was going to the gins
late this year. During a trip last week through the southern parts of
the Eighth District he heard a good deal of apprehension expressed by
informed parties concerning the weather from here on out. There had
been excessive moisture thus far, and if weather conditions caused
further delays the cotton crop might be down substantially. Mr. Johns
also reported that business loans at banks in the district were up less

9/30/58 -37
than seasonally in the last four or five weeks, principally
attributable to the volume of loans to commodity dealers. In
most recent weeks there had actually been a contra-seasonal
decline in loans because of less borrowing by finance companies.
Mr. Johns said he was rather impressed by the results of
a survey made recently among real estate mortgage bankers in the
St. Louis area. From this survey it would appear that there had
been a rapid and substantial turnaround in the availability and
cost of mortgage funds; respondents had spoken with astonishment
about the suddenness and rapidity of this change. A number of
smaller insurance companies and other purchasers of real estate
mortgages are reported to have disappeared or withdrawn from the
market. Although the larger ones customarily do not withdraw
completely but continue some activity, though at lower levels, in
order to maintain mortgage banker correspondent relationships, the
amounts they are making available to such correspondents have been
reduced and a further reduction of as much as 50 per cent is ex
pected next year. There was some opinion that for a time, and to
some extent, savings and loan money might pick up some of the slack,
but it did not appear that this could continue to offset the insurance
company decrease for a very long period of time. To what extent and
when these developments would be reflected in reduced housing starts
remained to be seen.

9/30/58 -38
In further comments Mr. Johns said that conversations with
representatives of the larger banks in the district indicated that
they did not feel that their banks were in a very liquid or easy
position. They had no bills to speak of, they have substantial
losses in their Government bond portfolios, and there is a sharpened
reluctance to dispose of bonds at current prices, especially in a
number of banks which took capital gains in the early part of the
year. The banks, he said, foresaw no very strong loan demand this
fall.
Mr. Johns stated that he agreed with the view expressed
several times at this meeting that there should be no increase in
the existing policy of restraint, at least for the time being.
However, he said, there was considerable opinion within the group
with whom he consults in the St. Louis Reserve Bank that at the
first appropriate time--whenever that might be--the discount rate
should be adjusted to bring it into better alignment with present
short-term market rates; also, that an increase of 1/2 per cent was
the least that should be considered under circumstances now existing.
The next directors' meeting at the St. Louis Bank, Mr. Johns said,
would come in the midst of Treasury payment dates and he was not
inclined to think that adjustment of the rate at that time would be
appropriate.
Mr. Szymczak expressed the view that one of the strongest
fears in the market at the present time reflected the large

9/30/58 -39
Government deficit and the resultant need of the Treasury to go
to the market to borrow new money. What happened in the Govern
ment securities market in July and early August, he said, was not
due to a policy of restraint on the part of the System; in fact,
any criticism leveled at monetary policy during that period would
have to be on the grounds that it was too easy. Instead, it was
an expectation on the part of purchasers that security prices would
rise that caused the speculation. Now the Treasury had a large
Government deficit to finance, and in view of the large number of
unemployed the market appeared to feel that money must continue to
be supplied, whether that was inflationary or not. It seemed to
be the general conclusion that inflation was in the offing, as
reflected by the trend of stock market prices. The frozen portfolios
of the commercial banks made the situation difficult for them,
particularly because they were liquid for a long period of time and
suddenly became lliquid.
Mr. Szymczak went on to say that much of the uncertainty
regarding the future appeared to be due to lack of clarity of
Federal Reserve policy. Therefore, it seemed to him essential that
System policy be clear, continuous, and steady. He felt that
seasonal demands for credit, whatever they might be, should be met
through open market operations. Like Mr. Mills, he felt that the
System could not allow the Government securities market just to

9/30/58 -40
keep on faltering because sooner or later the System would have to
come to its support and perhaps provide more reserves than would
otherwise need to be provided. In his opinion, free reserves should
not go down to the zero level. While he did not like to mention any
specific figure, he noted that operations in the market in recent days
had been substantially along the lines of keeping free reserves above
zero and maintaining an even keel. That, he felt, was about where
things should stand.
Mr. Balderston, after commending the Desk for achieving the
degree of stability that had been maintained in the past three weeks,
said he was concerned about the misunderstanding on the part of some
people as to why rates had moved up. As he saw it, the change in
margin requirements and the discount rate had little or nothing to
do with it. Instead, the basic considerations mentioned by Mr.
Szymczak had caused quite naturally a stiffening of rates, short as
well as long. It appeared that one must look forward to a long period
when the Federal Government would be competing with the private sector
of the economy for capital funds, and the competition would make it
difficult for corporations, State and local governments, and the
Federal Government itself to acquire the funds they desired at prices
they would like to pay. The System's immediate task was to see that
monetary policy helped to make the current bank underwriting of the
Treasury issues a success in order to overcome the bankers'

9/30/58 -41
disenchantment with the underwriting role. The Treasury, he noted,
had priced these issues in accordance with what those responsible
for monetary policy would wish. In fact, the pricing was so much on
the liberal side that any lack of success of the issues would be an
indication of a greatly disturbed market. These particular issues,
he said, had to make the bankers feel that the next time they would
be willing to do the necessary underwriting. Therefore, an even keel
in monetary policy seemed called for during the period until the next
meeting of the Open Market Committee. In other words, he would like
to see open market operations conducted during the next three weeks
in a manner as similar as possible to the past three weeks.
It was important, Mr. Balderston suggested, to avoid rumors
during the ensuing period and there should be no discussion of a
discount rate change at the Federal Reserve Banks. If such discussions
and rumors were to reach the market, confusion would certainly be the
result. When the System did move, however, circumstances would seem
to dictate moving more decisively than had been customary at times
in the past, particularly because the intervals available for action
would be short. Unless the System made its move as a System, neither
the public, the market, nor the Congress would understand the situa
tion and they would be properly critical. In summary, when the time
came to move he would hope that, to avoid confusion in the market,
the move would not be strung out, and instead the System would move
as a System.

9/30/58 -42
In an introductory comment, Chairman Martin said that it
was encouraging to note the degree of unanimity around the table
this morning. He expressed wholehearted agreement with Mr. Irons'
analysis of the overriding problem with which the System was con
fronted and of the Treasury's longer-range problem. At the last
meeting, he said, he was rather discouraged about the role of the
Federal Reserve System. Personally, he had not anticipated that
recovery would be as rapid or as full as had turned out to be the
case. While the Treasury had not been perfect in its analysis of
the situation, within the System family emphasis should be placed
on the System's own faults first, rather than on what other people
do. In his opinion, the System had not acted definitely, clearly,
or sharply enough during the past two months to make possible the
type of Government securities market that he regarded as necessary
and essential.
At the last meeting, Chairman Martin recalled, he had expressed
himself to the effect that if he had been doing it on his own he would
have moved the discount rate to 2-1/4 per cent. No one, of course, can
do it on his own. However, it must be recalled that after the difficult
July period the System had about two months when it was free to act so
far as Treasury financing was concerned. The problem, of course, was
complicated by the irregular scheduling of directors' meetings,
especially during the vacation period. In any event, there were now

9/30/58 -43
two problems--the economic problem and the financial problem--and
a sympathetic critic of the System had said to him several times in
recent weeks that the System appeared to be much more proficient in
economics than finance.
Chairman Martin expressed the view that action today should
be dirrected toward the three-week period ahead. Nevertheless, he
agreed that at the first feasible time a move should be made toward
better alignment of the discount rate and the bill rate. In talking
about an even keel, he said, one must remember that there is a flowing
reserve picture, which means that in order to maintain a given degree
of restraint, substantial reserves may have to be supplied due to
seasonal factors. Another way to think about it would be to say that
in maintaining an even keel one must try to maintain about the level
that there is in the stream. Also, it must be recognized that it is
necessary to give the Treasury some period of stability both before
and after it goes to the market. It would be most unfortunate at
the present time for the System to pull the rug from under the Treasury
immediately following the current financing. Most press commentators,
he noted, would be anticipating an increase in the discount rate and
a further tightening of credit because that was the logic of the
situation.
Continuing, Chairman Martin commented that differences within
the System and within every organization are all to the good, but when

9/30/58 -44
an organization can not resolve them effectively it is not functioning
properly. The System, in his opinion, did not have too good a record
in the last discount rate experience. In saying this he was not
blaming anyone, just trying to put the matter in terms of the future
and the situation that he could see developing. Within the System
there had been real differences of opinion, based mostly on economics
rather than finance. At the same time, the market was very much upset
because it thought at one point that the System was going to ease
further, and later because delays by various Reserve Banks in coming
into line on the discount rate caused people to think that the move
was going to be to 2-1/4 per cent. In going through the journals he
did not find any expectation that the New York Bank would not move its
rate. Rather--and he was just citing the New York Bank as an example-
the theory was that the debate concerned whether to go to 2 per cent or
to 2-1/4 per cent. That was unsettling to the market and confusing to
the logicians looking at the market.
As the System approached the forthcoming period, Chairman Martin
said, it should not foreshadow what it would or would not do. While it
did not seem likely, there was always the possibility of a downturn
between now and the time of the next meeting of the Committee. However,
even if the current upward trend continued, he would hope that no Re
serve Bank would move on the discount rate prior to the next Committee
meeting, at which time there would be another opportunity to review the

9/30/58 -45
situation. If it appeared at that time as though some action should
be taken, he would hope that it might be possible for at least three
or four Banks to act so that the action would be sharp and decisive.
Furthermore, it was his opinion that if conditions appeared to call
for an upward adjustment, that adjustment should be 1/2 per cent so
that there would be no misunderstanding of System policy. To stick
a knife in the wound, he observed, is only to prolong the misery.
In short, Chairman Martin said, there had been some uncertainty
in the market and the System had participated in the creation of that
uncertainty. He was not saying necessarily that one point of view was
right and the other wrong, but as an institution the Federal Reserve
must resolve its differences and move. From here on, the System would
have only limited time periods in which to make its moves because of
the Treasury situation.
Chairman Martin repeated the observation he had made at other
meetings of the Committee that the System was very fortunate from the
standpoint of the cooperation exhibited by the Treasury during this
period. He had found both Secretary Anderson and Under Secretary
Baird to have a rare degree of understanding of the System's problems.
While they did not always agree with the System, they were fully as
anxious to defeat inflation as those in the Federal Reserve.
The Chairman went on to say that in approaching its responsi
bilities the System should bear in mind the needs of the Treasury

9/30/58 -46
without, of course, making them overriding. In other words, the
System should realize that this was a joint endeavor. There was
a sick Government securities market, and while he had not tried
to analyze all of the causes, the Federal Reserve System could not
be held entirely blameless for the sickness of the market.
Sumarizing the views expressed at this meeting, Chairman
Martin said that it seemed very clearly the desire of the Committee
to try to maintain an even keel in the market, and that no change in
the policy directive appeared to be contemplated. It also seemed
clearly to be the desire of the Committee to give the Desk latitude
to take into account the color, feel, and tone of the market. No one
appeared to favor a further increase in the degree of restraint that
had been exerted; nor, on the other hand, was there a desire to ease
the market. The prevailing view would be to endeavor to keep the
general level of free reserves within about the same range as had
prevailed during the past three weeks.
Chairman Martin went on to say that if some situation should
develop before the date of the next regular Committee meeting which
indicated a need for a telephone meeting it would, of course, be
proper to have one. However, it was his view that telephone meetings
should be avoided if possible. Barring unforeseen developments, it
did not seem to him that from now to October 21 would be too long a
period in which to pursue an even-keel policy. At the October 21

9/30/58 -47
meeting there could be another full discussion, and then it would not
be possible for the System to continue indecisively; it must decide
one way or the other, and any action should be clear and decisive.
Thereafter, there should be again a period of stability before and
after the Treasury went into the market.
Chairman Martin then asked whether there was any question
about the directive or about his summation of the meeting, and no
questions were raised.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York, until otherwise
directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges
(including replacement of maturing securities, and
allowing maturities to run off without replacement)
for the System Open Market Account in the open market
or, in the case of maturing securities, by direct ex
change with the Treasury, as may be necessary in the light
of current and prospective economic conditions and the
general credit situation of the country, with a view (a)
to relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs
of commerce and business, (b) to fostering conditions in
the money market conducive to balanced economic recovery,
and (c) to the practical administration of the Account;
provided that the aggregate amount of securities held in
the System Account (including commitments for the purchase
or sale of securities for the Account) at the close of
this date, other than special short-term certificates of
indebtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be increased or
decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with

9/30/58 -48
discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to
issue participations to one or more Federal Reserve
Banks) such amounts of special short-term certifi
cates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time
to time for the temporary accommodation of the
Treasury; provided that the total amount of such
certificates held at any one time by the Federal
Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate
$500 million.
It was noted that if meetings of the Federal Open Market
Committee were maintained on a three-week schedule a meeting would
fall on Tuesday, November 11, which is a legal holiday in Washington
and other parts of the country. After discussion of alternatives, a
general preference was expressed for Monday, November 10, and it was
understood that a meeting on that date would be contemplated.
Some of the Reserve Bank Presidents then reported figures
that had reached them during the meeting from their respective Banks
concerning subscriptions to the issues involved in the current
Treasury financing. It appeared from these reports that the sub
scriptions were running rather favorably.
Pursuant to the understanding at the Committee meeting on
September 9, Mr. Rouse had distributed to members of the Open Market
Committee and the Presidents not currently serving on the Committee
under date of September 11, 1958, a memorandum on speculation in the
Government securities market prepared at the New York Bank for the
use of the Technical Committee of the New York Money Market. Under

9/30/58 -49
date of September 22, Mr. Rouse also had distributed a summary of
the first meeting of the Technical Committee, which was held at
the New York Reserve Bank on September 15, 1958.
Mr. Rouse commented that his secretary had received from
Under Secretary Baird's office a request for additional copies of
the two memoranda, since the supply sent originally by the New York
Reserve Bank to the Treasury had been exhausted; a copy of the
memorandum had gone to the President, and Secretary Anderson had
asked that a copy of the summary be sent to the Secretary of Commerce.
Chairman Martin stated that Mr. Mills had been designated by
the Board of Governors to head up the Board's study of speculation
in the Government securities market. He said that arrangements had
been made with the New York Stock Exchange for a representative of
the Exchange to confer with Mr. Mills and members of the Board's
staff.
It was agreed that the next regular meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, October 21, 1958,
at 10:00 a.m.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary