A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
riday, July 18, 1958, at 1:00 p.m. This was a telephone
erence meeting and each individual was in Washington except
therwise indicated in parentheses after his name in the follow
list of those participating:
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman (New York)
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Fulton (Cleveland)
Mr. Irons (Dallas)
Mr. Leach (Richmond)
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson (Richmond)
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Mr. Young, Associate Economist
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
(New York)
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Keir, Acting Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Rouse, at whose suggestion this meeting had been called by
Chairman, said that about an hour ago he had a telephone call from
Treasury to the effect that, based on reports they were receiving,
including reports from the Trading Desk, the price rise in the Govern
securities market which occurred earlier today had been dissipated,
market was drifting lower, and a condition was developing which the
sury could not, in its opinion, hope to deal with and which Under

7/18/58 -2
Secretary Baird thought was a responsibility of the Federal Reserve
System. While the Treasury felt that it had some justification in
helping the market for the 2-5/8 per cent bonds of 1965, it did not
feel justified in easing the market down in other issues. The
Treasury felt that this meant going into the market on a broad basis
and that the Federal Reserve had a responsibility.
As to the international situation, Mr. Rouse reported news
on the ticker of a demonstration in Moscow against the United States
Embassy and a demonstration in Potsdam against the United States
Military Mission there.
Mr. Rouse went on to say that since the call from the Treasury
the market had not gone down much but that there was pressure. The
2-5/8s were now below 98, and there were some reports from bank dealers
that long-term bonds were being offered in fairly sizeable amounts.
In response to a question about the bid side of the market,
Mr. Rouse said that one or two dealers were actually buying a few
bonds. However, they felt that they were getting fairly well filled
up on what they planned to do at this price level.
Mr. Rouse then stated that there was not in his judgment a
disorderly market, but that he had the feeling that there was one in
the making.
Chairman Martin asked Mr. Rouse whether another meeting at
2:00 p.m. would permit a clearer picture, and the latter indicated

7/18/58 -3
doubt. He thought it would be just about the same picture of lower
prices and a continuing volume of securities for sale. On the Treas
ury rights, he said, the bid side of the market was close to one per
cent, and the long bonds were working pretty close to a yield basis
of 3.5 per cent.
Mr. Rouse then reported that Under Secretary Baird had now
called again and said that on the 2-5/8s the Treasury was making
available $10 million to ease the market step by step as they went
down.
Chairman Martin said that Mr. Baird had expressed great
concern about the market and the responsibility of the Federal Reserve
System. He had told Mr. Baird that the Federal Open Market Committee
was going to hold a meeting but had made no commitment of any sort.
The Chairman then asked the Manager of the Account what, in
his opinion, could or should be done. The Manager, he noted, did not
feel that it was a disorderly market.
Mr. Rouse replied that there were a few bids, but not in any
volume. He saw a threat to the impending Treasury financing and in
the present situation, he said, one must think in terms of a national
emergency involving international affairs as against a purely domestic
situation. Mr. Rouse went on to say that he had not had an opportunity
to develop any well thought-out plan. He thought that the Treasury
would continue its support of the 2-5/8s. It was a case, he said,

7/18/58 -4
of trying to maintain some order in the market, and bids were not
available.
Mr. Rouse then stated that he would recommend that the
Committee authorize purchases of bonds for the Account today up
to a certain dollar amount in order to steady the market wherever
soft spots appeared. Then on Monday a decision could be made on
whether any action was necessary as to the rights.
Mr. Hayes said that although he had never quite understood
what a disorderly market was, he thought the present market was
close to it. He did not like the idea of taking too great a risk
by failing to make any move, particularly in view of the inter
national situation. Therefore, he would advocate doing what Mr.
Rouse proposed.
The Chairman then noted that the proposal had not been
defined in terms of dollars. Mr. Rouse indicated that he thought
$25 million today would do quite a lot of good, based on experience
with the 2-5/8s over the past few days. Looking ahead, he would
think that that many dollars through Wednesday might do quite a
bit of good. He was not advocating a pegging operation. Rather,
he was thinking in terms of maintaining some semblance of order
in the market and having some transactions executed.
After further discussion, Mr. Rouse suggested that for
today a maximum purchase authority of $50 million be fixed, but

7/18/58 -5
added that he would expect that less than $25 million would have
to be used.
Mr. Hayes, the first member of the Committee to express his
views, pointed out that this was his first experience with a condi
tion of this kind. However, logic called for doing something in
view of what the Treasury considered an incipient failure of its
financing. He would like to see the Account do some resistant
buying.
Mr. Irons said that, as he understood it, there was not at
the moment a disorderly market, but it was highly possible that one
would develop. There was a danger, in the Treasury's mind, that
its forthcoming issue of 1-5/8 per cent certificates would be a
failure in large degree, and this danger was considered to arise
out of the whole general atmosphere in the market. He questioned
whether spot purchases would result in giving the impression of a
better market and assure the success of the Treasury issue. What
the proposal really meant was buying in the intermediate- and long
term market where there were soft spots with the idea of avoiding a
disastrous situation at the time that the Treasury was operating in
the market. He would be reluctant to support the proposal, but Mr.
Rouse was closer to the market and he would accept his judgment on
the matter. If Mr. Rouse felt that a disorderly situation was in
the making and could lead to disastrous effects, he would be guided

7/18/58 -6
accordingly. However, he doubted whether anything that the System
could do short of buying the rights would assure that the Treasury
issue would be a success.
Mr. Rouse agreed with Mr. Irons but commented that the inter
mediate and long-term bonds influenced the whole market atmosphere
and that the System might be of some help at the outset. It might
be that on Monday or Tuesday the System would get involved with the
rights situation.
Mr. Rouse reported that the new 2-5/8s were now being offered
to the Account at 97-30/32.
Mr. Leach stated that he was impressed by what Mr. Rouse had
said. After verifying that the proposal was for authority to purchase
on an "if and when desirable" basis, in the light of existing condi
tions as seen by the Manager of the Account, he said that he would go
along with the proposal.
Mr. Mills said it was his feeling that the plan proposed by
Mr. Rouse would merely constitute temporizing with the market in the
same manner and with the same potential results as were reflected by
the Treasury's support of the 2-5/8 per cent bonds. Therefore, he
would not vote for the plan. However, he would be entirely willing
to proclaim a disorderly market and to intervene vigorously in all
areas of the market and that in the discretion of the Account Manager
deserved support. Also, he would make a public announcement of such

7/18/58 -7
intervention. It was his view that the reaction to such an
announcement would be such as to require very little in the
way of purchases of securities, and that the announcement would
give the proper tone and support to the Treasury in its impending
financing.
Mr. Robertson said that his view was somewhat similar to
that of Mr. Mills. He would not support the proposal of Mr. Rouse
on the strength of a merely incipient disorderly market. On the
other hand, he would not substitute his judgment for that of Mr.
Rouse regarding the existence of a disorderly market; if Mr. Rouse
should conclude that the market was disorderly, he would go along
with the suggestion of Mr. Mills. In such a situation he would
support the market, and he would announce that decision in order
not to have to get into the market any more than necessary. On
the basis of available information, it did not appear to him that
there was now a disorderly market.
Mr. Shepardson stated that it seemed to him that the situa
tion had not developed sufficiently to justify taking vigorous action
at this time. He was disturbed about what would be accomplished by
the small amount of purchases Mr. Rouse had suggested. However, if
action were to be taken at all at this time, he would favor Mr.
Rouse's suggestion rather than any major move. In other words, he
did not particularly favor Mr. Rouse's proposal but he would go along
with it in preference to stronger action.

7/18/58 -8
Mr. Fulton said he felt there was enough speculative
holding of bonds to keep the market weak for some time, and he
doubted whether a small amount of purchases would relieve the
situation. However, if Mr. Rouse thought that this was the thing
to do, he would go along. He felt that a public announcement
might be a rather bad thing in the light of developments abroad.
In summary, he would go along with the Rouse proposal as a small
probing operation to see whether the market had reached the level
it was seeking. If not, the System could hardly, without a massive
effort, change the market very much or give it great strength.
Mr. Szymczak said that no one knew, of course, what might
happen or what the System might have to do. Therefore, at this
writing he would go along with Mr. Rouse, who was close to the
market. He would then leave the situation to Mr. Rouse, with the
understanding that any significant developments would be reported
by him. Over the week end another look could be taken with a view
to determining longer-range possibilities.
Mr. Balderston said that he, too, would favor the recommenda
tion of Mr. Rouse. He did not think that a massive effort today
would be warranted since Mr. Rouse had indicated that there was not a
disorderly market. If a small action today would help the market
recede from its present level to a lower one in an orderly fashion,
the Committee would have helped the Treasury financing at a juncture

7/18/58 -9
which was a very serious one for the nation. As to whether further
steps should be taken later, he was uncertain at this time, but he
would not want to vote against the Rouse proposal because he hoped
that a minor action today would prove sufficient.
Chairman Martin said that he would vote for Mr. Rouse's
proposal reluctantly. He was uncertain whether it was the answer;
in fact, he was somewhat dubious, but nobody could be sure and it
seemed necessary to experiment. He would not want to declare this
a disorderly market in the absence of something more drastic than
had occurred, and he felt that a public announcement at the present
time would be a mistake.
Mr. Hayes inquired of Mr. Rouse whether the market would know
that it was the System Account that would be making the purchases
rather than the Treasury. Mr. Rouse replied in the negative.
Mr. Rouse commented that the state of the market was not good.
He shared the Chairman's sense of reluctance, but he had come to his
recommendation in the light of the Treasury's position and the inter
national situation, and felt that it was the right one. As to its
being a probing operation, he felt that it would be just that. The
Committee and the Treasury would have to be talking as the days went
by, and if the market got to a sustainable level, something worthwhile
would have been accomplished.
Chairman Martin inquired of Mr. Rouse whether it would be
the intention to buy on scale down, and the latter replied that it

7/18/58 -10
was, not 32d by 32d but on an irregular declining basis.
Chairman Martin then stated that he understood that Messrs.
Mills and Robertson wished to vote adversely on the proposal, which
was to authorize the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to purchase
for the System Open Market Account in the open market this afternoon
$50 million or less of Government securities at the discretion of the
Manager of the Account on scale in whatever sectors of the market the
Manager might deem appropriate in order to steady the market.
In further explanation of his position, Mr. Mills stated that
in his opinion the plan proposed by Mr. Rouse, especially with purchases
on a declining scale-down basis of prices, would do very little to
restore confidence in the market. When it became known publicly--as
it certainly would--that the Federal Reserve was buying other than
bills for its own account, he feared that if there should be a dis
orderly market by Monday, the correction of it would have been
seriously handicapped by temporizing and fluttering around the edges
of the market with minor purchases at this time.
Mr. Robertson said that he agreed completely. In his opinion,
adding an additional amount of money, some of which would go to support
the 2-5/8s that the Treasury had been supporting, would be the wrong
policy to pursue.
Thereupon, with Messrs. Mills and
Robertson voting "no" for the reasons
they had stated, authority was granted
to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York

7/18/58 -11
to purchase for the System Open Market
Account in the open market this after
noon $50 million or less of Government
securities at the discretion of the
Manager of the System Open Market Ac
count on scale wherever the Manager
deemed it appropriate in order to
steady the market.
Chairman Martin stated that in the absence of developments
which might indicate otherwise, another telephone meeting of the
Committee would be held on Monday, July 21, at 11:00 a.m.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
on Friday, July 18, 1958, at 2:30 p.m. This was a telephone con
ference meeting and each individual was in Washington except as
otherwise indicated in parentheses after his name in the following
list of those participating:
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman (New York)
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Fulton (Cleveland)
Mr. Irons (Dallas)
Mr. Leach (Richmond)
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson (Richmond)
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Mr. Young, Associate Economist
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
(New York)
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Keir, Acting Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Larkin, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York (New York)
Mr. Rouse stated that as the plan approved at the 1:00 p.m.
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was being put into effect
he was called by Mr. Larkin and participated in some conversations
which indicated that selling in the Government securities market was
increasing and spreading through the list. Bids were disappearing,
and about the only bids were those put in by the System. Indications

7/18/58 -2
were that volume was getting to be considerable. Several dealers
had been heard from to that effect.
Mr. Larkin stated that at the conclusion of the last Com
mittee meeting the Trading Room was informed by several leaders in
the business that there were almost no bids, particularly on Treasury
issues in the critical list, including the 2-5/8 per cent bonds of
1965. One and one-half hours ago the price level on the 2-5/8s was
in the neighborhood of 98 or slightly lower. Now it had dropped
further and the volume of selling seemed to be picking up. Until
recently, the selling seemed to be mostly speculative-type selling.
However, with prices falling and dealers withdrawing their bids,
there were reports of increasing institutional selling. While the
selling was not very substantial, it showed the way the wind was
blowing. Dealers were reporting that the market was tending to
feed on itself, and holders, including institutional investors,
were interested in selling. The 3-1/2s of 1990, Mr. Larkin said,
were now slightly below par, almost a point from the high level of
this morning and off a quarter from last night's closing level.
Summarizing the situation, Mr. Larkin said that in the
aggregate the volume of liquidation of bonds overhanging the market
was not huge but was growing. If the present atmosphere were to
continue and prices moved downward, he felt that gradually the
supply of securities overhanging the market would increase sub
stantially. There was the danger of a snowballing movement, with

7/18/58 -3
the market tending to feed on itself, and hat obviously would work
its way into the Treasury financing. Continuing, he said that rights
could now be purchased cheaper than Treasury bills. The volume of
securities being sold, the volume of securities overhanging the
market, and the willingness of investors--including institutional
holders--to sell all seemed to be building up rather significantly.
If conditions continued to deteriorate and prices declined further,
the over-all interest in liquidating securities could build up sub
stantially.
Mr. Rouse said that in the light of that picture, he had
called Chairman Martin and had said that he thought he would now have
to call the market disorderly. In the circumstances, the remarks of
Messrs. Mills and Robertson at the earlier meeting of the Committee
began to have point, and he therefore had suggested this meeting of
the Committee so that the situation could be reported. The funds
available under the previous authorization, and the basis on which
they were to be used, would now appear to be inadequate, and he
would like to have the views of Messrs. Mills and Robertson con
sidered by the Committee. Mr. Rouse then suggested the possible
text of the announcement, if it should be decided to make one follow
ing a decision by the Committee favorable to a proposal such as had
been advanced by Messrs. Mills and Robertson.
Mr. Hayes said that he had followed the situation closely
since the last meeting of the Committee. The evidence was quite clear

7/18/58 -4
before that the Committee was dealing with an incipient disorderly
market, and it now appeared to him that the market could be described
as disorderly. In view of that situation, and in view of the fact
that the approach before was tentative and probing in nature and
might not have the desired effect, he felt that the Committee would
have to take a more positive approach in order to try to stabilize
prices for the time being.
Mr. Irons said that, as he saw it, the Manager of the Account
felt that there was actually a disorderly market and that means must
be taken by the System to restore stability, rather than a probing
operation. He had expressed doubt before whether probing would ac
complish the purpose, but thought it desirable to try it first. Now,
with a disorderly market, the System could not stand by and let the
market move on its own. Therefore, he would be prepared to take
aggressive measures, and they might need to be quite aggressive.
He saw merit in a public announcement, but it would have to be
carefully worded in view of the whole complex of factors, including
the international situation.
In reply to a question by Mr. Leach, Mr. Rouse said that
about $10 million of securities had been purchased for the System
Account under the previous authorization.
Mr. Leach then said he was fairly well convinced that the
market was now in a disorderly condition and that it would be

7/18/58 -5
necessary to liberalize the earlier authorization. He felt that
it would be advisable to make a public announcement, provided it
was carefully worded.
Mr. Mills concurred in the view that the System should
intervene in the market aggressively, with an appropriately worded
public announcement. If a ceiling amount were to be authorized at
the present time, he would suggest $200 million, to be appropriated
by the Account Manager in his discretion.
Mr. Robertson said he would accept the judgment of the
Manager of the Account as to whether the market was disorderly.
He would not impose any limitation dollarwise on the authority
given, leaving that entirely to the Manager's judgment. He would
make a public announcement but say nothing about the speculative
elements in the market. Otherwise, he would proceed in accordance
with the judgment he expressed at the Committee meeting earlier
today.
Mr. Fulton indicated that he would be reluctant to give any
comfort to the speculators in the 2-5/8 per cent bonds. Otherwise,
he would support the market all along the line.
Mr. Shepardson inquired of Mr. Rouse whether he would con
template support at a fixed level or on a scale following the market
down, and Mr. Rouse replied that for the time being he would have to
use the word "pegging." He added that, as Mr. Mills and Mr. Robertson

7/18/58 -6
had suggested earlier, the announcement itself might help a great
deal and tend to minimize the volume of operations that may be
necessary.
Mr. Shepardson said that he would hate to see the market
pegged at this level. No matter what had to be done, however, he
would now favor going ahead with the announcement.
Commenting on Mr. Shepardson's point, Mr. Rouse said that
the longer-term bond market had declined so substantially that the
risks were minimized compared with anything that had prevailed for
many months.
Mr. Shepardson then repeated that he would go along with the
recommendation. However, he would hate to see a pegging at the
present level. He felt that further adjustment downward was needed.
Mr. Rouse responded that he did not have in mind pegging in
a rigid sense; that is, at 32ds.
Mr. Szymczak said that if the System was going to peg, it
would have to peg where the weakness was greatest and where there
was reasonable assurance that the securities could be held at those
prices. Then the System could follow a pattern of rates. What that
would take he did not know, but he was in favor of an announcement
and aggressive action as soon as possible.
Mr. Balderston said that he favored Mr. Rouse's proposal.
It would be his preference, however, to see some scaling down because

7/18/58 -7
he believed that the present level of prices was higher than
could be maintained permanently. As to the announcement, he
would confine it to a bare statement of the fact that the Fed
eral Reserve was operating in the market and not confining its
purchases to the short end. He would leave the interpretation
of the action to others.
Chairman Martin stated that he would support the recom
mendation of the Account Manager and felt that the Committee
should give him (the Manager) maximum discretion to handle the
situation in the way he thought best.
The Chairman then read the text of an announcement that
had been drafted by Mr. Thurston, and certain minor changes were
suggested.
With reference to the comment made by Mr. Fulton in regard
to the 2-5/8s, Mr. Hayes said that he would question letting them
drift when they were the weakest point on the market. He felt that
the Manager should be allowed to operate in them as well as other
issues.
Chairman Martin replied that the Committee would be giving
the Manager maximum discretion. He could take the comments of Mr.
Fulton and others as guides, but he would have to make up his own
mind.
Mr. Fulton stated that he had not intended to enter a caveat.
He would be content with a show of reluctance toward the 2-5/8s.

7/18/58 -8
Mr. Robertson said that the System would be in effect
pegging at the existing level. If, however, the action were
repealed and the Committee then entered into this another time,
it would use a different level--hopefully a lower one--to do its
pegging on.
Chairman Martin commented that he thought this was under
stood by all of the Committee members. However, it would not be
easy to move out of this operation. The authorization would be in
effect through next Wednesday at the minimum.
Mr. Robertson stated that he agreed completely, and Mr. Hayes
said that he and Mr. Rouse both agreed with the principle Mr. Robertson
had expressed. The Chairman commented that he also would hope for a
lower level at a later date, but that the Committee must realize the
possibility of serious difficulties ahead.
Question was raised whether a dollar limitation should be
put on the proposed authorization, and the comments were to the
effect that no need for a limitation was seen.
Thereupon, by unanimous vote, au
thority was granted to the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York to purchase for the
System Open Market Account in the open
market, without limitation, Government
securities in addition to short-term
Government securities.
The Manager of the System Open Mar
ket Account was authorized to give in
structions for the immediate implementation
of this authorization.

7/18/58
The following announcement was ap
proved by unanimous vote and the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York was authorized
to release the announcement to the ticker
immediately:
In view of the conditions in the U. S. Government
securities market, the Federal Open Market Committee has
instructed the Manager of the Open Market Account to pur
chase Government securities in addition to short-term
Government securities.
Mr. Rouse said he understood that this authorization would
include the purchase of rights, and there was no disagreement. Mr.
Rouse considered mention of this point in the public announcement
unnecessary, for if the System bought a few rights the word would
get around quickly.
Chairman Martin said that he would inform the Secretary of
the Treasury of the action taken by the Committee.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary's note: Upon being informed of the actions
taken by the Committee today, Mr. Vardaman said that
he concurred in each of them.
Secretary