A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
on Monday, July 21, 1958, at 11:00 a.m. This was a telephone
conference meeting and each individual was in Washington except
as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of
those participating:
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman (New York)
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Fulton (Cleveland)
Mr. Irons (Dallas)
Mr. Leach (Richmond)
Mr. Mangels (San Francisco)
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Treiber, Alternate Member of the Federal
Open Market Committee (New York)
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Mr. Young, Associate Economist
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market
Account (New York)
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Keir, Acting Chief Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Messrs. Larkin and Marsh, Assistant Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York (New York)
Mr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
(New York)
Mr. Larkin reported that the Government securities market
was moving up in price this morning, continuing the movement that

7/21/58 .2
developed late last Friday after the announcement appeared on the
ticker that the Federal Open Market Committee had authorized the
Manager of the System Open Market Account to purchase, in the open
market, Government securities other than short-term securities.
The movement on Friday, he said, was difficult to measure in terms
of 32ds, but roughly the price advance in the last quarter hour of
trading amounted to 1/ or 3/8 of a point. This morning the gains
ranged up to an additional 14/32ds. For example, the 3-1/2 per cent
bonds of 1990, which on Friday were purchased for the System Account
below par, were up this morning to 100-7/8.
Mr. Larkin said that offers were remarkably small, both in
numbers and volume; so far this morning there had been only a few
offers of bonds. Hence no action had been taken today by the System
Account with respect to intermediate or long-term issues. On Friday
between 3:00 and 3:30, roughly $32 million of notes and bonds in
five different issues were purchased for the System Account. Nothing
had been done on the rights.
Mr. Larkin continued by saying that the consensus of the
market now is that the average rate at the Treasury bill auction
today would be below one per cent, although some people in the market
thought that the rate might go up to one per cent or a little higher.
There was conjecture in the market as to what the System might do in
Treasury bills; that is, whether it would sell bills or let them run

7/21/58 -3
off, particularly the latter. As to the rights, the situation had
not improved. They were available in the market; although not in
huge amounts, offers were appearing. It was more a matter of the
level than one of magnitude. Together with the general atmosphere,
the situation was not one which would encourage the exchange of
maturing securities.
Mr. Larkin then went on to report other aspects of the market
situation this morning, including the picture on bank reserves and re
serve projections. His report is sumarized in a memorandum by Mr.
Thomas dated today. In accordance with the customary practice, Mr.
Thomas' memorandum has been sent by wire to all of the Federal Re
serve Banks and a copy has been placed in the files of the Federal
Open Market Committee.
In concluding his report, Mr. Larkin said that the Treasury
bond market was taking care of itself. There were some signs of a
two-way market developing as prices went up, but that remained to
be seen. The System Account did not intend to follow prices up, but
rather to stay out of the market.
Mr. Larkin then referred to the question of whether anything
should be done with respect to the rights and when-issued securities.
All things considered, the Account Management had decided to purchase
the when-issued securities rather than the rights on the theory that
this would contribute more help and would defer the release of re
serves until the first of August, when perhaps the problem could be

7/21/58 -4
dealt with better than tomorrow or Wednesday.
Mr. Larkin noted that the System Account held nearly $200
million of Treasury bills which would mature this Thursday and said
that the Management was considering the possibility of running off
some or all of them. However, a final decision would not be made
until it could be seen what happened as far as market conditions
were concerned. At present, it was the intent to run the bills off,
but this was subject to change depending on market developments and
the need for Federal Reserve operations in the market.
Mr. Leach inquired whether the Treasury bought any securities
Friday and whether it had any orders in now, to which Mr. Larkin
replied that the Treasury was out of the market today and that it did
not buy anything during the last hour on Friday. He added that the
authority had been virtually used up.
After Mr. Robertson expressed agreement with the thought that
the System should not be buying at the higher prices reported by Mr.
Larkin, the latter commented that prices had been marked up rather
sharply and that it remained to be seen whether they would hold. He
went on to say that the Desk had a couple of foreign orders for
Treasury bills, which at present it intended to supply from the
System Account.
Mr. Irons commented that he thought the System had done all
that it could from the standpoint of correcting a disorderly market.
He favored the idea of running off the Treasury bills. He then asked

7/21/58 -5
whether the System would gain much in the long run by making
purchases of rights or when-issued securities.
Mr. Larkin said he would like to think that some operations
in that sector of the market would be helpful and might encourage
holders of the maturing securities to exchange if they had been on
the fence. Otherwise, as a leading dealer said Friday, the Treasury
refunding could turn out to be the worst failure in the history of
Treasury financing. Unless the rights improved in price, it might
turn out to be just that.
Mr. Irons stated that this would be a precedent suggesting
that whenever a Treasury issue looked doubtful the Federal Reserve
should step in. He warned that the Committee should realize what
it might be building up for itself in the future.
Mr. Larkin responded that this was a most unusual situation,
particularly in view of the international situation. He said that
the Account Management did not have in mind the establishment of a
precedent. It was something that the Management abhorred as much
as anyone. There was full agreement, he said, that this should not
be regarded as establishing a precedent.
Mr. Robertson said that he concurred in the views expressed
by Mr. Irons, and Mr. Larkin said that the points Mr. Irons had
raised were recognized and accepted. Mr. Larkin also said he had
been informed that prices were holding where they were at the start
of the telephone meeting. (It was now 11:30.)

7/21/58 -6.
Mr. Thomas was then asked by Mr. Larkin if Chairman Martin
had any comments to make on the approach outlined. Mr. Thomas re
plied in the negative.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary