A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, July 8, 1958, at 10:00 am.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Irons
Mr. Leach
Mr. Mangels
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman 1/
Messrs. Allen and Johns, Alternate Members of
the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bopp, Bryan, and Leedy, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Atlanta, and Kansas City, respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Daane, Hostetler, Marget, Walker,
Wheeler, and Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Associate Adviser, Division of Re
search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Keir, Economist, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
1/ Withdrew from meeting at point indicated in minutes.

7/8/58 -2
Messrs. Mitchell, Jones, Strothman, and
Tow, Vice Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Chicago, St. Louis,
Minneapolis, and Kansas City, re
spectively; Mr. Coombs, Assistant Vice
President, Federal Reserve Bank of New
York; and Messrs. Anderson and Atkinson,
Economic Advisers, Federal Reserve Banks
of Philadelphia and Atlanta, respectively
Chairman Martin stated that Mr. Deming, Alternate Member of the
Committee,was on vacation and that in the absence of objection Vice
President Strothman of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis would
attend the meeting in Mr. Deming's place as an observer. There being
no objection, Mr. Strothman joined the meeting.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on June 17, 1958, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York covering open market operations during the period June 17 through
July 2, 1958, and a supplemental report covering commitments executed
July 3 through July 7, 1958. Copies of both reports have been placed
in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Reporting on open market operations since the last meeting, Mr.
Rouse stated that reserve availability has been maintained, with free
reserves averaging between $550 and $600 million. This figure is some
what higher than in the preceding three-week period, and reflects

7/8/58 -3
primarily the situation in the Government securities market. Bill
purchases totaled $797 million during the past three weeks, but $184
million bills will run off next Thursday, July 10. The average
issuing rate in yesterday's bill auction was .93 per cent and the
stop-out was just under 1 per cent,
Mr. Rouse reported that the Government securities market has
been in a poor state in recent weeks, superficially because of the
heavy volume of speculation in the new 2-5/8 per cent bonds of 1956,
but more fundamentally because of the feeling of investors that
economic conditions are improving and that recovery is in the making.
While there has been a good deal of selling of the new 2-5/8s as well
as of other issues during the past three weeks, there has been a
notable lack of buying, except on the part of the Treasury (which is
retiring a good part of the 2-5/8s that it purchased). Mr. Rouse
said that the recent sharp declines in Government bond prices were
triggered by the press story that appeared on June 19, stating that
there had been a shift in System policy. He observed that the de
clines would very likely have occurred in any event and would have
been triggered by something else even if that story had not appeared.
The Treasury has difficult problems ahead and must make its decision
next week as to the terms of the forthcoming refunding operation.
Since indications are that the Treasury will have to borrow cash in
August and October, there will be a particularly heavy calendar ahead

7/8/58 -
unless it is decided to combine the refunding of the called September
issues with the refunding of the August certificates or with the
August cash operation.
Mr. Mills observed that he had seen a good many comments
concerning the purchases by the Treasury to cushion the decline in
the bond market and noted that, since there had been no System
purchases, the buying by the Treasury had been virtually the only
source of support to the market. He wondered about the extent of
the overhang of securities remaining in the market, and inquired
if this overhang was of such size as to indicate that System pur
chases might at some point be necessary to supplement those of the
Treasury.
Mr. Rouse replied that back in May a New York money broker
convinced many that there was a quick profit to be made in participat
ing in the June refunding operation. He stated that only small margins
were required against the rights when they were purchased in May, but
that larger margins were required after the exchange on June 16.
There has apparently occurred, in many cases, almost a forced liquida
tion which may now be about completed; such forced liquidation, he
pointed out, was probably a large part of the total liquidation of
the 2-5/8s that has occurred. Mr. Rouse noted that Government securi
ties dealers held large positions--around $2.5 billion-- at the time
of the last meeting, but that such positions have now been reduced

7/8/58 -5
by somewhat over $1 billion and that a good part of the liquidation
represents 5- to 10-year bonds. He stated that it was difficult to
say how much speculation there was in the 2-5/8s. It had been ex
pected that the exchange into that issue would be in the neighborhood
of $3.5 to $4 billion, but actually the exchange turned out to be
about $7.4 billion. Mr. Rouse added that during this period of
sharp price declines in the bond market, there have been comments
that conditions were at times disorderly. He said that he disagreed.
Mr. Rouse concluded his remarks by noting that there have
been wide differences between the reserve projections of the Board
staff and those of the New York Bank. He reported that the staffs
are working on the problem of developing explanations of such wide
differences in projections, in the hope that the estimates will be
more useful to the Committee.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the open market transactions during
the period June 17 through July 7,
1958, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
In supplementation of the staff memorandum distributed under
date of July 3, 1958, Mr. Young made the following statement on the
economic situation:
Most recent economic intelligence points to better
performance for the economy in this period than observers

7/8/58
anticipated earlier. May and June together have shown
a two-point rise in the index of industrial production
and the present likelihood is that the final record will
show a rise of three points. Total national product for
the second quarter is currently estimated to be at least
modestly higher than in the first quarter.
Whether an abrupt turnabout of activity is taking
place or whether evident improvement merely reflects a
temporary rebound of production too far below consumption
is yet to be determined. But barring some unexpected jolt
to business and investor psychology, the odds would seem
to favor a better than rebound movement. Probably the
most important feature of the recent strengthening is
that it is without dominance of improvement in one or two
major areas. Rather, it represents a composite of small
improvements over a wide range of activities.
The important highlights may be briefly summarized:
Substantial gains in industrial production over May
and June were made by steel, autos, household durables,
textiles, apparel, leather and rubber products, paper and
paper products, coal and petroleum.
For the first time in eleven months, manufacturers'
sales in May were up modestly and the inflow of orders,
although still below shipments, rose moderately. Sales
from inventory continued, so that manufacturing inventory
liquidation was maintained at about the same high rate as
the preceding four months, bringing still closer the point
when inventory buildup would be a stimulus.
Construction activity in dollar volume in June also
showed lift, the first such indication since December.
Residential, commercial, and public (including highway)
construction constituted the strong elements; industrial
construction was off further. Contract awards for these
strong areas were up sharply.
Reflecting improved industrial and construction demands
for labor, initial claims for unemployment compensation have
stabilized and continued claims have declined. From May to
June, unemployment rose from 4.9 to 5.4 million, entirely
resulting from the increase in summer workers seeking employ
ment. The seasonally adjusted unemployment rate fell from
7.2 to 6.8 per cent. From mid-May to mid-June manufacturing
employment showed its first gain in 15 months and there were
also employment gains in services, State and local govern
ment, trade, and construction. Hours worked per week in
manufacturing rose both in May and June, the average reaching

7/8/58
-7-
39.2 in June compared with 38.3 in April. The increase in
hours worked was widely spread.
Personal income in May rose further and, at $344 billion,
was less than 1 per cent below its peak in August of last year.
Personal income for June is expected to reach a new high.
With improved personal income, retail sales in May rose
slightly further, with all major lines of durable goods show
ing some increase and nondurable sales holding at record levels.
In these circumstances, retail inventories declined further,
although at a slower rate than earlier in the year. June
department store sales increased slightly further from May.
New automobile sales in the first twenty days of June
about matched the improved May rate, and used car sales were
even better. With sales strength maintained, both new and
used car stocks declined further. Continued liquidation of
instalment debt for automobile purchases in May apparently
reflected in part a fairly sharp decline in credit sales.
Credit sales of new cars in that recent month apparently ran
about 57 per cent compared with average credit sales of around
60 per cent for preceding months of this year.
Activity in the housing market continued to pick up in
May and June. Low and moderately priced new houses required
less time to sell and existing houses also sold somewhat better,
though with some shading of prices. In response to stronger
demand conditions, and reflecting also the pressure of a grow
ing supply of mortgage funds, mortgage lending by all lenders
has increased. Mortgage rates are apparently still declining.
Wholesale prices have receded a bit recently, mainly be
cause of lower farm prices, particularly for livestock and
vegetables. Wholesale prices of industrial products have
been edging off, while prices of industrial materials have
been relatively firm after strengthening in late May and early
June.
While the index of consumer prices rose slightly to mid
May, recent indications for food prices, especially, would
point to no change or slight decline to mid-June.
One big uncertainty in the unfolding situation is the
possibility of cyclical downturn in European business activity
and a new surge of inflationary forces in Latin American and
Far Eastern countries whose export earnings have been cut
back in recent months. For more than a year, industrial cut
put in major European countries has shown leveling out and
some recent indications suggest the onset of recessionary
drift. But with statistical data less adequate and timely
than in this country, it is difficult to gauge the generality

7/8/58
of these signs. Certainly there is not yet enough evi
dence to warrant inference that European recession is
likely to become a force affecting adversely U. S. and
world trade developments. At the same time, there is
this hazard and European market developments will need
close watching in the months ahead.
A memorandum on the outlook for Treasury cash requirements
and bank reserves, prepared by the Board's staff, had been distributed
under date of July 3, 1958. With further reference to financial
developments, Mr. Thomas made the following statements
Since the last meeting of the Committee, the most
striking financial development has been the severe pres
sure on the Treasury bond market. This rather spectacular
episode and its causes have been described in written
reports submitted to the Committee by the staff and by
the Manager of the Account. These events contain lessons
not only for speculators and for the Treasury, but also
for Federal Reserve policy.
It is evident that the underlying factors were the
very large commitments in Treasury bonds made by temporary
holders, many for pure speculation, induced by expectation
of further declines in interest rates, and the attempt to
close out these commitments at a time when the money market
was under severe pressure because of exceptionally heavy
seasonal liquidity demands. These liquidity demands were
larger than usual because of the absence of a maturing
Treasury tax anticipation security, together with the
additional cash raised by the Treasury through a long
term bond issue.
The Treasury's deposit balances increased to over
$9 billion. Funds to make payments to the Treasury were
raised largely by the sale of Treasury securities
particularly the new 2-5/8 per cent bonds--or by calling
loans that had been made to dealers to carry large amounts
of securities they had purchased earlier as rights. The
effect on bank credit was phenomenal. Bank loans to
businesses increased only moderately but their holdings
of securities and loans on securities showed exceptionally
sharp increases. Total deposits at banks also increased
sharply, as did their required reserves.

7/8/58
In the three weeks ending June 18, total loans and
investments at banks in leading cities increased by $3.9
billion, of which $2.5 billion came in the third of these
weeks. In the next week there was a smaller decline than
usual. Altogether in the four weeks ending June 25 the
net increase was over $3.7 billion, many times more than
in the corresponding period of other recent years.
The pressure of these exceptionally heavy credit demands
came mostly through the U. S. Government securities market.
Business loans increased by little over a half a billion dol
lars--much less than in other recent years. Holdings of
Government securities by these banks increased by $1.5 bil
lion, holdings of other securities by nearly $500 million,
and loans on securities by about $1.0 billion; these items
have generally declined or shown little change in June of
other recent years.
Most of these funds went to enlarge Treasury balances,
which increased by $3.8 billion in four weeks at these city
banks, and by $4 billion at all banks to the exceptional
total of over $9 billion. In the corresponding weeks of
the three previous years, U. S. Treasury deposits had
fluctuated widely but showed little net change for the
period as a whole. Time deposits at banks continued to
increase at a fast pace--about half a billion dollars at
weekly reporting banks alone. Demand deposits of businesses
and individuals rose sharply in the first three weeks of June
but subsequently declined equally sharply, reflecting the
large tax payments in cash in the absence of a maturing tax
anticipation security, as well as cash payments for nonbank
purchases of the new Treasury bonds. The total for all banks
in June probably showed a contraseasonal decline estimated
at half a billion dollars.
Meeting these exceptional credit demands has called for
exceptional amounts of Federal Reserve credit. In the five
weeks ending July 2, System open market operations have sup
plied about $l. billion of reserve funds. About half of
this amount covered currency demands of $350 million and a
gold outflow of $300 million. Most of the remainder--over
$660 million--was added to member bank required reserves.
This has been one of the largest monthly increases in
required reserves on record. Free reserves of member banks,
which declined from over $550 million in the latter half of
May to less than $50 million in the first half of June,
increased to a level of close to $600 million in the past
three weeks, including the current week.

7/8/58 -10-
Notwithstanding this large addition to the reserve
supply, interest rates rose under the pressures of the
vigorous credit demands. The Treasury bill rate in
creased somewhat from the low level of around 5/8 per
cent reached at the end of May to about one per cent
in the third week of June. After declining somewhat,
the rate has again approached one per cent in the last
few days. The Treasury bond market was notably weak
under the influence of the closing out of speculative
commitments, and yields rose by nearly l/4 of a percentage
point. Yields on corporate and municipal bonds showed
somewhat more moderate increases, while new issues moved
slowly. Yet the market continued to absorb a substantial
volume of new issues, particularly when the long-term
Treasury bond is included.
This episode raises many questions about recent System
policies and more particularly about appropriate policies
for the near future.
In the first place, it needs to be kept in mind that
System policies have made possible the provision of very
large amounts of credit to the economy during the past
five to seven months. Total loans and investments of
commercial banks increased by probably as much as $12
billion from the end of January to the end of June--much
more than ordinarily occurs within a whole year--even
though this period has been one in which there is usually
little or no seasonal growth. To be sure, one third of
this growth occurred in June and is presumably largely
temporary. This temporary aspect is an important con
sideration for future policy to be discussed later.
This credit expansion has resulted in a growth in
required reserves of nearly $1.2 billion, which, together
with a currency drain of half a billion and a gold out
flow of $1.4 billion, called for exceptionally large
additions to reserve availability. Reserves were suppliod
by reserve requirement reductions aggregating $1.5 billion
and by System open market operations of $2 billion.
In addition to the temporary character of the large
June increase, another important qualification of the
recent bank credit growth has been pointed out by some
commentators. That is that the bulk of it reflects a
shifting of liquid funds and savings from U. S, Government
securities and perhaps other assets to time deposits at
banks, attracted by rates paid on such deposits in contrast

7/8/58 -11-
to the lower market yields on securities. From January
to May commercial bank and Federal Reserve holdings of
U. S. securities increased by about $6 billion, while
holdings of other investors declined by about $5 billion.
In this same period time deposits at commercial banks
increased by $5 billion, and those at mutual savings banks
increased by nearly $1 billion. It cannot be assumed,
however, that all of these changes, though similar in
amount, reflected a direct shift from Governments to time
deposits. Some of the funds obtained from the sale of
Government securities went into other uses, and some of
those that moved into time deposits no doubt came from
demand deposits, thus slowing down the growth in demand
deposits. Even if only one-tenth represented the latter
shift, the amount is not an insignificant addition to
demand deposits.
A substantial part of the growth in bank credit also
has gone into deposits of the United States Government, as
already pointed out, and has not been added to available
funds of business and individuals. The growth amounted
to $3 billion from January to the end of May and another
$4 billion was added in June. Most of this is temporary.
Demand deposits adjusted have declined by nearly $2
billion since January, but the normal seasonal decline
for this period would be about $4.5 billion. Hence, not
withstanding the large growth in time and U. S. Government
deposits, demand deposits adjusted have increased by close
to $2.5 billion in five months, an annual rate of growth
of nearly 6 per cent. If some allowance were made for a
shift to time deposits, the effective increase in active
demand deposits would be even greater. In any event the
increase shown is by no means an inconsiderable growth in
a period of declining economic activity.
For purposes of System policy, the significant point
is that a very large amount of liquidity has been supplied
to the economy. If demand deposits adjusted show no more
than the usual seasonal expansion for the rest of the year,
the net growth for the year would be over 2-1/2 per cent,
even without allowance for any shifting into time deposits.
It may be said, moreover, that in many respects time
deposits are more liquid than holdings of Government securi
ties in that they are payable at face value and would not
have to be converted into cash through market offerings
that might be made difficult by a changed monetary policy.

7/8/58 -12-
That conversion has already been made. Finally the large
volume of U. S. Government deposits will be drawn down
and the funds become available to the public for additions
to deposits or payment of debt. Bank credit has already
been provided to build up those balances; it does not have
to be provided again.
Projections of reserve needs for coming months, pre
sented by the Board's staff, are based on the assumption
that as the Treasury reduces its deposits the funds will
be used, in effect, partly to reduce bank credit and partly
to make additions to the money supply of no more than usual
seasonal amounts. On this basis total deposits at banks
and correspondingly total loans and investments should
decline substantially in the next two months. Increases in
September and October would be less than the previous decline.
These figures allow for additional Treasury cash financing in
August and October, but on balance over an extended period
Treasury borrowing should add only temporarily to the cash
needs or cash supply of the economy.
Other factors, including possibly a moderate further gold
outflow, are expected to exert some drain on reserves. When
allowance is made for them, as well as for normal monetary
needs, these projections imply that to avoid further increases
of more than normal seasonal amounts to the liquidity of the
economy, System holdings of Government securities should be
reduced by more than $600 million in July. If this were done,
moderate increases at the end of August and in October, at
times of Treasury cash financing, would be appropriate. In
the last two months of the year substantial operations would
be needed for seasonal purposes.
It should not be assumed that these indicated operations
would result in the credit developments projected. The
strength of credit demands and the desires of the public for
cash holdings will also be determinant factors. If credit
demands are stronger or if banks should be more active in
putting funds to use, expansion could be greater. If free
reserves were maintained at a high enough level, such might
be the result. On the other hand, reserves might be sup
plied but not be put to use. For these reasons, the ulti
mate test of policy is not the level of free reserves
provided, but the response as reflected in credit develop
ments.
Projections presented by the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York pose the problem facing the Committee in another

7/8/58 -13-
and highly significant manner. If I understand correctly,
they are based on the assumption that the maintenance of
free reserves at the current level will be a stimulus to
credit expansion, which in turn will require additional
reserves. These estimates predicate a growth in total
deposits of all member banks of $6.6 billion in the next
18 weeks--on top of the expansion that has already occurred
in June. Some $5 billion of this increase would be in
demand deposits, and the projected increase in required
reserves exceeds $800 million. If Treasury tax and loan
accounts are reduced, as they presumably will be, by over
$4 billion, the resulting growth in other demand deposits
would be close to $9 billion. The normal seasonal growth
for this period is about $2.5 billion.
To make possible this result and maintain free reserves
at $500 million, the System would have to add about $1 bil
lion to its portfolio in the next 18 weeks--much of it in
August. The Board's staff projection, which may be said to
indicate minimum requirements, would call for little net
change in System holdings for the period as a whole.
It is useful to have a projection of this sort as a
warning as to where policies might lead. Two questions
need to be considered: (1) Is it reasonable to expect that
the public's monetary desires will be so large or that banks
will want to expand their loans and investments by any such
amount if free reserves are maintained at above $500 million;
(2) Does the System want to follow a policy that will en
courage or make possible such a result?
The experience of June is an example of the pitfalls
that may be encountered in following a path of forcing down
interest rates and stimulating credit commitments regardless
of current needs. Resulting speculative excesses may lead
to crises that in turn raise demands for relief measures.
Is economic recovery aided by such false and temporary move
ments? Finally, isn't the liquidity of the economy already
more than adequate to support recovery for a long time ahead?
Mr. Hayes presented the following statement of his views on the
business outlook and credit policy:
Business activity during the second half of June sug
gests a mixture of diverse movements. While the downtrend
has been arrested for the time being at least, there are

7/8/58 -14-
no convincing indications of an incipient recovery. The
immediate outlook is for a summer in which economic indi
cators will move in both directions, perhaps showing as
many losses as gains, and expansionary tendencies may not
show their force until the fourth quarter at the earliest,
A good many of the encouraging elements in the last
few weeks have been connected with Government activity.
Thus the record level of construction awards for May was
in large part attributable to gains in the public sector;
manufacturers' orders improved primarily in the area of
defense contracts; and personal income was sustained to
a considerable extent by higher transfer payments. Higher
Government salaries and other payments will be increasingly
helpful in June and July, especially in the latter month
when retroactive salary payments and extension of unemploy
ment insurance will accentuate this tendency. Finally,
much of the price strength for certain metals in recent
weeks reflects Government policies with respect to tariffs
and stockpiling.
Contrary to earlier expectations, inventory liquidation
by manufacturers in May apparently proceeded at the same high
rate as earlier in the year. On the other hand, consumer
spending has continued to hold at a very satisfactory level,
with June retail sales apparently almost as good as those of
May. Consumer credit in May did not continue the decline of
the preceding months, as noninstalment credit rose more than
instalment credit diminished.
In general, price developments in recent weeks, especially
in industrial raw materials, have reflected the improvement in
business sentiment, although no predominant trend has been
established. Farm prices have continued their downward tendency
of the last month or two, with the result that the over-all
wholesale price index for June will probably be lower than for
May. The consumer price index has apparently stabilized.
Such corporate profits data as are available for the
first quarter make poor reading and cast renewed doubt on
the performance of the stock market. With dividends well
sustained, the shrinkage of retained earnings helps to ex
plain the continuing heavy corporate demand for long-term
financing at a time when plant and equipment expenditures
are declining.
In considering policy for the next few weeks, we should
have in mind not only the general business outlook but also
the important prospective Treasury financing operations and,
closely interrelated with both of these factors, the degree

7/8/58 -15-
of restoration of liquidity which has been already ac
complished and that which should be our goal in the next
few months.
With respect to the Treasury, terms of the major
August refunding are due to be announced next week, and
the exchange will have been effected by the time of our
next meeting. In the present disturbed atmosphere of the
Government bond market, there is some danger that the
capital market in general might not be as encouraging to
new investment as we would like to see it over the coming
weeks. In addition to the refunding, our calculations
suggest that the Treasury will have to raise some $2.5
billion of cash by early September at the latest, and
possibly by early August. Over the last six months of
1958 cash financing may total about $8 billion, with the
commercial banks doubtless taking a major proportion of
this amount.
As for bank and nonbank liquidity, June witnessed an
important further increase in bank holdings of securities
and continued growth in nonbank holdings of liquid assets.
Loans and investments of all commercial banks rose by $4
billion in the four weeks through June 25, with securities
and security loans accounting for most of the rise. By
the month-end, security holdings of all commercial banks
were roughly $10 billion above the level of last October,
while loans had increased only slightly. Since mid-May
loan-deposit ratios of New York banks have averaged around
58 per cent as against 66 per cent early last October, with
the comparable ratio for banks outside New York dropping
from 55 per cent to 51 per cent. Yet it is worth noting
that these ratios are still at a higher level than in any
recent period prior to 1956 and are ten percentage points
or more above the 1954 lows. While the increase in money
supply has been rapid in the last few months, the present
level is about equal to that of a year ago. If we compare
the sum of the money supply, time deposits and other highly
liquid holdings with gross national product, we find a rise
in nonbank liquidity of about 5 per cent between the third
quarter of 1957 and the first quarter of 1958, and this
trend probably continued in the second quarter. Total re
quired reserves (after adjusting for changes in required
reserve ratios) are now running close to $1 billion ahead
of last year. All of these measures taken together suggest
that we have achieved a gratifying improvement in liquidity,
wholly appropriate to a period of recession--but they also

7/8/58 -16-
suggest that we might begin to think about future moves
to damp down this growth of liquidity, especially if
business should fare reasonably well in the coming months.
Turning to specific credit policy, I would hope that
we could achieve a de-emphasis of the free reserve figure
as an objective of monetary policy. We have often talked
about this in the past, and we have not had much success
in getting away from this measure--but I believe we should
give increasing attention ourselves to the underlying
statistics on money supply and other liquidity measures,
and we should try to get the market and the public to give
them increasing attention.
Substantial free reserves should be maintained as a
stimulus to recovery, at least until we see a more imminent
risk than is now visible of excessive liquidity developing
in the economy--but this does not rule out the desirability
of some cautious probing toward slightly lower levels of
free reserves than we have seen recently, provided we can
do so without causing too much disturbance in the capital
markets. I am troubled over the basic dilemma of trying
to stimulate recovery through additional investment while
at the same time avoiding the creation of too much liquidity.
I would hope that we could keep free reserves at $500 million
or less in the next three weeks, subject to the usual reserva
tions as to the distribution of reserves and the feel of the
market. At the same time it is highly desirable that we
avoid any action that would be likely to set off a trend
toward higher long-term interest rates or to create a public
impression of a basic change in credit policy. Admittedly
this poses a delicate problem for the Management of the
Account for the next three weeks.
I can see no need at this time for a change in discount
rates or in the directive.
Mr. Irons said it seemed to him that the national picture, as
presented by Mr. Young, continued to indicate improvement and was en
couraging. It appeared that more and more factors were pointing to
the up side and that there was an accumulation of small movements
indicative of a gradual development of strength in the economy. In
the Eleventh District, Mr. Irons said, conditions continued about as

7/8/58 -17
they had been, with activity at quite a high and stable level.
The petroleum situation was gradually showing improvement, with
the stock situation better and prices a little firmer as the stock
situation improved. Allowables had been moved up to nine days in
June and possibly there would be further gradual increases. There
was some feeling that allowables might move up to eleven or twelve
days by the latter part of the year, which would represent a marked
improvement.
Mr. Irons said that the agricultural situation in the dis
trict continued to be very favorable, with rains at the right time
and the crop outlook good. Retail trade was holding up well; in
June it was just a shade under the very high level of June a year
ago. In the banking picture, recent call report data showed an in
crease somewhat in excess of $650 million from the roughly comparable
date of a year ago in total deposits of weekly reporting banks, and
more than half of this increase was in time deposits. There had
been reports of a shifting out of Treasury bills into time deposits
by corporations and others, and apparently there was quite a strong
demand on the part of holders of funds to get into time deposits
at a favorable interest rate. This led him to believe the time
deposit movement was something to be watched carefully for it might
contain a fairly substantial amount of funds which could prove to
be "hot money." Loan demand in the district was good, Mr. Irons
said, with loans up over a year ago.

7/8/58 -18.
As to policy, Mr. Irons said it seemed to him from a study
of the available figures that the problem over the next few weeks
would be one of avoiding too great an availability of reserves.
The projections, he noted, indicated fairly easy reserve positions.
Also, it appeared that the expansion in the money supply might be
substantial, with a shifting of funds into private hands from the
Treasury, so that the problem was likely to be one of guarding
against too great expansion and too much liquidity rather than the
reverse. The Treasury would be in the market almost continually,
or at least several times in any event, over the next few months
and it might be necessary to make a decision between the tighter
credit policy required by the unfolding economic situation and
support of the Treasury. Mr. Irons felt that it would be a mistake
to permit an ease to develop that could not be sustained as condi
tions moved ahead over the next month or so, and he did not feel
that anything would be gained by such a course. Altogether, the
circumstances indicated that the Management of the Account was
going to have a difficult time. The use of judgment and a feel
of the market would be required in trying to restrain further
availability of reserves and hold a checkrein to the extent possible.
Mr. Irons concluded by saying that he would not favor a
change in any of the implements of System policy such as the dis
count rate or reserve requirements. That point, he felt, had been

7/8/58 -19
passed for the time being.
Mr. Mangels said that the Twelfth District had experienced
about the same degree of improvement as reported nationally. Lumber
reports indicated a little better than seasonal inprovement, both in
new orders and production, in May and early June, and there had been
an increased demand for plywood, accompanied by a price advance.
Residential construction was holding up very well; in May it was
reported that residential construction contracts were at the highest
point since 1956. However, nonresidential construction awards had
declined slightly from April and early May figures. Steel produc
tion, which was up early in June, declined by the end of the month
and the decline was expected to continue in July because there had
been forward buying in anticipation of a price increase. Removal
of the freight tax at the end of July had resulted in efforts to
defer shipments.
Agriculture in the district was progressing favorably, Mr.
Mangels said, with the fruit and vegetable canning industry looking
forward to good prospects. The inventory carryover was not as large
as in 1956 or 1957 and some improvement in profit margins was ex
pected this year. Employment had been rising, and the slight in
crease in manufacturing employment was significant because previously
there had been uninterrupted declines for the past ten or twelve
months. On the other hand, unemployment had increased slightly.

7/8/58 -20
There continued to be cutbacks in aircraft employment in Southern
California but this was offset to some extent by gains in other
areas. At the Boeing plant in Seattle, employment in May was
around 63,000, a figure 2,500 higher than a year ago. While
automobile sales in May were below the 1957 level, in California
they were up somewhat in April. In other States from which reports
were available, it was indicated that May sales were about the same
as those for April, whereas normally a little decline might be
expected. Department store sales showed little change in May from
the preceding month.
Mr. Mangels continued by saying that for the three-week period
which ended June 26, loans at banks in the Twelfth District were up
$174 million, which included an increase of $30 million in real estate
loans. Time deposits continued to rise, the increase of $164 million
more than offsetting the decline of $156 million in demand deposits.
Mr. Mangels recalled that at the last meeting of the Committee he had
reported indications of a possible reduction in the rate of interest
on savings deposits. As the end of June approached, however, the
banks found that savings and loan associations were not going to
reduce the dividend rate so they decided, rather reluctantly, not to
change the savings deposit interest rate. With one or two exceptions,
the banks had announced that they were going to keep the rate until
the end of this year. There was practically no borrowing from the

7/8/58 -21
Reserve Bank by member banks, and Federal funds transactions were
running at somewhat lower than normal levels, with purchases slightly
exceeding sales.
In terms of the over-all situation, Mr. Mangels said that the
principal question seemed to be whether the present indications of
encouraging developments in business were going to persist and bring
about actual recovery. Even if the most optimistic expectations
were realized, however, he felt that rather substantial unemployment
must still be expected at the end of the year.
As far as monetary policy was concerned, Mr. Mangels ex
pressed the view that the Management of the Account had done an
excellent job under trying conditions. He agreed with Messrs. Hayes
and Irons that the System ought not to liberalize its attitude and pro
vide more ease. As to free reserves, he had in mind a level some
where around $500 million, and he would have no objection if the
level were to drop somewhat below that figure. The System, he felt,
should not be influenced too much toward extending its position of
ease because of the Treasury financing ahead, but the Account Manage
ment must continue to have some degree of discretion in its operations
for there was another three-week period ahead which would not be easy.
In conclusion, Mr. Mangels referred to the meeting of the
San Francisco directors to be held tomorrow and said he was quite
sure that the directors would not be inclined to make any change
in the discount rate.

7/8/58 -22
Mr. Allen said that the Seventh District continued to
provide a contrast between the farm and industrial sectors. Crop
conditions remained favorable over most of the district, with
pasture conditions in Michigan and Wisconsin having been improved
by rains and moisture very good in the corn belt. Hog prices had
continued to increase and were nearly 20 per cent above a year ago,
but farmers reported plans for substantially increased production
which, if accomplished, should bring about a sharp drop in hog
prices next spring. In the industrial sector, the district con
tinued to run behind the nation in most respects. In the matter
of employment, for example, the larger centers continued to register
less satisfactorily than the country as a whole, and Chicago and
Flint had been reclassified by the Labor Department to reflect
worsening conditions. District experience in construction and
housing starts likewise was running behind that of the nation,
and builders and lenders in the residential field in both the
Chicago and Detroit areas expected a second half generally resembling
the first. Department store sales for the district for the four weeks
ending June 21 were 6 per cent below a year ago compared with a drop
of about 2 per cent nationally.
Mr. Allen observed that the practice of scheduling vacation
shutdowns and interruptions for model changeovers in July and August-
a practice common in the automobile business and growing in other

7/8/58 -23.
industries--added to the difficulty of estimating whether or not
this was a period of recovery from recession. It was understood
that the automobile people planned unusually low production for
the third quarter--680,000 cars--but their sales were better in
June. While official figures were not available, informed sources
estimated that 00,000 cars were retailed during the month of June,
which meant that this was the best month so far this year, although
27 per cent below June 1957. Unofficial estimates placed the June
30 inventory of unsold new cars at around 695,000, while the figure
last year was 735,000. With that inventory figure and with the low
production program for the third quarter, it would not take much of
a sales performance to reduce inventories to quite a modest level
by the first of October. The target for that date was 400,000 and
it could be achieved by a daily sales rate of 12,500 through the
third quarter. If the daily rate were that of June--16,000--the
inventory on October 1 would be down to 143,000.
The large Chicago banks, Mr. Allen said, had been in an easy
position. While moving to improved reserve positions the Chicago
banks, and also those in Detroit, had continued to enlarge their
holdings of Treasury bills and the volume of bills held by those
banks had more than doubled in the last four weeks. At the same
time, loans against securities had not increased relatively as
much in the banks of the district as in the country as a whole.

7/8/58 -24
Turning to policy, Mr. Allen said he agreed with those
who had already spoken at this meeting. He felt that System
policy had amply accommodated commerce and industry and that
"hewing to the line" was indicated. While he disliked to use
free reserves as a gauge, those who had spoken thus far had
mentioned a level around $500 million. With this he agreed, even
if it meant sales out of the System portfolio in the next few weeks.
In his opinion, the System should stick to its trade and not worry
too much about the Treasury. The Treasury, he felt, would be very
fortunate if it could borrow longer-term at anything like the rates
which it had been paying. With most people feeling that this is an
inflationary age, and with the record of inflation over the past
ten years, it would be remarkable if the Treasury could stay near
those rates.
Mr. Leedy said that the Tenth District continued to do
better than the nation generally. The winter wheat crop had worked
out about as forecast and the district would have a near record
crop. Last week was the peak of the harvest and conditions were
ideal. With something like 2,000 cars on the track, there had
been a short strike of workers at the terminal elevators in Kansas
City, but fortunately the strike was quickly settled. Wheat yields
per acre were reported to be quite high and the quality of the wheat

7/8/58 -25
was satisfactory, although the protein content was a little lower
than that of last year's crop. Other crops in the district like
wise were reported to be in excellent condition and the same kind
of report was prevalent as to pastures and ranges. The favorable
situation with regard to farm income in the district, which he had
previously reported to the Committee, continued to show up as
additional monthly figures became available. Cash farm receipts
for the first four months of the year were 19 per cent higher than
for the first four months of last year, compared with an increase
of 7 per cent nationally. Department store sales for June were
slightly higher than in June of last year and for the first half
of the year sales were virtually unchanged from the same period of
1957.
Mr. Leedy went on to say that nonfarm employment continued
to improve in the district in May. While data were not yet complete,
it appeared that further seasonal gains in nonmanufacturing activities
were widespread. Also, manufacturing employment in most of the States
of the district had increased slightly. Although employment levels
were running substantially below last year's figures, insured un
employment continued to fall in response to the seasonal upturn in
nonfarm jobs so that in mid-June it was about 15 per cent lower
than a month earlier. By States, the range had been from 4.9 per
cent in Missouri and Oklahoma to around 3 per cent in the other

7/8/58 -26
States, which compared with the national figure of around 6.4 per
cent. Construction contractsawarded in the district in May were
one-fifth higher than a year ago, with substantial gains in all
major types of construction; for the first five months of the year
the total of construction awards was about 8 per cent above the
similar period for last year. The banking picture in the district
conformed generally to that which had been reported for the country.
There had been an increase in all major categories of loans over
the last three weeks, with tax borrowing the principal reason for
the expansion in business loans. Deposits were up, reserve positions
easy, and the reserve city banks had been supplying some funds to
the Federal funds market.
As to policy, Mr. Leedy said he subscribed to what had been
said previously at this meeting. As he understood the views ex
pressed, they were quite uniform. He felt that the System had gone
far enough in providing ease in bank reserve positions and, as Mr.
Hayes had suggested, there might be some probing for a lower level
of free reserves. He also subscribed to what had been said about
the course which should be pursued in the event of a conflict
between the System's objectives and those which would best serve
the Treasury. Should conflict necessitate a choice, he would follow
a course that would give precedence to effective monetary policy.

7/8/58 -27-
Mr. Leach said that in recent weeks some of the major
Fifth District economic indicators had remained unchanged but
many had shown improvement. The recently announced pay increase
of 10 per cent for Federal employees retroactive to January was
expected to provide a substantial stimulus to consumer spending
because military installations and the presence of the Nation's
Capital combine to give the district nearly one-fifth of total
Federal civilian employment within the United States. While there
had been little change in the textile industry, construction con
tract awards in May showed a substantial increase over April, as
well as over May a year ago, to provide the most optimistic note.
There were others, however. Bituminous coal production improved
noticeably in May and June; cigarette production was up; lumber
production was at a good level; department store sales were doing
well; employment had stabilized or shown gains in most areas; and
insured unemployment rates had fallen, though the rate for West
Virginia was still above 13 per cent.
Turning to credit policy, Mr. Leach expressed the view that
despite the continuing signs of improvement in economic conditions
it would clearly be premature to think in terms of abandoning the
present policy of ease at this juncture. He believed, however,
that there should be a change in emphasis. Further additions to
the liquidity of the banking system and the economy should be

7/8/58 -28
avoided as far as practicable because they would serve no useful
economic purpose and would make the future task more difficult.
While the System must, of course, supply the reserves needed for
the Treasury's deficit financing, this inevitably would add sub
stantially to liquidity in the months ahead and made it all the
more important to avoid unnecessary additions in so far as pos
sible. This, he felt, should be the Committee's objective under
current economic conditions. Although he realized that such an
objective would be extremely difficult to attain in view of
Treasury financing, the unsettled condition of the Government
securities market, and the importance which the market and the
public now attach to changes in the level of free reserves, current
economic conditions might continue for some time without substantial
change and he thought that the System should gradually back down
from the $500-$600 million level of free reserves as market condi
tions and Treasury financing permitted.
Mr. Leach said that although he could not tell what banks
would do with additional reserves, bankers are paid to invest
money and he could not imagine that they would let reserves lie
idle. Therefore, it appeared that they would use additional re
serves until the bill rate was lower than at present. He felt that
the Committee should get away from free reserves as too important
an indicator of policy and that it must get away from the present

7/8/58 -29
level of free reserves. Perhaps, however, it could not do better
than $500 million until the next Treasury financing, and any shift
should be made gradually without attracting too much attention.
While the Committee could continue to use the same policy
directive, Mr. Leach noted that there had been quite a change in
conditions and prospects since that directive was adopted on
March 5. He suggested, therefore, that the following language
might be considered for clause (b): "to contributing by monetary
ease to resumption of stable growth of the economy without creating
excessive liquidity." It was dangerous, he felt, to keep allowing
liquidity to increase.
Mr. Vardaman said that national psychology was such, and
the national economy as reported here too unsteady and uneven to
tolerate without undue disturbance any change in Federal Reserve
policy to the tight side. Therefore, the System should continue
about as is--around $500 million free reserves--and hope to de
emphasize any fixed amount of free reserves at some future date.
Excessive liquidity in the money market should be avoided if
possible, but not at the risk of a change to a pattern of tighten
ing money. He would not change clause (b) of the policy directive
at this time.
Mr. Mills said that the explanation by Mr. Thomas of the
mechanical results of System policy in past weeks raised in his

7/8/58 -30
mind the thought that the Committee had allowed itself to work
on a treadmill when, by attempting to reach some set level of
free reserves, an expansion in bank loans and investments was
generated that had produced the dangers and the difficulties
seen by Mr. Thomas in overliquidity. He shared the concern that
he sensed was felt by Mr. Thomas, and also by Messrs. Leach and
Irons, which suggested that temporarily the development of System
policy should be concerned predominantly with financial rather
than economic factors. In so doing, an attempt should be made to
reduce the System's portfolio of Treasury bills, However, in
setting that objective--and without doubt it should be a System
objective--there was also the quite different question of what
could be realistically accomplished. This involved whether it
would be possible for the System to educate and condition the
investment fraternity to a policy that would not contemplate
continuing injections of reserves and whether it would be possible
to accustom the market to some reduction in reserves. Because the
objectives to be sought would entail difficult problems, a great
deal of latitude would have to be vested in the Manager of the
Account t judge the feel of the market so that in seeking a more
moderate policy in the provision of reserves he would not in the
process create alarm in the market or unduly impair the Treasury
in its financing problems, which must have very first consideration
in the development of System policy.

7/8/58 -31
Mr. Robertson said that he shared the views expressed
at this meeting with regard to excessive liquidity. By vigorously
trying to establish ease, he felt that the System had gotten into
a situation from which it could not easily extricate itself. In
his opinion, the System should start moving toward tightness
faster than indicated by the comments around the table--as fast
as possible without unduly upsetting the market--and it should pay
more attention to the formulation of monetary policy in line with
the economic situation than to the objectives of the Treasury or
any special interests.
For the next three weeks, Mr. Robertson said, the Committee
ought to avoid pushing ease, in fact should restrict it, and in the
absence of any better criterion he would use free reserves as a
target and try to move toward $400 million. This would not be an
ironclad target but one with flexibility on either side depending
on conditions that prevailed during the period. He would work with
as much vigor toward reducing the ease which had created excessive
liquidity as had been shown in bringing about a condition of ease.
Mr. Robertson went on to say that he was favorably inclined
toward the suggestion for amendment of the directive. He thought
that a change in the directive would not be misunderstood. Instead,
it would be a very slight signal, a little flag for the Manager of
the Account in carrying on activities during the next three-week
period.

7/8/58 -32
Mr. Shepardson said that his views were very much like
those expressed by Mr. Robertson. It was his impression that
the Committee had been aiming at free reserves on the lower side
of $500 million rather than the upper side, and consequently he
was a little disturbed when the level of free reserves got as
high as it did. In his opinion, System policy should be moving
back toward a little less ease.
Mr. Shepardson said he was rather concerned about some of
the comments one heard and read regarding the lack of investment in
plant and equipment for he did not see what was gained in trying to
push additional investment of that kind at a time when there was a
surplus of plant capacity. He also questioned the advisability of
efforts to encourage increased demand for goods and services by
means of easier consumer credit terms which might further impede
needed price adjustments. Adjustments now going on in many
businesses seemed to be increasing efficiency and cutting out some
excesses. There were also some indications of price adjustments,
and those things were all to the good.
This meant to him, Mr. Shepardson said, that the System
should not be in the position of trying to push too fast on recovery
and that necessary adjustments should be allowed to take place and
work through. While he had reviewed the directive and felt that
perhaps it should be amended, he had not developed any specific

7/8/58 -33
wording. It appeared to him that the language suggested by Mr.
Leach might not be inappropriate.
In summarizing, Mr. Shepardson said that he would like to
see monetary policy a little less easy than it had been. This
suggested that it might be time for a change in the directive,
particularly to eliminate the word "further" in clause (b), as
mentioned by Mr. Irons at recent meetings of the Committee.
Mr. Fulton said he could only describe conditions in the
Fourth District by saying that the economy was quite soggy. At
present there were no developments of such a nature as especially
to engender a hope that the fourth quarter would be better than
now. On the agricultural side, crops and prices were good and
farmers were buying cautiously, but in the industrial sector there
were further layoffs of workers, particularly in the machine tool
and heavy electrical industries. Steel had experienced a little
upswing during the past month but that had now subsided and nothing
much was looked for until August when the automobile companies would
take delivery on some sheet steel. There was apprehension about
acceptance of the new models by the public and it was understood
that the automobile people were not going to inventory much in
the line of steel or parts until the extent of acceptance had been
determined. If the new models did not go over well, there would
be a substantial downturn in all industries allied with the auto
motive industry. Construction in the Fourth District was not up

7/8/58 -34
as in some of the other districts; residential construction had
a slight revival but then a relapse. Over all, therefore, there
was nothing to forecast a sharp upturn, at least from present
indications in the Fourth District.
Mr. Fulton said he subscribed to the thinking that the
System had gone a little far in supplying reserves and that free
reserves were on the high side at a level of $600 million. What
he envisaged at the last meeting, he said, was a top of around
$500 million. Despite the relatively slow state of conditions
in the Fourth District, he felt that more firmness could be brought
into the picture rather than to keep reserves as high as at present
and thus contribute to a basis for inflation. He would like to see
the word "further" eliminated from clause (b) of the directive
because the directive would then state more clearly the current
attitude of the Committee, at least to judge from the expressions
around the table at this meeting, but he had no convictions about
the rest of the language.
Mr. Bopp said that he interpreted the national data a little
bit less optimistically than most of the others at this meeting and
that his interpretation was influenced only in part by developments
in the Third District, which were rather on the gloomy side.
Mr. Bopp then made substantially the following statement:
The Manager of the Account has done an outstanding
job under trying circumstances in a period marked by

7/8/58
extraordinary complexity and unanticipated develop
ments.
One important complicating factor was that the
market saw signals the System did not intend to give.
This raises the age old question of whether we can
give clearer signals--particularly to correct a market
misinterpretation. My own view is that direct opera
tions in the longer sector of the market at such
strategic times would be the most effective way for
the System to signal its intentions.
If we move to the short sector, relatively wide
spreads between the discount rate and short-term rates
in the open market are likely to lead to periodic mis
interpretation. Persistence of a wide spread may be
interpreted as indicating that the System believes
market rates are too low or that it will not resist
some tightening in the market. Under these circum
stances, a rise in short-term market rates, especially
if accompanied by a reduction in the net free reserve
position of member banks, may be interpreted as a move
ment away from an easy money policy.
Since it is so difficult to estimate the magnitude
of necessary "defensive" operations, which comprise the
largest volume of purchases and sales, open market opera
tions are not well adapted to give unmistakable signals
to the market. At the present time, to give a clear
signal to the market that the policy of ease is being
maintained, I would recommend a reduction of 1/2 per
cent in the discount rate. An ancillary but not un
important advantage of this move is that it would put
us in better position to give a clearer and earlier
signal when a change in the direction of policy is
intended.
I wish to report that we had extensive discussion
of economic and financial developments at the meeting
of our Board of Directors on Thursday. There was agree
ment that we are still in a recession and that the
probabilities of a sharp snapback by August or September
are extremely small. In terms of the economic and
financial merits of the case, the directors were dis
posed to vote a reduction in the rate, but in the light
of this early meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
and of my own recommendation--which parenthetically was
influenced by the decisions at the last meeting of this

7/8/58 -36
Committee--they were willing to renew the existing
rates on Thursday--but with a divided vote.
It is possible that they may take the initiative
to establish a lower rate at the next meeting of the
Board.
In concluding his comments, Mr. Bopp said he realised that
his views on the discount rate placed him distinctly in the minority
around the table.
Mr. Bryan said that the Sixth District was experiencing
almost exactly the same trends and changes in figures as the nation.
On the basis of the year-to-year comparisons, the district had shown
lesser declines than the country as a whole, but rather curiously
recent month-to-month comparisons were more favorable for the nation
than for the Sixth District. Some of this apparently could be ex
plained by the recent improvement in durable goods of the kind not
manufactured in the Sixth District.
Turning to the national economic picture, Mr. Bryan said
that he had almost completely changed his views in the last three
weeks. It seemed to him that there was being accumulated a good
deal of evidence that the country was going through this recession
with much the same sort of rolling adjustment that had taken place
before the postwar period, and there was little evidence of ac
cumulating recessionary tendencies. He had only one reservation,
Mr. Bryan said; namely, that the country was not yet in a vigorous
recovery and there was still a possibility that the economy might
be experiencing sort of a false bottom.

7/8/58 -37
As to policy, Mr. Bryan recalled that earlier he had been
an advocate of further ease but said that he had now reversed him
self. Looking at the total picture on a year-to-year basis, and
making adjustments for the difference in reserve requirements, he
now concluded that the System had done an ample job of providing
ease. Even the money supply figures, however taken, suited him a
good deal better than they did earlier. Therefore, he could not
find a basis for advocating further ease and he was rather sympathetic
to the idea that the System should avoid further ease. Nevertheless,
there were one or two things that the Committee might keep in mind.
First, there was evidence of considerable congestion in the capital
markets for a variety of reasons, not all of them due to the false
signal of a change in System policy or to the speculation in Govern
ment securities, and there was going to be a heavy calendar in July.
Also, the Treasury at some point must come in for cash. Accordingly,
he had come to the conclusion that there might very well be con
siderable tightening in the capital markets unless the System
maintained a fair degree of ease. By this he meant continuing just
about what the System had been doing and maintaining a level of free
reserves in the neighborhood of $500 million for the next three-week
period.
Mr. Bryan went on to say that a discount rate change at the
present time would seem to him to be a mistake, for it would contain

7/8/58 -38
the grave danger of conveying to the public a message precisely
opposite to that which the System wanted to convey. In other
words, it might be interpreted as meaning that the System had no
confidence in the current more toward recovery. As to the directive,
he would be inclined to support striking the word "further" from
clause (b).
Mr. Johns recalled that he had been among the small minority
who argued for further ease at recent Committee meetings but said
that he did not desire to make those arguments again because his
position had changed somewhat. At this juncture he was inclined to
agree that the System should not actively pursue a policy of further
ease. Mr. Hayes had suggested that it might be appropriate to do
some cautious probing of a lower free reserve level, if and when
that could be done without repercussions, and Mr. Johns said that
he was inclined to agree, although he had reservations as to whether
this could be done without repercussions. He felt that the System
should not signal any change of policy at this time and that certainly
it should not encourage a trend toward higher long-term rates. While
he had been on vacation since the last Committee meeting, he had re
viewed open market operations from the reports of the New York Bank,
and this review led him to conclude that operations in the Account
during the last three weeks had been thoroughly satisfactory. While,
as he had said, he felt that it would be premature at this time to

7/8/58 -39
signal any change in policy, on the other hand be did not wish to
repeat the arguments he made at the last two meetings regarding a
reduction in the discount rate since he agreed with Mr. Bryan that
a change in the rate might be misinterpreted.
Turning to the policy directive, Mr. Johns said he would not
object to eliminating the word "further", but that he had reserva
tions about using the word "excessive* in the clause suggested by
Mr. Leach because the Committee ought not to give the impression
that it or its Agent Bank or the Manager of the Account were given
to excesses.
In substance, Mr. Johns said, he would like to continue
about as at present for the next three weeks.
Mr. Szymczak said that he has favored a reduction of the
level of free reserves. However, he was fully aware of the fact
that the Treasury would be in the market for a considerable period
of time, and he was concerned also about the situation with respect
to all issues, Government, corporate, and municipal. Furthermore,
although he hoped there would be some signs of an upswing in the
fourth quarter, the doldrums of the summer months were ahead.
In a further explanation of his views, Mr. Szymczak said
that the System, having provided reserves--perhaps too many--up
to this point, should try to vary the reserve position of the banks,
not only because of the excessive liquidity that had developed but

7/8/58 -40
also because the market gets accustomed to having a certain volume
of free reserves available. He was mindful of what Mr. Mills had
pointed out, however, and he would adopt a realistic point of view
with the Treasury coming into the market.
As to the directive, Mr. Szymczak said that although he
would not recommend a change, on the other hand he would not object.
Mr. Balderston inquired of Mr. Rouse whether, if the Treasury
went into the market shortly, its needs could be reconciled with a
reduction of $600 million in the System Account portfolio.
Mr. Rouse replied that as of the moment it did not appear
likely that this could be done. However, the projections refine
themselves from week to week and the Account might not be faced
with the same problem that appeared to exist today. In this con
nection, he observed that $184 million of bills would run off this
week, another $150 million would mature next week, and a similar
amount the week after that. At present the Account was faced with
a nasty situation in the market, prices had dropped noticeably this
morning, and in that kind of atmosphere it was not possible for him
to give a categorical answer to Mr. Balderston's question. The
situation this morning, he said, did not seem to have any relation
ship at all to reserves, and the same thing had been true the last
two weeks. In other words, the availability of reserves seemed to
have no effect marketwise. In the kind of a situation which bad

7/8/58 -41
prevailed, he just did not know the answer to the question of
reducing the System portfolio.
Mr. Balderston then said that he had asked this question
because of the dilemma pointed out by Mr. Mills and because of hia
own view that Mr. Irons had correctly described the policy that the
Committee should be following. As he saw it, the conflict between
those two positions might make policy decisions very difficult
indeed. There were evidences of speculative responses both to the
System's monetary policy and to the Governmental spending and stock
piling programs; in short, the economic field that should have been
irrigated carefully in the last two or three months seemed to him
to have become flooded. Looking back, he felt that excessive
liquidity explained the failure of the System's policy of monetary
restraint to become effective early in 1955 and he viewed any
repetition of that situation with great concern. On the other hand,
it had been pointed out that no matter whether free reserves were
kept above or below $500 million, the level might be regarded as
a signal to the financial community of the System's intentions.
All of this indicated to him how careful the System must be, in
view of the Treasury financing ahead, not to disturb the bond
market unduly. It appeared that the System should take no overt
action but that, as indicated by Mr. Hayes, it might be desirable
for a lower level of free reserves as the opportunity permitted.

7/8/58 -42
Mr. Balderston said he would not favor a reduction in the
discount rate. He had had the feeling in 1955 that the discount
rate level at that time was too low, and that mistake should not
be repeated. Neither would he favor a change in reserve require
ments. If the directive were changed, he would not only eliminate
the word "further" but also try to develop some new wording in
place of "stable economic growth" because to him that phrase was
lacking in definition.
Chairman Martin said that he found it difficult to express
his thoughts on this type of a situation. In general, however, it
was his feeling that the System ought not to push either in the
direction of easing or tightening at this time. However commendable
it might be in theory to talk about probing, the changes in funda
mentals that occur whenever there is a turning point may make that
impossible. At such times forces are at work that are bigger than
the System or the Treasury, and if one tries to play with them he
is apt to get into serious difficulty.
Continuing, Chairman Martin said he had found it difficult
to keep his own sense of balance recently. The week end after
June 19 was one of the worst that he had spent since coming into
the System, with many persons who were stirred up about rumors of
a change in System policy calling him with various kinds of stories.

7/8/58 -43
Such stories, he observed, are always symptoms of a turning point.
Of course, he did not know for certain whether there actually had
been a turning point but many elements were making for it. Per
sonally, he was inclined to be optimistic, recognizing that one
should not be prematurely optimistic. One should recognize the
Treasury's problem at this kind of juncture and keep in mind that
movements in rates never come gradually, much as that might be
desired. He noted that one person at this meeting still thought
that the discount rate ought to be reduced, so there was not yet
a unanimity of belief that a clear turning point had developed.
Chairman Martin then commented that in the realm of
speculation in which the System and the Treasury must deal there
are many factors to be taken into consideration. If it had not
been for the story in the press on June 19 which suggested that
there had been a change in Federal Reserve policy, he felt that
there would have been some other story or comment. He noted from
the comments at the Committee meetings over the past three months
that the views had shifted back and forth in both directions.
When it comes to the public putting their money on the line, he
said, the System must deal with the actual situation as it exists.
The System must try to be right, but the story of the man killed
crossing the street on the green light who was "dead right" seemed
to apply to the situation with which the System was now dealing.

7/8/58 -44
The Chairman said he thought that, if the System was
going to change policy, some thought should be given to what
happened in the November 1957 period and the System ought to
do something that would really be clear-cut. This did not mean
necessarily that there could not be any probing, and actually
probing had been done in the market over the last ten days or
two weeks. The whole situation, he reiterated, should be viewed
in the light of a fundamental change. Also, the System ought not
to do anything to create more difficulty for the Treasury than
necessary unless it thought that it was really right, for the
Treasury had real problems and should not be asked to perform a
miracle. If the System were certain of the basic situation, that
would be one thing. However, as Mr. Robertson had said, the
System probably had contributed to the difficulties of the Treasury
by going overboard in the direction of easy money, if a turning
point was really here.
In further comments Chairman Martin again said that the
System ought to try to keep its balance at this time. It seemed
wise, he suggested, to give wide latitude to the Manager of the
Account, who had had a difficult period in which to operate. He
would not be strongly opposed to taking the word "further" out of
clause (b) of the directive, but he recalled that on the eve of a
Treasury financing the Committee changed policy last November and

7/8/58 -45
the change caused about as much trouble as anything that could
have happened. It must be remembered that the problem of the
Treasury in a period of uncertainty might become impossible if
it appeared that the System was contemplating a change in direction
of policy. While it might be, therefore, that a change in the
directive ought to be made, by and large he felt that it would be
better not to have it appear in the next three-week period for
that would needlessly create problems. While perhaps he did not
reflect the view of the majority in saying that, it appeared that
the majority was in favor of only a moderate change in the directive,
if any. Most of those around the table had talked about $500 mil
lion in free reserves and he felt that such a target was all right.
However, the Manager of the Account was up against the feel, color,
and tone of the market and little shifts were going to be very
difficult to gauge.
Chairman Martin again stated that the Committee ought to be
extremely cognizant of the difficult position of the Treasury. When
the time came to make a definite policy change that was one thing,
but to play around with the market was playing around with fire.
The Treasury had had a difficult problem already with the 2-5/8
per cent bonds and might be saddled with nearly the whole issue,
although that was a matter of judgment.
Mr. Vardaman asked Chairman Martin whether he felt that
the difficulty of having the word "further" in the directive was

7/8/58 -46
serious enough to warrant a change, and the Chairman replied
that he did not think it was a very big point. In his view,
it would be better on balance not to change the directive at
all.
Mr. Shepardson commented that although he recognized
the problem involved in the forthcoming Treasury financing,
there would be a series of Treasury operations throughout the
rest of the year. He inquired, therefore, whether it was the
Chairman's view that System policy would be frozen during all
of those periods.
Chairman Martin responded that until the System was
certain what its policy ought to be, there would be a difficult
period. It was the problem of financing a deficit; namely,
whether the money was going to be printed to finance it. He
hoped not, but some money probably would have to be printed,
depending on the size of the deficit.
Mr. Shepardson commented that he had raised this question
because he was ready to take the position of wanting less ease,
and Mr. Leach said that in his view the System ought to stop adding
to liquidity.
Mr. Mills suggested that in a sense Mr. Leach's position
would represent a confession of error on the part of the System

7/8/58 -47
which it could be undesirable to incorporate in the policy di
rective. If excessive ease had been created, he said, the System
had been responsible for it.
In responding, Mr. Leach referred to the language of the
directive adopted by the Committee in January 1955 and said it
had never occurred to him that the language carried the implication
suggested by Mr. Mills. He went on to say that he did not want to
emphasize unduly a change in the directive since he was primarily
concerned with actions. If, however, the present wording of the
directive is interpreted in the future, as it has been in the past,
as requiring free reserves in the $500-$600 million range, he did
not know how the System could escape from furnishing additional re
serves, which in turn would lead to additions to deposits and short
term investments of banks. He would like to see no further un
necessary additions to liquidity.
Mr. Hayes said he was glad that the Chairman had stressed
the difficulties of the ensuing period. Under such conditions he
considered it advisable that the System avoid signaling any overt
change in policy. Much as he agreed with the desirability of not
having further ease, he felt that it would be better not to change
the directive at this point.
Mr. Irons recalled that he had not spoken at this meeting
in favor of deletion of the word "further" from clause (b) of the
directive and said that he had had a reason; namely, the possible

7/8/58 -48
damage to the Government securities market on the eve of a
Treasury financing. He thought that the System was wrong in
shifting policy last November just before a Treasury financing
and that it would be wrong in making any change now. The matter
could be deferred until there was a little more solid situation
in the Government securities market and a more solid feeling in
people's minds.
Mr. Mangels indicated that he agreed with Mr. Irons, but
Mr. Allen stated that he would favor eliminating the word "further"
from the directive on the basis that the directive would then
reflect better the attitude of the Committee today.
There ensued further discussion of the directive and of
policy in the period immediately ahead, following which it developed
from a show of hands that the majority of those around the table
would prefer not to make any change in the directive at this time.
Consideration then was given to the target that should be
set for free reserves and the difficulties involved in the use of
any specific figure were again pointed out.
Mr. Hayes suggested that the objective might be stated as
$500 million of free reserves or less. By this he meant that the
Management of the Account would try to go below the $500 million
figure rather than above it, but that in conducting operations in
the Account the Management would recognize all of the implications
of going below $500 million.

7/8/58 -49
Chairman Martin then said that there appeared to be agree
ment on the part of all that the feel, color, and tone of the market
must be an element. In terms of the level of free reserves, he sug
gested that "around $$00 million" was probably as well as the matter
could be stated.
In further discussion, Mr. Irons raised the question whether
it would be possible to avoid entirely the use of a target figure for
free reserves. If a figure is mentioned, he said, there is an in
clination to maintain that figure. What was wanted, he felt, was
the concept of maintaining an availability of reserves that would
not contribute to excessive liquidity or to a deficiency of funds,
rather than the maintenance of a free reserve figure per se. He
suggested that considerable leeway must be given to the Manager of
the Account and that the objective might be put in terms of leaving
it to the Manager to carry out the concept of maintaining an avail
ability of reserves which would not be disruptive to the market.
Mr. Hayes said that he would not disagree except to point
out that the public has grown accustomed to looking at the level of
free reserves. If an attempt to bring about the kind of situation
the Committee would like to see prevail should result in a smaller
volume of free reserves, the System might be inviting a very difficult
situation from the standpoint of public reaction to its policy.
Mr. Irons agreed that this was an element that the Account
Management would have to take into consideration.

7/8/58 -50
Mr. Rouse commented that the System was in a box which
it would have to get out of at some time by a decisive move. At
present he had no suggestion for resolving the problem, but the
Account could try to bring down the free reserve level of the
last couple of weeks. Pointing out how certain possible actions
could just lead to more complicated situations, he noted that a
reduction of reserve requirements might disabuse the market of its
idea about a shift in policy and that sopping up the reserves
simultaneously would possibly "get us off the hook." On the other
hand, it might develop to be the secondary thinking that the sopping
up was the essence of the action and that the market had been right
the first time.
The discussion concluded with a statement by Chairman Martin
that he doubted whether the Committee could do any better than to
leave the free reserve target at "around $500 million" and to give
maximum discretion to the Management of the Account at a time like
the present.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York until otherwise
directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges
(including replacement of maturing securities, and
allowing maturities to run off without replacement)
for the System Open Market Account in the open market
or, in the case of maturing securities, by direct

7/8/58 -51-
exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary in the
light of current and prospective economic conditions
and the general credit situation of the country, with
a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in the market
to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to contributing
further by monetary ease to resumption of stable growth of
the economy, and (c) to the practical administration of
the Account; provided that the aggregate amount of securi
ties held in the System Account (including commitments for
the purchase or sale of securities for the Account) at the
close of this date, other than special short-term certifi
cates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be
increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with
discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue
participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks)
such amounts of special short-term certificates of
indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time for
the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided
that the total amount of such certificates held at any
one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed
in the aggregate $500 million.
Mr. Vardaman withdrew from the meeting at this point.
At the request of Mr. Rouse there had been distributed to
the members of the Committee a memorandum suggesting an increase
from $50 million to $75 million in the limitation on outright
holdings of bankers' acceptances by the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York. On November 27, 1956, this limit was increased to the
lesser of $50 million or 10 per cent of total acceptances outstanding,
as shown by the most recent bankers' acceptance survey, and since
that time the New York Bank had held a minimum of about $15.5
million on October 28, 1957, and a maximum of $45.7 million on
June 17, 1958. Holdings as of June 30, 1958, were $44,796,000.

7/8/58 -52
The memorandum explained that in recent weeks the New
York Bank had gradually increased its holdings of acceptances
by $1 million or more a week, to be consistent with increases
in System holdings of United States Government securities. As
long as open market policy remained one of maintaining a posture
of ease, acceptance holdings therefore could quickly reach the
limit if the New York Bank were to continue to coordinate
acceptance activities with other market operations.
Following supplemental comments by Mr. Rouse concerning
the matters referred to in the memorandum, Mr. Allen commented
that according to his recollection the reason for granting the
present authority was to show friendliness to the acceptance
market. He recalled that, although he was not at the time a
member of the Committee, he questioned increasing the purchase
authority because it seemed to him that the way to build up the
market was to get people accustomed to buying acceptances. If
the Committee should conclude that holdings of acceptances ought
to be increased proportionately to System holdings of Government
securities, as suggested in the second paragraph of Mr. Rouse's
memorandum, he would have nothing further to say. If, however,
as indicated in past discussions the purpose of the Committee was
to promote the acceptance market, he would not agree that increasing
the present limitation would work toward that end.

7/8/58 -53
Mr. Mills said that he agreed completely with Mr. Allen's
reasoning. He sensed that the Committee might drift into another
position from which extrication might be difficult due to the New
York Bank's having built up a portfolio of acceptances for open
market purposes rather than to foster the acceptance market as such.
Reports submitted by the New York Bank had indicated repeated in
ability to fill orders from foreign accounts for bankers' acceptances,
which puzzled him as to why a portfolio or acceptances was being
developed in the face of an investor demand for their acquisition.
However, market conditions are now unsettled, and as bankers'
acceptances are a vehicle for open market conduct that works on
the edge of the total securities market, the System must be prepared,
if needed, to render assistance to the acceptance market. Such being
the case, he felt that the limit for acceptance purchases should be
temporarily raised to $75 million as an emergency measure.
Mr. Allen said that he had no quarrel with Mr. Mills' state
ment. However, he hoped that the New York Bank would meet requests
for acceptances because that seemed necessary to build up the ac
ceptance market.
Mr. Hayes commented that the New York Bank could get out of
acceptances very easily within a few weeks. He stated that there was
nothing irreconcilable between the two objectives of fostering a
wider acceptance market and conducting acceptance operations in a
manner consistent with activity in the System Open Market Account.

7/8/58 -4b
On the point of helping the acceptance market, he suggested that
it was of assistance over a period of time for the New York Bank
to be in that market, and that the Bank was properly using the
acceptance authority as a money market instrument. The fact that
customers occasionally were unable to obtain all the acceptances
they wanted did not mean to him that the Reserve Bank should get
out of the market. If it was going to be in the market, it should
be a more or less reliable factor. Sometimes, he pointed out,
foreign correspondents want to sell acceptances but the New York
Bank should not be prepared necessarily to take them; rather, it
should be a steady and encouraging factor in the market.
Mr. Robertson said he was inclined to feel, as he had
before, that the System had no business in this field at all.
When the matter came up previously, he understood that the purpose
of purchasing acceptances would be to show an interest in this area
of financing, and to participate actively in the acceptance market
seemed to him to be an entirely different thing. This, he said, was
the first time he had seen any indication that what the New York
Bank was trying to do was to increase acceptance holdings consistent
with increased holdings of Government securities, and he could see
no relationship at all between the two types of holdings. He sug
gested that a moving up of the limitation to $75 million might
result in substantial control of the acceptance market, and he

7/8/58
-55
saw no merit in it. The trend, he said, should have been in the
other direction, using $50 million not as a target but as a ceiling.
It was his view that holdings of the New York Bank should be reduced
and that competitive factors should be allowed to determine the
extent of acceptance financing.
Mr. Hayes said he differed strongly from the view that
holdings of 5 per cent represented control of the market. Holdings
of $50 million, he pointed out, represented a much larger share of
the acceptance market when the existing authority was given than it
represented now.
Chairman Martin said he had not changed his own view that
the System should be friendly to the acceptance market. He would
like to see that market promoted and developed in any way possible.
In view of the differing opinions expressed during this discussion,
he suggested that the topic be held over for another meeting of the
Committee, and there was agreement with this suggestion.
There had been distributed at the beginning of this meeting
copies of a letter addressed to Chairman Martin by Congressman
Wright Patman under date of July 2, 1958, in which Mr. Patman referred
to the record previously furnished him showing each transaction in the
System Open Market Account during the period from March 1951 to the
end of 1956 and requested that a similar record be furnished covering
transactions during the calendar year 1957. Mr. Patman noted that

7/8/58 -56
in a letter dated January 7, 1958, Chairman Martin had stated that
the Open Market Committee felt that it should withhold such informa
tion until after the Board's Annual Report for the year 1957 had been
issued, but offered to supply the data thereafter.
Following a brief discussion, it was agreed that the informa
tion should be prepared and transmitted to Congressman Patman pursuant
to his request.
At the suggestion of Chairman Martin, Mr. Riefler, who had
recently returned from England, commented informally on the new
liquidity control system announced in the House of Commons last week.
Under this relaxation of the British Government's credit control
policy, banks would not have to restrict the total level of their
advances to any given figure after the end of this month. However,
control of total advances would be retained by normal monetary
measures, reinforced by a new arrangement under which the Bank of
England would, if necessary, restrict the liquidity ratio of the
banking system by calling for special deposits.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, July 29, 1958, at 1000 a.m.
Thereupon, the meeting adjourned.
Secretary