A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
on Friday, July 25, 1958, at 11:00 a.m. This was a telephone
conference meeting and each individual was in Washington except
as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of
those participating
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman (New York)
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Fulton (Cleveland)
Mr. Irons (Dallas)
Mr. Leach (Richmond)
Mr. Mangels (San Francisco)
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Treiber, Alternate Member of the Federal
Open Market Committee (New York)
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Mr. Young, Associate Economist
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market
Account (New York)
Mr. Molony, Special Assistant to the
Board of Governors
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Associate Adviser, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Mr. Keir, Acting Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Messrs. Larkin and Marsh, Assistant Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York (New York)
Mr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (New York)

7/25/58 -2
Mr. Larkin reported that the Government securities market
was steady this morning. The intermediate-term issues drifted some
what yesterday but there was no tendency for prices to move sharply
and the downward drift did not build up significantly. Today, that
downward drift had been stopped and the market had a generally
steady tone. Where prices had changed, they were slightly higher
and trading was light. Treasury bills were demonstrating further
strength, and bill holdings of reporting dealers showed a short
position of $25 million. Thus, there was quite a scarcity of bills
in the market as measured by dealers' inventories. Total dealer
holdings of Government securities showed a drop roughly the same as
the drop in holdings of bills, so dealer positions were quite low in
comparison with the total positions of $2.5 billion that the dealers
had late in June.
Mr. Larkin continued with a more detailed report on the market,
as summarized in a memorandum from Mr. Thomas dated today, a copy of
which has been placed in the files of the Committee.
Included in Mr. Larkin's report were the New York Bank's
estimates of net free reserves. For the statement week which began
yesterday the average of free reserves was placed at $57 million,
and for the week ending August 6 the figure was placed at $1,175
million, without any allowance for run-off of Treasury bills from
the System Account during that week or for any Treasury financing.
The projections of the Board's staff, as stated by Mr. Thomas, were

7/25/58 -3
substantially higher, with an estimated average of $530 million
for the week ending next Wednesday and an estimate of $1,375 for
the week ending August 6. The latter estimate assumed a Treasury
financing on August 4. Basically, the difference in the estimates
of the New York Bank and the Board's staff reflected a variance in
the estimates of required reserves,
In terms of approach, Mr. Larkin said that the Account
Management did not contemplate market transactions today. The
Bank had received a small foreign order for Treasury bills and
it was expected that this order of $5 million would be made avail
able from the System Account.
Following a further discussion of market developments, it
was agreed that there would be no further meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee until the meeting in Washington on Tuesday,
July 29, unless in the meantime circumstances arose of such a nature
as to cause the Manager of the System Account to request that a
meeting be held.
The meeting adjourned.