A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, September 9, 1958, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. M artin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Irons
Mr. Leach
Mr. M angels
Mr. M ills
Mr. R obertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Vardaman
Messrs. Erickson, Allen, Johns, and Deming,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Bopp, Bryan, and Leedy, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Atlanta, and Kansas City, respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Daane, Marget, Walker, Wheeler, and
Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Associate Adviser, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Keir, Acting Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Ellis, Roosa, Mitchell, and Tow, Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Boston, New York, Chicago, and Kansas City,
respectively; Mr. Balles, Assistant Vice

9/9/58 -2
President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland; Messrs. Anderson and
Atkinson, Economic Advisers, Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and
Atlanta, respectively; Mr. Parsons,
Director of Research, Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis; and Mr. Meigs,
Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meetings of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on July 29 (two meetings) and
August 19, 1958, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York covering open market operations during the period June 17 through
September 3, 1958, with emphasis on the August 19-September 3 period,
and a supplemental report covering commitments executed September 4
through September 8, 1958. Copies of both reports have been placed
in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Reporting on operations since the last meeting, Mr. Rouse
stated that reserve availability has been about what the Committee
hoped it would be. Free reserve levels have been worked down steadily
with a minimum of market disturbances. During the last few days the
market has been more calm than at any time since last June, despite
the reduction in reserve availability and the developing tensions in
the Far East. A better tone has also developed in the markets for
corporate and municipal bonds. The Standard Oil of California issue

9/9/58 -3
sold well at a reoffering yield of 4.40 per cent--which compares
with the 3.75 or 3.80 rate at which the issue could have been
brought out in June, as originally planned. The Sears Roebuck
$350 million issue is being offered at par to yield .,75 per cent
and is expected to be an initial success.
Mr. Rouse stated that looking ahead, the Treasury is planning
to begin consultations on its next cash offering on September 22 and
the announcement of the terms of the offering is expected to be made
on September 25. Between now and then a major problem confronting
the Account Management is how to deal with float, which is expected
to raise free reserve levels sharply over the next two or three weeks.
Current projections indicate average free reserves of $182 million for
the week ending September 10, $492 million for the September 17 week,
and $561 for the September 24 week. Mr. Rouse added that the figure
for the week ending September 10 had been expected to be lower than
the $182 million (shown on the attachment to the supplementary report),
but that a substantial "miss" had occurred in the projections on
Friday and it turned out that there were considerably more reserves
available over the week end than had been anticipated. Mr. Rouse
stated that as regards the float-induced bulge that lies ahead, his
plan, based on existing policy, is to offset this rise in reserves
almost entirely, if possible, unless the Committee feels that he
should do otherwise.

9/9/58
-4-
Mr. Mills observed that since the initial benefit of float
appears largely in country banks, and since corrective action would
involve taking money out of the central money market, he wondered
whether the attempt to offset float might cause a severe tightening
of the money market just before the Treasury is ready to come in for
cash. Mr. Rouse replied that the market will be looking closely at
the statistics on free reserves, and unless float is offset, the
feeling might develop that the money market was being adjusted to
help the forthcoming Treasury offering.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the open market transactions during
the period August 19 through September
8, 1958, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
In supplementation of the staff memorandum distributed under
date of September 5, 1958, Mr. Young presented the following state
ment on the economic situation:
Sparked by a marked rise in financial liquidity of
businesses and consumers, a liberal dosage of Government
spending and subsidy, and an inflationary psychology in
equity markets, domestic recovery in output, income, and
consumption has been vigorous indeed. At this point,
recovery certainly holds promise of continuing vigorous
over the period ahead. Current information indicates
that the August index of industrial production will be
marked up two more index points to 135 relative to the
1947-49 average, and further that the rise in third
quarter GNP will amount to at least $10 billion, bringing
the total to $439a nnual rate. These figures mean that
half of the decline in industrial production and over
half of the decline in the dollar value of GNP from the
third quarter of last year has now been recovered.

9/9/58 -5-
Gains in industrial production have continued to be
widespread and to extend through durable goods and non
durable goods lines, to be sure with some uneveness. Fuel
and minerals output has also risen further, as have rail
freight loadings and electric power output, the latter to
new high ground.
New orders at durable manufacturers rose again in July.
Though small, the rise was the third in a row and unfilled
orders edged up slightly for the second consecutive month.
At all manufacturers, the July sales rise, amounting to 2
per cent, was the third significant monthly increase in
succession.
Manufacturers in July continued to liquidate inventories,
but at the lowest rate of liquidation since December. Reduc
tion of finished goods inventories was again a feature of the
liquidation, but as in the past two months liquidation also
included materials supplies and goods in process.
In the area of industrial production, the big uncertainty
for the near-term future relates to automobiles. Here retail
sales are lagging, but with model changeovers in process
dealer stocks are being worked off and market forces point
towards a fairly tight new and used car supply situation by
this month's end. Meanwhile, though the threat of labor work
stoppage continues to be an industry hazard, output of parts
for new model cars is proceeding apace.
Construction activity in August rose again and reached a
total value, annual rate, of $49.5 billion, up 5 per cent
from May and about 2 per cent under the peak in December. Con
tract awards have continued very high, with residential awards
once more particularly strong. Prices of building materials
and construction costs have resumed an upward drift.
Pertinent to the rise in activity in durable goods pro
duction and construction is the latest information on plant
and equipment expenditure plans. Whereas earlier reported
capital investment plans of business indicated decline extend
ing through the fourth quarter, though at a rate sharply
reduced from the preceding three quarters, the most recent
Commerce-SEC survey just released shows a leveling off in this
quarter and a modest rise in such investment in the fourth
quarter.
With activity in industry, transportation, power, and
construction all showing marked upward tilt, some further
strengthening in labor markets might well be expected. Such
improvement as has occurred, however, has been moderate.
Over the past month, changes in employment, unemployment,
and workweek have been largely seasonal, though some contra
seasonal rise seems identifiable in manufacturing, trade, and
Government employment.

9/9/58
At the consumer level, retail sales, which had held
the March-April gain of 2-1/2 per cent through May and June,
rose again by 1 per cent in July. August department store
sales, which climbed 5 per cent ahead of July and 3 per
cent over August of last year, suggest another strong month
at retail outlets. Retail inventories, which had shown
modest accumulation in June, showed modest liquidation in
July.
Since early August, average prices at wholesale have
declined slightly, reflecting declines of about 3 per cent
in average wholesale prices of farm and food products with
average prices of industrial commodities--materials and
finished goods--about stable.
Consumer prices, which rose slightly further in July,
have probably declined slightly in August, reflecting the
influence of lower prices for meats and vegetables.
In industrial countries abroad, the indications are of
either revival, as in Canada, or of stability at moderately
reduced levels, as in most European countries and in Japan.
Contractive tendencies in steel and textiles in Europe seem
to have largely run their course. In raw material countries
of South America and Asia, balance of payments problems,
stemming in part from lower export prices, remain acute with
various country situations critically inflationary. Taken as
a whole, however, markets for U. S. exports seem stronger and
our export volume appears to have been showing gradual re
covery from its low reached last February. By latest indica
tions, which relate to June, U. S. imports appear to hold at
the high level of preceding months.
Mr. Thomas made the following statement with regard to financial
developments:
The most striking financial developments of recent
weeks have been those associated with the adjustment of
interest rates. Long-term and medium-term rates con
tinued during August the rise that began in June; short
term rates joined the procession and rose most sharply in
August. Yields on long-term securities are now close to
the highs of 1957, with U. S. Government bonds near 3-3/4
per cent, high-grade corporate seasoned bonds at 4 per
cent, and new issues 3/8 of a point higher. Yields on
medium-term U. S. issues are almost up to the level of
long-term rates but lower than they were at last year's

9/9/58
peaks. Rates on various types of short-term paper have
risen from the neighborhood of 1 to 1-1/2 per cent to
near the range of 2 to 2-1/2 per cent, but are still well
below the range of 3-1/2 to 4 per cent that existed
approximately a year ago.
It is as yet difficult to judge to what extent these
changes in interest rate levels reflect a basic shift in
credit demands relative to the supply of savings; to what
extent they reflect speculative forces that may have moved
too far first in one direction and then in the other; or
to what extent they reflect the shift in System policy as
to availability of reserves. Each of these elements has
exerted an influence. The steadier tone of the market
during the past week may indicate that the rise has halted
until fundamental trends can be reappraised.
Somewhat higher interest rates than those which pre
vailed in the early summer are clearly justified by basic
factors in the credit markets. The clear indications of
economic recovery presage growing credit needs from the
private economy. The prospective Treasury deficit
designed to offset declining private expenditures--will
probably coincide with an increase in such expenditures
and probably in private borrowing. The aggregate amount
of credit that has been supplied this year has been very
large. Expansion of total loans and investments of com
mercial banks has already been larger than that for any
other recent year taken as a whole and the season of
greatest increase is still ahead. New security issues
have continued at a high level. Mortgage lending activity
has increased.
It is likely that the speculative and professional
forces that operated so dramatically to depress bond prices
have abated. Many of the weak holders have been sold out.
Investors, such as banks, that might be inclined to sell
in anticipation of declines have been restrained by the
rapidity of the decline and the unwillingness to take losses.
Dealers in securities, who build up positions to very high
levels in June, have reduced their commitments to manageable
and in many cases negligible amounts. Dealers in Government
securities, for example, who had positions of about $2.5
billion in June, approximately double normal holdings, now
hold negligible net amounts with short positions in many
issues. They are more likely to be buyers than sellers in
the future.

9/9/58 -8
The volume of credit demands during the remainder of
this year is difficult to predict. It is clear that the
Treasury will be a heavy borrower. Something like $7.5
billion may need to be borrowed before the end of the year.
A similar amount of new borrowing may be needed in the first
half of 1959, but that will be offset by redemption of
maturing debt.
A major uncertainty is whether the Treasury deficit, by
providing funds to the economy, will reduce private borrow
ing demands, or whether economic recovery, stimulated in part
by the Government deficit, will induce increased private
borrowing. Coincident increases in both, following the bank
credit expansion that has already occurred, could result in
much greater credit and monetary growth than is needed or
desirable for sustained economic recovery.
Most of the bank credit growth that has occurred this
year has been in holdings of Government securities, and
other borrowing at banks has been moderate. The funds sup
plied by the banks through buying Government securities,
however, have gone indirectly into other uses. This trend
might continue. There should be no objection to financing
Treasury needs through the banks, if other types of bank
credit are limited and total credit expansion is kept within
moderate limits. To achieve this result, however, in a
period of business recovery may require some restraint on
credit growth with resulting increases in interest rates.
The policy question to be decided is how much monetary
expansion should there be in the next few months. There are
no specific quantitative guides, because of variations in the
use of existing money and of money substitutes. The active
money supply, as measured by demand deposits and currency,
declined somewhat more than seasonally in August from the
record high, on a seasonally adjusted basis, reached after a
very rapid growth in July. The total--seasonally adjusted-
at $136.8 billion, is $2 billion or 1-1/2 per cent larger
than a year ago. In addition, time deposits have increased
by $10 billion and U. S. Government deposits by $1.5 billion,
making a total growth of over $13 billion, or nearly 6 per
cent, in all deposits and currency over the past year. The
gross national product, after dropping over 4 per cent, is
by now probably about 2 per cent below the peak quarter of
last year. The existing money supply plus normal seasonal
expansion should be more than adequate to support a rise of
GNP to above its previous peak by the end of the year.
The usual seasonal growth in demand deposits from the
end of August to the end of December would be about $6 billion

9/9/58 -9
at all commercial banks, with $5 billion at member banks,
requiring additional reserves of nearly $800 million allowing
for certain changes in the Treasury tax and loan accounts.
The usual currency growth would be nearly $1 billion. After
allowance for float and other factors, to meet these needs
would call for open market purchases or additional member
bank borrowing of nearly $1.5 billion by the end of the year.
The bulk of these operations would come in November and
December and would need to be reversed in January to provide
for the seasonal increase in money and then to offset the
post-holiday decline.
Timing of operations would need to take into consideration
temporary variations, the impact of Treasury financing, and
the degree of restraint to be exercised. The projections pre
sented allow for supplying reserves at the time of Treasury
cash financing, but their subsequent absorption as Treasury tax
and loan balances are reduced. In view of the possibility that
banks may be willing to increase their borrowings to meet
credit demands rather than liquidate Government securities at
prevailing prices, if the pressure of total credit demands
should exceed the seasonal pattern, then net borrowed reserves
should be allowed to increase accordingly. To absorb existing
free reserves, other than a moderate amount during the mid
September tax week, there probably should be further open
market sales of $200 million or more in the next two weeks
depending on how much float is absorbed. Purchases to meet
seasonal needs would not need to begin until late October.
If purchases conform in amounts and timing to the pattern
projected, then any greater than seasonal credit growth would
bring about higher borrowings by member banks. If, on the
other hand, credit growth should fall below the projected
seasonal pattern, then free reserves would increase. In
either case, these results should be permitted to occur; no
particular level of free or net borrowed reserves should be
rigidly maintained. The policy guide should be to provide a
certain addition to the reserve supply.
Stricter administration of the discount window and
further discount rate increases may be appropriate if bank
credit tends to expand more rapidly than seems desirable
and borrowings increase accordingly.
Mr. Hayes presented the following statement of his views on
the business outlook and credit policy:
On returning from a month's absence, during which I had
some uneasy feelings as to national monetary developments, I

9/9/58 -10-
was struck especially by the dramatic upsurge in interest
rates, both short-term and long-term, which had occurred
during August. I was afraid this upsurge might be a sympton
of a state of intensifying tightness in the money and credit
markets--tightness that might not, in my judgment at any
rate, be appropriate in the present early stage of the
recession-recovery cycle. My concern mounted when I found
not only a bill rate almost 1-1/2 per cent higher than at
the end of July and long-term yields within striking
distance of the 1957 boom peaks, but also that a number
of bond issues had been postponed and that the availability
of mortgage funds was being adversely affected.
I feel apprehensive especially over the fact that the
Federal Reserve System, far from acting to damp down this
extreme movement, has abetted it by effecting a substantial
tightening of monetary policy. The rise in margin require
ments early in August could be properly attributed to an
overexuberant speculative surge in the stock market. But
the subsequent speed with which free reserves have been
reduced from the $500 million level to around $100 million,
coupled with discount rate increases which may partly have
been induced by these open market pressures, has pointed
clearly to a sharper change in reserve policy than I believe
has been warranted by actual business developments.
Expectations of better business and fears of resumption
of strongly inflationary trends are doubtless at the root of
the rise in interest rates. (Involved here is a public
assumption, I believe an erroneous one, that the prospective
Federal deficit for fiscal 1959 makes near-term inflation
inevitable.) But these basic causes have been reinforced
and exaggerated by a widespread belief that Federal Reserve
policy has been getting tighter and is likely to get a good
deal more so from now on.
Undoubtedly business recovery is proceeding more rapidly
and on a broader front than most of us had expected a few
months ago. This is cause for rejoicing. The major uncertainty
in the business outlook lies in the future course of consumer
buying. So far, in spite of a sharp pickup in personal income,
retail sales seem to have done little better than hold even.
It remains to be seen whether the 1959 automobile models will
have sufficient appeal to spark a strong revival in buying.
While there is some evidence of upward revisions of plans for
business plant and equipment expenditures, these are not yet
very substantial. I am impressed by the fact that unemploy
ment in July was still at about the same level as in the
April trough of the recession, despite the recovery in

9/9/58 -11
industrial production. As has been true for many months,
the situation is still characterized by surplus capacity,
surplus labor, and surplus inventory. In the absence of
unforeseen diplomatic and military developments abroad,
it is hard to discern any near-term danger of excessive
pressures on available real resources.
The same general conclusion appears to be supported
by a review of recent price trends. Both wholesale and
retail indexes have been leveling off, and the prospect
of lower food prices over the coming months is a distinctly
favorable element in the over-all price outlook. Raw
material prices are not behaving as if traders expected a
strong upsurge in demand. General price stability seems
to be a reasonable expectation for some months to come.
If neither the state of business activity nor price
conditions seem to convey a threat of imminent inflation,
it still behooves us to examine carefully the potential
inflationary influence inherent in any excessive increase
in the money supply or in liquidity in general. Our studies
of this situation do not support the conclusion that
liquidity is dangerously high, either in or outside of the
banks. Gains in the money supply to date (and in prospect
for the rest of 1958), when viewed in reasonable perspective
over the last few years, appear consistent with the economy's
long-term growth. It has been pointed out that the seasonally
adjusted money supply rose at the rate of 8 per cent per
annum from the end of January to the end of July--but this
came on top of a very sharp decline from July 1957 to
January 1958, so that the gain for the whole year ending
July is around 1.2 per cent. For the calendar year 1958
the gain is unlikely to exceed 2.5 per cent to 3 per cent
(and I believe will probably be less than 2.5 per cent)
and the average for the eight years 1951-1958 is likely to
be about 2.5 per cent. There is danger, I believe, in
overemphasizing possible errors in our policies in 1954
1955 and drawing a close parallel between that period and
the present one, when virtually all measures show substantially
less liquidity now than at that time.
Essential as it is for the System to stand guard against
the dangers of inflation, I think we would be doing the public
a disservice if we put too much stress on this danger, at a
time when the danger does not seem imminent. For our exces
sive concentration on the subject could lead the public to
believe that the data at our disposal suggest an explosive
threat of inflation. I would be the last to deny that infla
tion is a serious long-term problem, primarily because of the

9/9/58 -12-
tendency of wage increases in key industries, in good times
and bad, to exceed a reasonable share of national productivity
gains. But I cannot see any justification for combating this
long-term threat by means of a rapid shift in monetary policy,
at a time when inflationary forces are not dominant and when,
in my view, a gradual shift away from ease would be appropriate.
Because the events of the past summer have already brought
many rates to high levels, there is danger that the further
steps required, if the present business improvement should be
come a boom, could lead to interest-rate levels so high as to
be harmful to the economy and so high as to place the System
in political jeopardy. Just what is the right remedy for this
long-term wage-push inflationary threat, I am not sure. It may
be some form of concerted Government effort to discourage or
prevent wage increases in excess of a reasonable share of
national over-all productivity gains. The Federal Reserve
System might well devote considerable attention to this ques
tion even though responsibility for any ultimate action along
these lines would doubtless rest with the Executive Branch of
the Government.
We must of course bear in mind that the Treasury faces a
difficult cash financing problem early in October. Treasury
problems and Federal Reserve credit policy are interrelated.
We can never be unmindful of those problems. It seems to me
that it is important that there be a period of stability in
the money and securities markets. This should help not only
the Treasury but the entire economy. I believe that the Fed
eral Reserve should promote that stability; that we should
make clear, through open market operations, that the move away
from active ease is a mild and gradual one, not a sharp change
of policy. I think we should always be guided by the market
effects of our actions, and if the market has overreacted, as
indicated by the course of interest rates, we might well let
free reserves rise above the current $100 million level,
perhaps ranging up to $300 million, in the hope that this
would encourage the reestablishment of a better feeling of
equilibrium in the capital market, perhaps evidenced by some
modest decline in interest rates. We should make clear, I
believe, that we intend to provide reserves readily both for
seasonal needs and to permit the banks to underwrite the
coming Treasury offering.
Our Bank has given very careful consideration to the dis
count rate for the past several weeks, and at last Thursday's
meeting of our Directors, I recommended that the rate be re
established without change. The Directors voted unanimously
to do so, and the comment was made that if the recommendation
had been otherwise I would have had a very hard fight on my

9/9/58 -13-
hands. In fact I had no inclination to recommend otherwise.
It seemed to our Directors, and to me, that an increase in
the rate would be undesirable if it were to be regarded as
a signal (as it doubtless would be) tending to confirm a
substantial tightening of Federal Reserve policy. As I have
outlined above, we felt that the tightening effect had gone
too far already, and that the appropriate policy at this
juncture is to try to damp down this tendency, not to en
courage it. We did not believe that there was any serious
danger of abuse of the discount window, for the time being
at least, and hence an increase did not seem to be required
for such a technical reason.
While the argument has been made that a move to 2 per cent
might have "cleared the air," removing fears that our Bank
might be contemplating a 1/2 per cent rise, and thus tending to
stabilize market conditions well in advance of the Treasury
offering, I cannot accept this argument. It seems to me that
if we had raised the rate, the market would still be wondering
two or three weeks from now whether a second rate increase was
in prospect, if not before, then immediately after, the Treasury
financing. I respect the views of those Reserve Banks which
have seen fit to increase the rate, but this is a very delicate
juncture in Federal Reserve policy when it is perhaps especially
desirable to give scope to regional differences of opinion. I
might add that our Directors, who were unanimous in their views,
wished me to convey to the Committee their opinion that monetary
policy has been too restrictive in the last few weeks and that
some modification of this tightening process is greatly needed
if we are to avoid serious economic and political consequences.
It seems to me that the present directive provides a
suitable framework within which to operate over the next three
weeks.
Mr. Johns stated that due to the fact that the directors of the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis would hold their regular September
meeting this Thursday, at which time there would, of course, be con
sideration of the discount rate, the matter uppermost in his mind at
this moment was how he would discharge his obligation to make a recom
mendation to the directors concerning the rate. As the Committee was

9/9/58 -l4
aware, he had been one of a minority who believed that perhaps
the rather rapid and substantial rise in interest rates, and more
recently the greater restrictions upon the availability of reserves,
had proceeded a little faster than they should have. It might turn
out, of course, that this was absolutely right; it could even turn
out that it was not enough. Nevertheless, whatever his own views
about those developments might be, he had to accept the fact that
these changes had occurred--that the Federal Reserve System had
either permitted or caused them to occur. He was not inclined to
believe that the actions taken and the results achieved could be
reversed irrespective of whether they had gone too far or had pro
ceeded too fast. Neither did he wish to magnify out of proportion
the importance of the St. Louis discount rate at this time. In all
the circumstances, his present inclination was to conform to what
very rapidly was coming to be national policy regarding the discount
rate--and which perhaps ought to be national policy without too much
further delay. Therefore, he expected on Thursday to recommend to
his directors that the St. Louis discount rate be increased to 2 per
cent. Although he proposed to make such a recommendation, he could
not forecast what the directors would do. At the meeting on
August 28, at which six of the directors were present, the action to
reestablish the existing rate was taken by unanimous vote, and con
versations with two other directors who could not be present at that
meeting indicated that if they had been present they would have

9/9/58 -15
voted the same way. He was not sure that the directors' views
had changed or could be changed so as to bring about the action
that he expected to recommend.
Mr. Johns said he had a feeling that Federal Reserve action
in the next three weeks--and he supposed he did not have to look
too much further ahead at this time--should not accelerate the
tightening which had already occurred. He said this without regard
to the needs of the Treasury which would be quite great. At this
juncture he thought that the Committee might pause--that is, keep
things as they are for at least another three weeks--and then take
another look at the situation.
Mr. Johns recalled that he was one who suggested a few weeks
ago that it might be appropriate to look at margin requirements.
Although he had no recent figures--in fact did not know whether they
were available or not--he still had some question in his mind as to
whether margin requirements were as high as might be appropriate.
He had no suggestions with respect to the policy directive.
Mr. Bryan stated that the latest figures available for the
Sixth District seemed to indicate as a continuing matter a rather
broad and vigorous recovery. Nonfarm employment had improved and
manufacturing employment was up sharply. Department store sales
showed increases which were rather dramatic, about 10 per cent over
a year ago, and other indicators were telling about the same story.

9/9/58 -16
There had been a sharp increase in manufacturing payrolls and in
average hours worked per week. Weekly reporting bank business loans
were increasing and the increase in the past four weeks was larger
than that occurring in four of the last five years. The picture in
the Sixth District seemed to him eminently to justify the recent
increase in the Atlanta Bank's discount rate.
In general, Mr. Bryan said, he did not believe that System
policy had proceeded too fast or had gone too far. If the market
had over-reacted, that was an indication of the fact that a two-way
market was operating at the present time. He believed it was very
necessary to get a two-way market operating in the Government securi
ties field where there had not been such a market for a considerable
period.
Mr. Bopp said that he found this a very difficult period on
which to comment. From the standpoint of the nation as a whole,
quite clearly there had been a significant and general recovery,
especially in the past three months, so that conditions in the money
and capital markets which were appropriate at an earlier date were
no longer appropriate. In his opinion, however, conditions had
changed more radically in these markets than called for by business
conditions. He would not wish to increase pressure at this time
and, in fact, would favor some slight moderation in the implementation
of policy.

9/9/8 -17
Turning to the Third District, Mr. Bopp said that recovery
continued to lag behind the country as a whole, especially in the
critical area of employment. In July 1957, when the national level
of unemployment was 4.3 per cent,the percentage in the Third District
was 5.8. This July, when the national level was 7.5 per cent, the
rate in the Third District was 9.4 per cent. Since mid-July new
claims for unemployment compensation in the district had been down
irregularly but not as much as might have been expected on a seasonal
basis. Therefore, it appeared to him that a split discount rate
might be appropriate and that the Philadelphia Bank perhaps should be
at the tail end of the rate change. Meanwhile, the Bank was watchi
closely the level of member bank borrowing and the details of such
borrowing. For the last three weeks city banks had been coming in
to the discount window over the week ends but last night they had
all repaid their borrowings. These borrowings have been running at
a rate equal to 5 per cent of the national total.
Mr. Bopp repeated that if there was any time when a split
discount rate would be appropriate this would appear to be the time.
However, if member bank borrowings should go up substantially and
administration of the discount window became difficult, it would be
quite inappropriate for the Philadelphia Bank to continue operating
at a lower rate. Under such circumstances he would recommend to
his directors that the Philadelphia Bank move along with the other

9/9/58 -18
Banks on the discount rate, even though it might feel that the
national policy was not quite appropriate.
Mr. Bopp concluded by saying that he would favor leaving
the policy directive unchanged.
Mr. Fulton said that the rays of dawn had begun to appear
in the Fourth District but that they were not as bright as everyone
would like to see them. The district steel industry had had a con
siderable rise in the proportion of capacity being used, the present
figure being about 56.5 per cent against the April low of 3 per cent.
He pointed out, however, that 56.5 per cent is not very high for the
industry. The foundries were working at a very limited percentage
of capacity and in the machine tool industry orders had fallen off
in July after a spurt in June. Employment did not go down as much
in July as might have been indicated on a seasonal basis, so there
was a little improvement in that respect. The model change-over
in the automobile industry, of course, always sends unemployment
up at the time of the year when it occurs, and the change-over was
taking place now.
All in all, while there had been some improvement from a
rather low level of activity, total activity in the Fourth District
was still on the low side. The automobile industry was not ordering
to any extent and until very recently--the last couple of days--the
steel mills had received no orders from the oil industry for large
pipe or similar materials. In some quarters business was being

9/9/58 -19
characterized as having improved to a plateau--a somewhat low
plateau--and it was reported that no improvement had been shown
in the last couple of weeks. Therefore, a little discouragement
was being voiced, the question being whether business activity
was going to stay at the present level. Nevertheless, it was
believed generally that if an agreement was reached with the auto
unions, ordering of steel and components would take place and there
would be a noticeable improvement in the latter part of the year.
Continuing, Mr. Fulton said that construction activity in
the Fourth District was rather strong in terms of heavy engineering
projects and residential construction, but the picture as to non
residential construction was not very good. Retail trade continued
below the year-ago level, being down about 6 per cent, and although
department store sales rose quite substantially last week they were
still down 4 per cent for the year to date. In summary, the situa
tion was hopeful but no strong upsurge had appeared as yet. A
disturbing factor was the continuous price increases and the anticipa
tion of price increases in a broad segment of industry. Steel,
aluminum, and rubber had all increased their prices. The National
Cash Register Company had just announced a 5 per cent price increase
and many others were anticipating increases as the result of labor
contracts being signed which provided for a 3.5 to 4 per cent in
crease in wages despite unemployment in the fields of activity
concerned.

9/9/58 -20
Mr. Fulton reported that member banks had been coming to
the discount window very substantially during the recent period
but a check did not disclose that they were borrowing at a
preferential rate and selling Federal funds to banks in other
districts at a profit. Instead, it appeared that the banks needed
the money that they were borrowing.
Mr. Fulton expressed agreement with the comments of Mr.
Johns about a national policy with respect to the discount rate
level. Therefore, he said, he intended to recommend an increase
in the discount rate of the Cleveland Bank on the basis of national
policy at the directors' meeting this Thursday. However, he was
not sure whether the directors would go along with that recommenda
tion. At the meeting of the executive committee two weeks ago, the
directors in attendance voiced strongly the feeling that the Fourth
District was not in such a condition as to warrant an increase in
the rate at that time. Mr. Fulton concluded his comments by saying
that he saw no reason to suggest a change in the policy directive.
Mr. Shepardson said it seemed to him that all of the reports,
statistics, and other economic information indicated that the national
picture continued to be one of strong recovery. Admittedly, there
were some areas that had not moved back as fast as others, but for
the country as a whole there seemed to be a vigorous movement toward
a strong recovery. However one looked at the prospects for the

9/9/58 -21
next few weeks, it seemed certain that there would be expansion in
the fall, along with a serious Treasury problem beginning with the
financing in the next two or three weeks and continuing on through
the rest of the year.
Mr. Shepardson then referred to Mr. Rouse's earlier comment
to the effect that he thought System operations had about succeeded
in meeting the Committee's target as to reserve availability and
said that this was not his (Mr. Shepardson's) understanding. At
its last meeting, he recalled, the Committee first talked about
getting down to approximately a zero level of reserves by Labor Day
but later the idea seemed to be more one of getting down to that
level by the date of this meeting. Apparently there was still some
difference of opinion. His own feeling was that free reserves should
have gotten down close to zero by this time so that member banks
would have had to come to the discount window under the pressure of
further demands for credit this fall. He said that he was somewhat
disturbed by the reserve projections presented at this meeting.
According to the New York Bank's projections, average free reserves
for the current statement week would be $182 million and the average
would be substantially in excess of $400 million for the next state
ment week. There was a very short time remaining if free reserves
were going to be gotten down further, and in his opinion they should
be gotten down so that there could be some period of stability

9/9/58 -22
before the Treasury financing later this month. It would be his
hope that the Account Management could get free reserves down
below the figures presently projected. In his opinion, the trend
should still be toward the zero level that some of the members of
the Committee had had in mind.
Mr. Shepardson said that this was no time to be in a position
of indicating any vacillation in policy. If free reserves were to
turn back up, that would create more uncertainty and leave the System
in a more vulnerable position later on. He felt that it would be
most desirable if the discount rate situation could be straightened
out promptly. There may have been reasons why some Banks did not
move at the beginning but that period was now past. Therefore, he
believed that the Reserve Banks should reach a uniform basis without
delay.
Mr. Robertson, who had been on vacation during August, said
that upon reviewing monetary policy following his return he found
that he approved wholeheartedly everything that had been done during
the time that he was away from his office. He then made the follow
ing statement:
The specific problem which this Committee now faces
is how many bank reserve dollars should be provided in
the next few months to meet the credit and monetary needs
of general economic recovery to a higher level of activity,
as well as those customary at this season of the year, and

-23-
at the same time not encourage unsustainable expansion
based on commitments of a speculative nature. The out
standing money supply, which increased while economic
activity was declining, is presumably already adequate
to support a level of output and consumption higher than
the peak reached last year. Thus no more than the usual
seasonal increase should be needed.
The huge Treasury deficit, which seems inevitable
for this fiscal year at least, makes the problem an
exceptionally formidable one. If private credit demands
should increase, along with Treasury borrowing, the total
expansion of credit could be excessive. It is not in
evitable, nor is it necessary, that this should occur.
Treasury borrowing and spending will supply a large portion
of the funds needed for recovery; other borrowing could be
correspondingly smaller than it would otherwise be. The
danger is that the government deficit will be a stimulus
to a too rapid acceleration in private borrowing and
spending, instead of an offset to a decline in private
activities, as it was designed to be.
It is very important that total credit expansion be
kept within reasonable bounds, that the Treasury compete
in the market for the funds it needs, and that private
borrowing be tailored accordingly. If we supply the
volume of reserves that we believe to be appropriate for
the situation, and private credit demands are moderate,
the task of Treasury financing should not be too difficult,
although interest rates might stay at present levels or
rise a little in order to attract savings, as well as bank
credit, into Treasury securities. If private credit demands
expand along with Treasury borrowing, there may well be
strengthening upward pressures on interest rates. System
policies should not be designed to prevent rates from rising.
To do so would require pumping more money into the economy
than will be needed for sound recovery.
Since the likelihood is that such pressures will develop,
some rise in rates should be permitted to occur before the
Treasury comes to the market in October. Consequently, I
would welcome further advances in discount rates to 2-1/4 or
2-1/2 per cent immediately.
The principles that should govern our operations seem to
me to be clear. The mechanics of providing the proper amount
of reserves will by no means be easy to determine. That task
will have to be handled with skill and judgment by the Manage
ment of the Account with such guides as the Committee may
decide upon from time to time in the light of developments.
But at this juncture, when we are in the midst of a broad and

9/9/58
vigorous recovery, we should avoid the appearance of being
afraid of our shadow. We should show by our actions that
we are firmly resolved to resist inflationary pressures.
In conclusion, Mr. Robertson said that he would not favor
changing the policy directive for he did not feel that any change
was necessary. In his opinion, existing open market policy should
be continued. He agreed with Mr. Shepardson that this was a time
to be more restrictive rather than the opposite.
After stating that his appraisal of System policy considera
tions followed quite closely the views expressed by Mr. Hayes, Mr.
Mills made the following statement:
In reading the minutes of this Committee's last meet
ing, I was impressed with Mr. Bopp's remarks, which I took
to mean that the Federal Reserve System would be ill-advised
to be so overwhelmingly concerned with the problem of infla
tion as to become oblivious to other pressing problems and
responsibilities. My own thinking follows his and leads me
to the conclusion that too severe a policy attack on antici
pated inflation can defeat its own purpose.
This spring's experience again demonstrated the lag
between initiating a System policy and getting its effects
and that impatience in obtaining results can produce too
strong policy actions which, on this occasion, were reflected
in excessive credit ease and speculation in the market for
U. S. Government securities. A policy of severe credit
restraint can now produce undesirable consequences of a
reverse order that will show up in a further thinning of an
already thin U. S. Government securities market and specula
tion on the short side of the market that will tend to
accentuate the downward trend of securities prices. In
turn, the congestion in the new issues market for corporate
and public obligations will worsen as prospective borrowers
hasten to assert their claims in anticipation of still
higher interest rates.
This is the kind of a situation that relates itself
to a restrictive monetary policy whose effects cannot be

9/9/58 -25-
measured by the available supply of reserves, which
technically does not denote severe credit restraint,
but by the impact on the commercial banking system of
a relative reduction in the supply of reserves from
that which the System's policy of earlier this year
had accustomed it to. When it is considered that the
rapid fall in the prices of U. S. Government securities
has produced a major depreciation in the investment
accounts of the commercial banks at a time when the
level of their loans is high and their holdings of U. S.
Government securities very substantial, their ability,
under a policy of credit restraint, to shift their assets
to make room for seasonal loans and investments in new
issues of U. S. Government securities is greatly handi
capped. Hence it is that if a System policy or credit
restraint is pushed too vigorously, the System may be
confronted with the need of supplying reserves in quantity
in order to foster commercial bank subscription to new
Treasury offerings and, in so doing, an undesirable
inflationary impetus will have been created. Moreover,
a too aggressive policy of credit restraint by hampering
commercial bank financing of new underwritings of securities
can retard the kind of investment programs that are con
ducive to a sound economic recovery.
All of the above preaches the thought that the Federal
Reserve System's responsibility to the U. S. Government
securities market needs re-study. Policy actions of recent
date cannot be said to foster the kind of market breadth,
depth and resiliency that has been lauded in the past but,
instead, have produced opposite results. Inasmuch as the
Federal Reserve System must accept a large share of the
responsibility for having promoted an illusory excessive
liquidity in past months and a major speculation in U. S.
Government securities, thought must be given as to whether
the U. S. Government securities market should have been
left entirely free to work out its own adjustments or
whether the Federal Reserve System had, and has, a
responsibility to ease the path of these adjustments in
ways that will restore the much vaunted market breadth,
depth, and resiliency that has been a policy objective.
Mr. Mills concluded by expressing the view that free reserves,
temporarily at least, should be in the range of $200-300 million.

9/9/58 -26-
Mr. Vardaman said that when he found himself in disagreement
with Mr. Mills and Mr. Hayes it caused him to think very seriously.
He agreed with Mr. Hayes in the latter's analysis of the factual
situation but he reached somewhat different conclusions as to what
the System should do in the circumstances. As to the views expressed
by Mr. Mills, he did not think that in times like this, or in fact at
any other time, the System could build a monetary policy around the
Government securities market.
Mr. Vardaman went on to say that if one should look back a
couple of years from now it seemed likely that he would regard the
San Francisco Bank discount rate action as one of the most commendable
and farsighted moves that the System had made. He did not think that
this was a time to retreat from the policy thus initiated. He con
sidered it fortunate that there had been initial disagreement as to
the discount rate level and that there had been a split rate. At
present, however, he would like very much to see the other Reserve
Banks seriously consider going along up to the present level and
being poised to go still higher. As he said at the last Committee
meeting, he felt reasonably sure that shock treatment would be
necessary later this fall, and the shock treatment would be lessened
a bit if there could be a uniform discount rate at 2 per cent or
even higher. He did not feel that he and Mr. Hayes were in dis
agreement as to whether there was going to be inflation, the

9/9/58 -27
difference of opinion being principally as to the imminence of
inflation. Personally, he felt that inflation was inevitable
unless restrictive action was taken at the proper time, and that
time, in his opinion, was already here. He believed that the
public was ahead of the statistics. With the landing of troops
in Lebanon the Government established a frame of mind on the part
of the buying public which would cause them, and also borrowers,
to seek to obtain their requirements at the earliest possible time
in anticipation of a price rise that was bound to come with United
States military operations being carried on in various parts of the
world. The psychological effect of those operations was bound to
sting and spur the public. He would like to have money rates at a
point where only necessitous borrowing would be indulged in, and
prices at a point where only necessitous buying would take place.
The Federal Reserve System should not retreat from its present
policy and it should maintain reserves at the level of zero to
slightly minus. The System should not attempt to rig a market
just for the benefit of the Treasury when it was very apparent,
at least to his view, what was going to happen. This was that the
country was going to have inflation and that there must be serious
shock treatment.
Mr. Vardaman felt that it would be impractical to attempt
to control wage pressures and that, in fact, there would be greater

9/9/58 -28
pressures. Therefore, he felt that the Committee ought to go on as
at present, facing the fact that it was confronted with inflationary
pressures not only now but increasingly so with the passage of time.
In the light of that prospect, the System should act accordingly.
Mr. Leach said that the recession in the Fifth District was
marked by a severe decline in the coal mining areas of West Virginia
and a lesser but still substantial decline in the heavy industries
of Maryland. Declines in Virginia and the Carolinas were much less
pronounced. Textile and tobacco manufacturing are important in
dustries in the latter three States, and textiles had declined before
the general recession had started while tobacco manufacturing is to
a considerable extent depression resistant. In recent months there
had been continuing and widespread recovery in the Fifth District
but bituminous coal mining had not yet recovered to a satisfactory
level. Current production in this industry was-running about 20
per cent under its year-ago volume. There had been significant
gains reported in a variety of other industries including construction,
furniture, lumber, and hosiery and there had also been signs of
improvement in some parts of the long-depressed textile industry.
All told, there had been a marked improvement in practically all
areas of the Fifth District. No evidence was seen, however, that
the rate of expansion had been too rapid.
With respect to policy, Mr. Leach said he thought the System
was correct in shifting to less ease fairly early in the recovery

9/9/58 -29
phase. Indeed, the System's actions may have already had some
slight effect in dampening inflationary sentiment. Certainly,
the System had made it clear that its policy had shifted toward
less ease. It was true that there was now substantial depreciation
in the investment portfolios of commercial banks which might limit
their liquidation of longer issues. But holdings of bills and
certificates by weekly reporting member banks are now $3.7 billion
above last November and nearly $1 billion above their level at the
end of 195. This might seem to be a cause for further tightening
now but he was impressed by the rapidity with which the System had
moved in this direction in the last several weeks. It did not now
have much room left to move as far as the availability of reserves
was concerned before the reserve data would indicate a posture of
restraint. He thought it would be unfortunate to take such a posture
at this time when further recovery was desirable. Specifically,
while he realized that time was running out on this period of
relative freedom of action before the next Treasury financing, he
would not be in favor at this time of open market operations that
would produce net borrowed reserves. In his opinion, the System
had gone far enough and had moved fast enough for the time being.
Logically, Mr. Leach said, the next tightening move should
take the form of an increase in the discount rate above 2 per cent,
but in view of the substantial tightening that had already occurred

9/9/58 -30
he thought that this should wait. Under present conditions it would
be extremely difficult for the Government securities market to
stabilize if the System should continue to follow one tightening
move with another. The forthcoming Treasury operation would be
difficult in any event and he did not think that the System should
intensify the difficulty without a clear case for further action.
At present, he saw no clear case.
Mr. Leach said that he expected to recommend an increase to
2 per cent in the discount rate of the Richmond Bank at the regular
monthly meeting of the board of directors to be held the day after
tomorrow. A discount rate of 2 per cent would be quite a bit below
the bill rate at the moment but thus far a 1-3/4 per cent rate had
not led to any administrative problems at the discount window. Two
weeks ago the full Richmond Board of Directors was unanimously of
the opinion that action on the discount rate at that time would be
premature and he could not say what the directors would do this week.
The policy directive, he felt, was satisfactory as presently written.
In this connection, he suggested that if the System should move over
into a policy of restraint, or even to a tighter policy than at
present, it might be that the Committee would not be following the
directive, which calls for operations with a view to fostering
recovery.
Mr. Leedy stated that the trends in the Tenth District con
tinued to be very much the same as he reported at the last meeting

9/9/58 -31
and at previous meetings. It seemed to him that the question
whether the System had gone too far and too fast as far as
reserves were concerned was now a moot question, for the System
had arrived at a certain point and it seemed to him that it could
not retrace its steps. While he would not advocate at this time
going any further, on the other hand he would certainly advocate
that the System not attempt in any wise to move in any opposite
direction. The next question, it seemed to him, was whether the
level of discount rates on which the System had embarked was high
enough. If time permitted before the next Treasury financing and
if any further policy move was to be made, it seemed to him that
perhaps a rise above 2 per cent would be the logical move.
Mr. Leedy went on to say that he could not escape the
feeling that what appeared to be a babble of voices within the
System was not serving the System's best interest. To him, the
movement that had taken place with regard to reserves was not at
all consistent with what should have been done by this time with
respect to the discount rate. In order to be effective he thought
that the System ought to be speaking with more unison than had
been the case since the last Committee meeting. The present situa
tion might be creating a condition such as to undermine to some
extent the things that the System was attempting to accomplish.
At present he did not have in mind suggesting to the Kansas City

9/9/58 -32
Board of Directors that a further move be made on the discount rate
but he noted that at the last directors' meeting there was some
feeling within the board that perhaps even then the establishment
of a 2 per cent rate was not going far enough.
Mr. Leedy went on to say that he subscribed to a great deal
of what Mr. Vardaman had said. From all of the available signs, the
System should not postpone the matter of looking at the possibility
of inflation ahead of it. There were signs of recovery on every
hand, and if the System should wait until there was recovery beyond
any shadow of a doubt it seemed to him that the System would have
lost its opportunity to do the kind of a job that it was supposed
to be doing.
Mr. Allen commented that his report on the Seventh District
would be largely a repetition of what he had said three weeks ago.
Business improvement continued but at a less rapid pace than the
national experience. On the one hand, Iowa showed up very well
indeed, whereas Michigan at the other extreme would be in the throes
of model change-overs through September. Construction awards showed
improvement in the district but nothing like the sharp increase
reported nationally. Department store sales were very strong in
August in many of the Seventh District cities, as nationally, but
Detroit and Milwaukee were laggards. Although employment improved
in the nation as between June and July, it remained practically the

9/9/56 -33-
same in Illinois, Indiana, and Iowa and worsened somewhat in
Michigan and Wisconsin. After a two-week rise as a result of
the Lebanon crisis, prices of agricultural commodities continued
a normal seasonal decline, and the record crops expected this year
would keep prices under heavy downward pressure. Growing conditions
have been excellent throughout the Seventh District except where
drought conditions existed in parts of Michigan, central Wisconsin,
and northwestern Iowa. It was anticipated that increased marketings,
especially crop marketings, would largely offset the price declines
during the last half of this year, with the result that on the whole
farm income in 1958 would be the best since 1954.
Mr. Allen went on to say that improving business activity
and reduced reserve availability were beginning to be reflected in
the operations of Seventh District member banks. Those banks ap-
peared to be expanding their lending to business somewhat faster
than the national pace. However, reserve pressures in the district
had been considerably less than in New York, and Chicago banks
continued to be net suppliers of funds to other areas. Nevertheless,
these banks had been supporting their positions by liquidating
Treasury bills, which had declined by $157 million, or about 40 per
cent, since August 6. Since the increase in discount rates by the
San Francisco and Dallas Reserve Banks, there had been a noticeable
increase in the proportion of Federal funds going to banks in those

9/9/58 -34-
areas. In the month of July, for example, 14 per cent of sales
by Seventh District banks went to banks in the San Francisco and
Dallas districts. In the first ten days of the rate differential,
the proportion rose to 27 per cent.
Mr. Allen said that there had been two directors' meetings
in Chicago since the San Francisco Bank raised its discount rate to
2 per cent. At the first of those meetings, held on August 21, he
recommended, and the directors decided, to take no action on the
rate in recognition of the business situation in the Seventh District.
At the second meeting, held on September , he recommended, and the
4
board of directors decided, that the recovery nationally should be
recognized, in a token way to be sure, by raising the rate to 2 per
cent. In the light of the figures presented by Mr. Young and in the
light of other factors, including the serious inflation of the past
twenty years, the hugh Government deficit now in the offing, and the
requirements of flexible monetary policy, he found it hard to
reconcile a 1-3/4 per cent rate at this time--in Chicago or elsewhere.
Chairman Martin, he recalled, had said that flexible steel is stronger
than iron that breaks--but true flexibility means bending both ways.
Certainly, the System went in the direction of ease very fast and
very far, and the current situation seemed to him to call very clearly
not only for the action which had been taken by this Committee but by
a coordinating movement in the discount rate. The increase to 2 per

9/9/58 -35-
cent was not fully coordinating but at least it went part way.
The Chicago directors, he commented, were not unanimous on the
discount rate change but the reluctance on the part of those
directors who did not wish to raise the rate reflected a feeling
that New York is the main money market. Therefore, those directors
would have preferred for the discount rate action in Chicago to be
coordinated with or to have followed discount rate action in New
York. The reluctance was not based on business conditions in the
Seventh District.
As far as the next few weeks were concerned, Mr. Allen said
that his views were similar to those of Mr. Shepardson. As he saw
it, any movement on reserves probably must be accomplished in the
next week with the Treasury financing imminent, for an even keel
policy ought to begin in about ten days. He would like to see
free reserves in the range of zero to $100 million. However, if
that range could not be achieved by ten days from now, he felt that
the System should try to stay at the level that was achieved by that
time through the period of the Treasury financing.
Mr. Deming said that the Ninth District picture continued to
be one of above national average strength and general pick-up in
activity. Figures in bank debits highlighted this picture. In the
first quarter of this year debits in the district were 2.6 per cent
ahead of the like period in 1957 and in the second quarter the gain

9/9/58 -36-
was 4.8 per cent over a year earlier. July 1958 was 5.4 per cent
ahead of 1957 and the August-to-August comparison should be even
better. Only one or two recent district developments were worthy
of particular note. Against the background of an excellent farm
picture in general, cool wet weather had retarded corn and soy bean
maturity. Without some warm weather or a later than normal fall
frost, there was likely to be another soft corn crop. Even so,
however, farm income would be high this year, and if corn and soy
beans could mature normally a record cash farm income was probable.
A soft corn crop probably would contribute to the prospective hold-
back of feeder cattle for higher prices. Feed supplies in general
were excellent and cattle producers were in a basically strong
position for the coming fall and winter.
Continuing, Mr. Deming said that in the first seven months of
1958 total loans of all district member banks increased 3.5 per cent
as against a rise of 2.7 per cent in the same period of 1957. Most
of the loan increase was at country banks where loans were up 6 per
cent relative to year end as against a 1 per cent gain at city banks.
Incidentally, no inventory borrowing was seen as yet. In the first
seven months of 1958 district member bank investments were up 4.3 per
cent as against a decline of 3.2 per cent last year, with the gain
mostly in longer-term securities. This kind of investment behavior,
he noted, did not indicate a strong liquidity position. Rather, it

9/9/58 -37-
argued for caution in applying restrictive action.
Referring to the discount rate action taken last week by the
Minneapolis Board of Directors, Mr. Deming said that the increase was
made without great enthusiasm but without opposition. He also said
that for the immediate future he would be content to coast along
about as at present with free reserves in the neighborhood of $100
million. He would prefer not to see further restrictive action taken
at this point.
Mr. Mangels reported that on the West Coast business condi-
tions continued to follow a trend of moderate recovery with strength
in construction, including residential, nonresidential, and public,
and Government spending becoming more of a factor. In both July and
August factory output increased more than seasonally with a rise in
average work-week hours. An increase in employment stemmed particu-
larly from construction, aircraft, ordnance, electronic equipment
plants, and State and local government payrolls. Insured unemployment
in six of the States of the district dropped in July, but in the
State of Washington it increased because the new benefits year
started July 6 and a number of old claimants restored themselves
on the rolls. Despite the improvement that had taken place, un-
employment still amounted to about 5.8 per cent of the labor force
in California and in Oregon and Washington the figure was about 9
per cent. This reflects the fact that on the West Coast the labor

9/9/58 -38-
force is increasing more rapidly than the number of jobs. Depart-
ment store sales were 3 per cent better in August than in August a
year ago but automobile sales were down, while agricultural condi-
tions continued to be quite good in all categories except that out-
of-State shipments of California deciduous fruits were down 24 per
cent from a year ago. This was particularly noticeable with respect
to peaches where Georgia so far this year had shipped more than
California, as opposed to last year when its shipments were only
about one-fifth of those from the State of California. Out-of-
State shipments of Washington apples also showed a decline because
of increasing production in eastern areas.
Mr. Mangels said that for the three-week period ending
August 27 business loans were up $109 million with borrowers now
applying for credit in anticipation of an increase in the prime
rate. Real estate loans were up $37 million, which was the largest
increase for any three-week period so far this year. Demand deposits
were up slightly but time deposits reversed their course and were
down $4 million. There was practically no member bank borrowing
at the Federal Reserve Bank during this period.
In the over-all picture, Mr. Mangels said, there were several
questions which caused some concern. First, he was not too sure that
business indicators for August and September would continue to show
the rate of gain that was indicated in July. He wondered whether,

9/9/58 -39-
if there were strikes or if international tensions became greater,
such developments might not have an effect on public psychology
and shake public confidence so as to result in some adjustment in
the rate of business improvement. There was also the question
whether interest rates had risen more than justified by the improve-
ment in business. It might be that the rise in the rate structure
was an indication of less liquidity in the banking system than some
had thought. Also, the bond market was still in not too good shape.
The Treasury would need about $7.5 billion before the end of the
calendar year and one would have to be rather naive to assume that
the banks were not going to have to take a substantial portion of
the new offerings. If there was more than a seasonal demand for
credit and free reserves were at the zero level, there probably
would be considerably more use of the discount window. Mr. Mangels
felt quite sure that the member banks on the West Coast would not
want to come to the discount window; they would do this only as a
last resort and somewhat reluctantly. However, if they were forced
to do so, this might be a drag on credit and have the effect of in-
creasing interest rates further. Therefore, it seemed to him that
if free reserves stayed pretty much at the present level, that is,
in the $100-$200 million range, the System would be easing things
for the Treasury in the coming offering and would be going along
for the time being on an even keel. That was the way in which he

9/9/58 -40-
felt the Committee should approach the next three weeks.
Mr. Irons stated that as he saw it the recovery showed
continued strength nationally, with evidences very clear on that
point. In the Eleventh District a high level of economic activity
continued to prevail, with further improvement in the oil industry.
The agricultural crops were virtually made at this time and he was
told by agriculturists that crops would be better than a year ago
in all the major areas, so agricultural income would be up sub-
stantially. Construction was strong and retail trade good, while
hours in manufacturing were now around 40.8 per week against 39.8
some time ago. The unemployment situation did not show much change.
With the exception of one city (Houston) the district had not been
plagued by unemployment. In Houston the figure was about 7.0 per
cent but in other principal cities it was only running about 4.5
per cent so there was not too much problem in that respect.
Turning to the banking picture, Mr. Irons said that the
demand for credit continued to show improvement, with business loans
up as compared with the same period a year ago to the extent of
about 6 per cent. Loan figures were high and demand strong.
Deposits of individuals, partnerships, and corporations continued
to rise. Discounts from the Reserve Bank were averaging from a
few hundred thousand dollars to around $1 million. Thus, on the

9/9/58 -41-
whole conditions in the district were very good and people were
looking forward to a strong fourth quarter.
Mr. Irons went on to say that at a special meeting of the
Board of Directors of the Dallas Bank which was called promptly
after the San Francisco Bank had acted on the discount rate, the
directors unanimously and enthusiastically voted to change the
rate. In fact, there was some minority support for a rate of
2-1/4 per cent, although no actual motion to that effect was
presented. These sentiments, Mr. Irons said, were put in the form
of comments to him which indicated that, although those directors
making the comments agreed with the action that had been taken,
they felt that it might have been a mistake not to go to 2-1/4 per
cent. The action on the discount rate was not taken solely on the
basis of regional indicators but rather on the basis of the over-
all situation as the directors saw it.
Mr. Irons said that he was rather satisfied with open market
policy in the past two or three weeks. Disregarding the volume of
free reserves but watching rate movements, particularly rates in
the short-term market, he felt that the results of open market opera-
tions were not too much out of line with what the Committee had
anticipated. At the last meeting, he recalled, he had spoken against
trying to pinpoint agreement on a zero level of reserves. However,

9/9/58 -42-
open market policy definitely had moved away from ease, although
perhaps not far enough. His own feeling was that the System should
not relax the movement toward restraint that it had initiated, and
that the System had not gone too far. He would like to see the
System continue in the direction of the movement that had been
initiated. There was not too much time remaining before the
Treasury financing when policy would have to get on an even keel,
and in his opinion it would be a mistake to permit a condition of
ease in the market sometime around, or prior to, the Treasury
financing period and then move away from ease as soon as the
financing was over. Certain of the Dallas directors, he noted,
had spoken very clearly along that line. If the System was going
in the direction of restraint it should do so honestly and without
rigging the market so as not to have banks come in at a comparatively
favorable rate and then find the System exerting restraint. Mr.
Irons agreed with Mr. Rouse that if float or some other aberration
should cause conditions in the market to ease the Management of
the Account should attempt offsetting action so as not to go into
the even keel period on a basis of unsustainable ease. He would
like to see the reserve position move into net borrowed reserves
and he would have no qualms about how rapidly and steadily the
System moved. Thus, he would bring banks into a position where
they would use the discount window. Mr. Irons concluded by saying

9/9/58 -43-
that he saw no need for a change in the policy directive at this
time.
Mr. Erickson said that economic conditions in the First
District were not as buoyant as in the nation as a whole. The New
England manufacturing index for July showed no change from June;
while textiles and leather were up slightly, primary metals were
down. Construction contract awards in July were up 6 per cent
over a year ago but this increase was less than the increase
nationally and the main strength was in public works. Residential
construction was 1 per cent less than a year ago. For July, the
seasonal drop in nonagricultural employment was less than a year
ago, while the average hourly work week in factories was the same
in July as in June. Department store sales for eight consecutive
weeks ending August 30 were ahead of similar weeks last year. The
index was up 15 points and this was the highest point in a year.
Deposits of banks were up slightly but loans in July were off
slightly and were still behind a year ago. The Reserve Bank's
survey of mutual savings banks in July showed that deposit balances
were up more than 6 per cent with deposits up and withdrawals down.
Real estate loan balances were up 8 per cent over last year.
Mr. Erickson said that at the directors' meeting which was
held yesterday it was recommended that there be an increase in the

9/9/58 -44-
discount rate but the directors did not see fit to follow that
recommendation. There was a feeling that conditions in the First
District did not warrant a move at this time. He did not know
whether it would have made any difference if he had been at the
meeting himself. The matter probably would be brought up again
at the meeting on September 22.
Mr. Erickson said he was inclined to agree with Mr. Rouse
that the System ought to try to absorb any excess reserves that
might be created by float. He assumed that the System would only
have a week or ten days before entering an even keel policy on
account of the Treasury financing, and he would hope that it might
be possible to get free reserves down to a level around $100 mil-
lion. He saw no reason for a change in the policy directive at
this time.
Mr. Szymczak said that this had been one of the most
educational meetings he had ever attended for the discussion
reflected the way in which the recession had developed according
to geographical areas. As all were aware, this had not been a
recession of uniform proportions throughout the nation. He
recalled that there had been similar discussions during the
period when the discount rate was being reduced. The latest
figures, he noted, showed improvement in the econony earlier than
had been expected. It was satisfying to see these figures but

9/9/58 -45-
there was still the problem of geographical upturn and the problem
of a lagging behind in the durable goods area, steel, automobiles,
and plant and equipment expenditures. It is always inevitable
during an upturn, he said, that the timing of policy has to coincide
with when the upturn starts in order to make that policy effective
because of the liquidity that has been provided to the banking system.
Thus, the System is always bound to get all kinds of protests.
Mr. Szymczak said he agreed with the policy that had been
followed, However, he did not think that it would be possible to
get down to a zero level of reserves during the ensuing period. He
would keep reserves around $100 million or a little higher but not
above $200 million. In other words, he would keep them about as at
present to the extent that it was possible to do so. Experience, he
said, had shown that the discount rate is a national rate, for a
change in the rate has repercussions all over the country. In other
words, the effects are visible on a national basis. Originally, it
appeared to have been the intent of Congress that there should be
different discount rates in the different Federal Reserve districts
so that discounts would be more or less available according to local
conditions, but over the years that did not happen and any discount
rate change reflects itself in the market generally. Therefore, in
a sense it seemed academic to discuss whether the discount rate should
of should not be changed at the remaining Banks, for the rate is now

9/9/58 -46-
2 per cent as far as the market is concerned. Whether to go further
on the discount rate would depend on improvement in the economy. In
his opinion, that improvement would not develop as fast over the
balance of the year as the figures would seem to indicate that it had
proceeded since this spring. However, he felt that there would con-
tinue to be improvement.
Mr. Szymczak said he would continue the open market policy that
had been initiated and followed. He would keep free reserves in the
$100-$200 million range until it was known what the Treasury was going
to do, for that was one of the things that must be taken into account.
Mr. Balderston said that he had found this meeting a most
intriguing session, partly because he had heard so much with which he
agreed and partly because the comments of some of his colleagues with
which he disagreed were useful nudges to one's complacency. To him
the calendar posed a crisis that called for prompt and unified System
action. He had always been a strong believer in the structure of the
Federal Reserve System and the decentralized nature of its operations,
but there are times of crisis when that structure is a weakness. The
present time, he felt, was such a crisis. On the one side, there was
the basis for an inflationary upsurge. Economic activity as measured
by the index of industrial production was half way back to the boom
peak. Also, although some figures might indicate that the money
supply had increased only 1-1/2 per cent since last year, actually

9/9/58 -47-
he felt sure that the increase had been greater, for the 1-1/2 per
cent figure did not take into account near-money equivalents. Some
figure such as the one quoted by Mr. Young at the last Committee
meeting seemed more realistic; if time deposits were taken into
account, the rate of increase of the money supply since the beginning
of the year would be found to have been over 12 per cent. Furthermore,
the Congress had authorized spending in excess of income to the extent
of $11 or $12 billion for the fiscal year and this has an impact on
the economy even before actual Government spending expands sub-
stantially. It seemed to him that what the Congress did before it
went home increased significantly the problem of monetary control
because the very expectation of Government business and subcontracts
stimulates planning activity and borrowing in such a way as to
aggravate the problem. Then, one must think also of the auto union
negotiations referred to previously during this meeting. If wages
were to go up, one might expect higher automobile prices as a result
and the beginning of a new wage pattern.
Continuing his analysis of the situation, Mr. Balderston com-
mented that the Treasury must by September 25 decide how to seek new
funds in a capital market disturbed by uncertainty, an uncertainty
to which the System in the discharge of its own functions had con-
tributed. This uncertainty should be reduced by all means available
to the System between now and September 25.

9/9/58 -48-
All this led to the question, Mr. Balderson said, of how
the current crisis should be handled. Although for the last two
months he had desired zero free reserves as a target because he
felt that the free reserve figure was incompatible with the needs
of the situation, he now found himself in the position of desiring
a compromise simply because time was of the essence. He believed
the use of the free reserve figure is the best language available
to the Committee, although he deplored reliance upon that one figure
by the market. Therefore, the anticipated rise in free reserves to
an average of $182 million for this statement week caused him much
concern.
Mr. Balderston suggested that the Desk be asked, if possible,
to reduce the $182 million figure by action today and tomorrow to
such extent as might be feasible. His suggestion contemplated a
level of perhaps around $100-$150 million which would announce to
the capital market that the System was going to hold a steady hand
for a while, at least through the next Treasury financing. Of
course, the Committee could not say that in words, but if the Desk
could establish a figure of $100-$150 million and hold that for two
or three weeks, it would tell the market what the market needed to
know.
In Mr. Balderston's opinion the time had come for the System
to have a unified position regarding the discount rate, even though

9/9/58 -49-
three weeks ago, or thereabouts, there might have been some virtue
in a split rate. Now, however, a split rate was something that
could not be defended before the court of public opinion. It gave
the appearance that the decentralized Federal Reserve System could
not get itself together to reach a decision in a time of crisis.
If unity were not achieved within the relatively near future, the
Treasury would be left with an impossible climate for its financing
and the Federal Reserve System would be responsible for that. By
failing to achieve a uniform rate policy the System would neither
be fighting inflation nor helping to see that the Treasury got the
money it must have. This week, Mr. Balderston said, was the time
for decision.
Chairman Martin, in expressing his views as to the System's
position and problems, said he believed this was a time when what
he had said at the last Committee meeting was again pertinent. There
would, of course, always be honest differences of opinion and dif-
ferences in judgments, which is a very proper thing in a system such
as the Federal Reserve System. However, it was his conviction that
the problem the System was facing today was that of inflation in a
bigger way than anything that had been faced during his own life-
time. With respect to the Government securities market, the summer
had been a very difficult one and he had great sympathy and under-
standing for the problems faced by the Secretary of the Treasury

9/9/58 -50-
and the Under Secretary. As he had stated to the Committee on
previous occasions, if the Treasury had not had men of the caliber,
understanding, and insight of Messrs. Anderson and Baird, the System
would have been in even greater difficulty.
Chairman Martin said that if he were doing it on his own he
would fix a 2-1/4 per cent discount rate at the present time. The
problem was one of dealing with human nature and people always tend
to prefer disagreeable facts whose effects will be felt in the future
to a disagreeable remedy in the present. The remedy for the inflation
which had gotten ahead of the country over a period of twenty years
was bound to be disagreeable but the problem required t aking a stand.
Certainly, the Federal Reserve System could not handle the fiscal,
debt management, or budget policies of the Government, but as to its
own posture there should be no misunderstanding. He was glad that
the System's posture was fairly clear but wished that it was more
clear. Referring to the question of an adjustment of 1/4 per cent
in the discount rate, he said no thinking man could really believe
that an increase of that size could brake or destroy the recovery
process if it was really under way. Nobody could really know what
was going to happen with regard to the current negotiations in the
automobile industry but if wages should get even further ahead of
productivity than they were now he did not know at what point it
would be possible to retrace steps. In some respects he saw
certain similarities to 1929.

9/9/58 -51-
The Chairman emphasized that he had always been a vigorous
advocate of flexible monetary policy. He had favored moving down
when it became clear that the economy was declining, although he
did not think that the Federal Reserve System caused the decline.
As to the political front, he said it was constantly being thrown
up to him that the System was in jeopardy because its actions might
be so unpalatable that the System would be destroyed. Many times
this summer he had been told that if the System did not move in
certain ways it would lose its independence, to which his stock
answer had been: "Then let's get it over with. Make the System
an arm of the Treasury and stop worrying about its independence."
If those of us who are in the System were to be nonentities, if
they were not to play a role involving judgment but were here just
to serve to finance the Treasury under whatever conditions might
arise, nationally or internationally, certainly the purely operating
problems of the System would be much simpler. It would be a situa-
tion where the Treasury and the Federal Reserve worked side by side
with no clear distinctions as to authority.
In further comments, the Chairman said he was somewhat
disturbed about a few Reserve Bank directors taking the position
that the open market policy of the System was wrong. Of course,
they were entitled to their views but open market policy is determined
by the Federal Open Market Committee. If it should ever reach the

9/9/58 -52-
point where open market policy was being determined by individual
directors per se, and this became known, there would eventually be
some revamping of the System setup. Prior to enactment of the
Banking Acts of 1933 and 1935 there was unlimited discussion of
this particular point and that discussion brought out the desire,
without impugning anyone's integrity, to remove bankers and busi-
nessmen from control of the supply of money. That was the whole
intent and purpose of the relevant sections of those two statutes.
It was important, the Chairman said, to face up to the
fact that the Federal Reserve System could preserve its independence
ad infinitum if those in it chose to be complete nonentities and just
did the bidding of others. However, he for one would not care to
participate in that type of operation. The System, he felt, had an
obligation to adopt a posture which would make it clear that the
System was pursuing a firm line and was willing to stand up and be
counted. He again expressed the view that it was important that
those responsible for System policies should not let their judgment
be warped by fear of the System losing its independence.
Continuing, Chairman Martin commented that during the
discussions of the easy money policy some people had charged that
he was not always consistent. However, he had always taken the
position that when business was declining it was appropriate to
make easing adjustments, and when business was moving up also to

9/9/58 -53-
make firming adjustments. Likewise, he had intended to make it
clear that he did not believe monetary policy was the controlling
factor on either side. He recalled that, toward the end of last
year and in January when business was moving down and other things
besides monetary policy were needed to create recovery, he made
the comment that during all the time he had been in the Federal
Reserve System the real problem came when the situation called for
moving up. Sometimes it is hard to make a start moving down, but
when the start is made it is possible to go down almost to zero.
When you are moving up, however, resistance is encountered all along
the line. He could go back over his seven years in the System and
see how this factor had come into the picture time and again.
Periods when System policy had been moving upward were times of
struggle against charges that the proposed actions would result
in collapse. Naturally, of course, the System had to assume a risk,
for it would always be blamed if things went wrong. All he was
saying and hoping for the System was that it would stand up and be
counted, and would not dilly-dally unduly about the risks and
particularly about political jeopardy. If the System should lose
its independence in the process of fighting for sound money, that
would indeed be a great feather in its cap and ultimately its
success would be great. He happened to believe that the American
people want sound money and that they would support the System

9/9/58 -54-
when they saw what was really involved. Certainly, it could not
be said that there was sound money when the credit of the United
States Government was endangered as it had been in the last few
months, but he did not believe that Federal Reserve action had
been responsible for that. The Government securities market, he
said, ought to be better organized, for it is not properly put
together today. It is not properly regulated and it does not have
the depth, breadth, and resiliency it should have. Accepting all
of those things, the real factor of unsettlement that the Govern-
ment securities market had been faced with in the last six months
went far deeper than Federal Reserve policy. It had been faced
with the first intimations of the beginning of a flight from the
dollar. If this should continue, it would change the whole structure
of the money market. Ultimately the Treasury would not be able to
sell securities and would be on a perpetual treadmill. The Federal
Reserve System might not be able to stop those developments but it
should do everything it could in the battle to try to stop them.
Chairman Martin said that, as he understood the feeling of
the majority, open market policy was about right. The trend should
be in the direction of a zero level of reserves.
Mr. Shepardson noted that in the discussion around the table
the phrase "where we are" had been stated several times. Pointing
out that free reserves were close to $200 million, he asked whether

9/9/58 -55-
that was a temporary aberration.
Mr. Rouse said he would interpret "where we are" as being
better signified by the average of free reserves for the last
statement week, which was $128 million. Aberrations in the Treasury
balance, primarily, had thrown free reserves off somewhat and the
figure was liable to fluctuate.
Chairman Martin observed that for the last several meetings
it had been agreed that the free reserve figure itself is not too
good a benchmark. However, it had been the consensus of the Com-
mittee that the Account Management should be trending toward zero.
Some had been "higher on the totem pole" than others but the trend
was clearly in that direction. Only one or two persons around the
table today had suggested going below the zero level. Therefore,
it appeared that open market operations could be based on trending
toward zero as reflecting the majority position.
Mr. Hayes raised a question, stating that as he understood
it the majority position would favor "staying about where we are."
After Chairman Martin commented that he had been endeavoring
to express the majority opinion in terms of a trend, he said he
assumed there was no disagreement with the thought that the System
should maintain an even keel operation through the period of the
forthcoming Treasury financing. No disagreement was expressed with
that statement.

9/9/58 -56-
In the discussion that ensued Mr. Thomas observed that it
would be difficult to get to the zero level next week because of
the usual mid-month bulge in float and a probable sharp drop in
Treasury balances at the Reserve Banks for two or three days, and
Mr. Vardaman suggested that the matter might be put in terms of
"from where we are trending toward zero." Mr. Riefler suggested
putting the matter in terms of "an even keel" which would signify
endeavoring to maintain free reserves in the neighborhood of $128
million through the Treasury financing, and Mr. Thomas commented
that such a course could be in fact quite restrictive in a tax week,
when a high degree of liquidity is desired. Actually, that would be
"trending toward zero."
Chairman Martin then commented that the System did not have
much time left before the Treasury financing and that thinking in
terms of "an even keel" was perhaps the best way to look at it,
bearing in mind that the Committee would not like to see an even
keel projected into an upsurge of reserves.
Mr. Shepardson said that he would still be in favor of
"trending toward zero," as originally suggested, and Mr. Robertson
agreed but added the words "if possible."
Mr. Rouse stated that there might be an opportunity to get
rid of a good part of the bulge in reserves through sales to foreign
accounts and through letting bill maturities run off, as well as by

9/9/58 -57-
selling bills to dealers. It would be possible to do a good job,
he thought, and the Account Management would do the best it could.
Nevertheless, operations might result in higher reserve figures. He
felt sure that he understood what the majority of the Committee de-
sired, that is, what it was trying to bring about, and he felt that
this could be accomplished. However, as Mr. Thomas had pointed out,
it was quite doubtful whether it would be possible to get free
reserves too much lower in the ensuing period.
Chairman Martin stated to Mr. Rouse that the Committee would
have to rely on his judgment from the standpoint of the stability of
the market.
Mr. Rouse then stated that he would think of the matter in
terms of trending toward zero, with the qualification of avoiding a
serious upset in the market.
Mr. Robertson said that, despite the difficulties with respect
to terminology, he felt that there was actually general agreement with-
in the Committee. Use of the term "trending toward zero" did not mean
necessarily that it would be possible to get there. The Account
Management would do the best it could, but developments might work
out in the other direction.
Mr. Hayes then commented that he continued to feel that the
majority wanted to keep "about where we are" in terms of atmosphere.
In discussion based on Mr. Hayes' comment, Mr. Robertson
stated that the trend should be downward but that if this was not

9/9/58 -58-
possible in the light of market conditions the Account Management,
of course, could not do it. The Chairman referred again to the
maintenance of an even keel, and Mr. Shepardson inquired whether
continuing to exert some pressure would still be contemplated.
Mr. Hayes responded that an even keel meant an even keel
to his way of thinking; he did not think one could say "even keel" and
keep exerting greater pressure.
Mr. Szymczak commented that an effort to keep free reserves
around $125 million would mean, according to the projections, that the
Desk would have a problem of absorbing considerable reserves.
Mr. Hayes then commented that if the Management of the Account
tried to get the free reserve figure below $128 million it would have
to put a considerable and increasing pressure on the market.
Mr. Shepardson said he would accept that statement and that it
would be agreeable to him just to continue the degree of pressure now
being exerted.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re-
serve Bank of New Ycrk until otherwise
directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges
(including replacement of maturing securities, and
allowing maturities to run off without replacement)
for the System Open Market Account in the open market,
or, in the case of maturing securities, by direct
exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary in the
light of current and prospective economic conditions
and the general credit situation of the country, with

9/9/58 -59-
a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in the market
to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to fostering
conditions in the money market conducive to balanced
economic recovery, and (c) to the practical administra-
tion of the Account; provided that the aggregate amount
of securities held in the System Account (including
commitments for the purchase or sale of securities for
the Account) at the close of this date, other than
special short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the
Treasury, shall not be increased or decreased by more than
$1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with
discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue
participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such
amounts of special short-term certificates of indebtedness
as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total
amount of such certificates held at any one time by the
Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate
$500 million.
Mr. Rouse referred to the speculative situation in the Govern-
ment securities market during the summer and said that a meeting of
the Technical Committee of the New York Money Market, the appointment
of which had previously been reported to the Committee, had been
called for next Monday. It had been suggested to the Committee that
an appropriate subject for study would be the question of the possi-
bility of avoiding a recurrence of the conditions which brought
about the speculative fever in the market. Whether anything would
come out of it was an open question, but the committee was on notice.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York was preparing a memorandum on
the matter of a factual nature for the use of the committee and
copies would be furnished to the Federal Open Market Committee.

9/9/58 -60-
It was agreed that the next regular meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, September 30, 1958,
at 10:00 a.m.
No objection was interposed to Vice President Tow of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City attending the next two meetings
of the Federal Open Market Committee as an observer in the absence
of Mr. Leedy, or to First Vice President Wayne of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond attending as an observer in the absence of W. Leach.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
ecre ,