A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Monday, November 10, 1958, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Irons
Mr. Leach
Mr. Mangels
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Messrs. Erickson, Allen, Johns, and Deming,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Bopp, Bryan, and Leedy, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Atlanta, and Kansas City, respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Daane, Walker, and Young, Associate
Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Special Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Associate Adviser, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Keir, Acting Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Roosa, Abbott, and Tow, Vice Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York,
St. Louis, and Kansas City, respectively

11/10/58 -2
Messrs. Balles, Baughman, and Einzig,
Assistant Vice Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland,
Chicago, and San Francisco, re
spectively
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Willis, Anderson, and Atkinson,
Economic Advisers of the Federal Reserve
Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, and
Atlanta, respectively
Mr. Parsons, Director of Research, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
held on October 21, 1958, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York covering open market operations during the period October 21
through November 3, 1958, and a supplemental report covering the period
from November 3 through November 7, 1958. Copies of both reports have
been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Mr. Rouse reported that the System Open Market Account had been
fairly active in purchasing Treasury bills and writing repurchase agree
ments during the past three weeks; a net total of $492 million Treasury
bills was purchased, and $57 million repurchase agreements were put on
the books. Repurchase agreements were used rather extensively because
of their usefulness in adapting to the large day-to-day swings in
reserve figures. The Committee's objectives were achieved through

11/10/58 -3
these operations. Free reserves were expected to have averaged
in the neighborhood of $75 to $80 million, and the money market
atmosphere had been generally firm or even tight. A few days of
easy money market conditions developed at the end of October, when
a very large volume of funds flowed into the central reserve city
banks from the country banks. This flow of funds presumably repre
sented excess reserves that the country banks had accumulated earlier
in their reserve averaging period, and they promptly flowed back to
the country banks at the beginning of November.
The U. S. Government securities market had been quiet as it
awaited the Treasury's financing announcement. Regular Treasury bills
had traded in a range of 2-1/2 to 2-3/4 per cent. On Friday evening
the Treasury announced that it planned to offer $3 billion of June
1959 tax-anticipation Treasury bills at auction on November 14, and
it also announced that it would make known its plans for the December
refunding on November 18. The press release also mentioned that the
Treasury was planning to issue more Treasury bills, although it was
not specific as to its plans. Mr. Rouse pointed out that the 13-week
Treasury bill cycle would be rounded out at $1.8 billion per issue
this week. The Treasury was a bit afraid to attempt the full $4 to
$4.5 billion of cash financing in January in one operation, and it
had, therefore, been thinking of raising about $2.1 billion of the
total through Treasury bills, beginning within the next few weeks.

11/10/58 -4
One method under consideration was a program that would gradually
convert regular Treasury bills to a 17-week cycle over the next
three or four months. Another approach would be to issue 98- or
120-day bills in a single lump amount while continuing to roll over
the 13-week bill maturities. If the Treasury should convert to a
120-day bill cycle, the tentative plan was that each issue should
amount to $1.5 billion.
Mr. Rouse said that current projections at New York estimated
about $100 million of free reserves in the week ending November 19
after allowing for redemption of approximately $80 million of the
November 13 Treasury bills. The Board staff's estimate of free re
serves was somewhat higher but, in any event, it would be necessary
for the Account Management to "play by ear" because of the uncertain
ties in the projections and in the market atmosphere.
At the conclusion of Mr. Rouse's report, the Chairman asked
him if the American Bankers Association had said anything to the
Treasury about a new Treasury bill cycle. Mr. Rouse replied that he
wasn't sure that the ABA Committee had discussed this proposal.
Secretary's note Following the
meeting Mr. Rouse checked the ABA Com
mittee recommendations and sent word to
Chairman Martin that the Committee
reported that it had considered the
"issuance of additional weekly bills"
but believed "that it would be better
to meet the problem (the Treasury's
January cash needs) by making an
attractive offering" of other securities.

11/10/58
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the open market transactions during
the period October 21 through Novem
ber 7, 1958, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
Mr. Rouse then referred to a letter that had been addressed
to Chairman Martin by Congressman Wright Patman on October 1, 1958,
in which Mr. Patman referred to tabulations of data sent to him
covering System Open Market Account transactions during 1957 and
earlier years and raised a number of questions concerning figures
of "purchases or sales as agent for other banks, institutions, or
Government agencies." Mr. Rouse noted that the letter from Mr.
Patman revealed some apparent misunderstandings on Mr. Patman's
part of the tabulations that had been sent to him earlier, particularly
in distinguishing between transactions of the System Open Market Ac
count and those executed by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as
agent for foreign accounts and for Treasury investment accounts. He
then read a draft of reply that explained the difference between
System Account and agency transactions and that called Mr. Patman's
attention to the fact that some of the data he requested had already
been supplied to him.
Mr. Riefler stated that, while Mr. Patman's letter evidently
showed confusion as to the figures that had been furnished to him,
it seemed clear that he had intended to ask for additional figures
showing transactions in Government securities executed by the Federal

11/10/58 -6
Reserve Banks during the year 1957 for foreign accounts, Treasury
accounts, and member bank and other accounts. It was Mr. Riefler's
view that the draft letter presented by Mr. Rouse should be revised
to inform Mr. Patman that these data would be compiled and furnished
to him as soon as the tabulations were completed.
There was a discussion of the extent to which it was desirable
for the System to undertake large amounts of work in tabulating work
at the request of Congressman Patman, at the conclusion of which there
was agreement with Chairman Martin's suggestion that in this instance
it would be desirable to proceed to compile the information that Mr.
Patman intended to ask for in his letter. It was understood that a
revised draft of reply would be prepared and distributed to the members
of the Committee with a view to further discussion of the matter at the
next meeting.
At Chairman Martin's request, and in supplementation of the
staff memorandum distributed under date of November 7, 1958, Mr. Young
made the following statement on the economic situation:
As a group, major indicators of economic activity are
still showing upsweep, but more diversity of month-to-month
movement among individual indicators is appearing and the
over-all pace of rise seems to have slowed some. For some
months, the averages of prices at wholesale and retail have
been about stable, reflecting offsetting movements of in
dustrial material prices and prices of farm products and
foods--the former up and the latter down.
The rise of industrial production in October is now
estimated at one index point over September. This is a
smaller rise than earlier projected and reflects mainly

11/10/58
three elements: hold-back of output through work stop
pages in autos, glass, and farm machinery; cessation of
advance in business equipment output; and decline in fuel
output--i.e., petroleum and coal. October paper board
output and freight car loading reached a new high, but
electric power production about maintained its September
level. With auto output rising sharply in November, some
new advance occurring in equipment lines, and turnaround
in fuel output, a November rise in the industrial produc
tion index of two points seems possible at this early stage.
Construction activity, as indexed by the value of work
put in place, seasonally adjusted, rose 2-1/2 per cent in
October to an all-time high of nearly $51. billion--3 per
cent above last year's high level. Private residential,
commercial, and public utility construction continued upward
and public construction advanced further. Private industrial
construction, after 13 months of unbroken decline, showed no
change.
Nonfarm employment in October, counting strikers as
employed, rose somewhat further and unemployment dropped
300,000 to a total of 3.8 million, giving an unemployment
rate of about 7.1 per cent. Continued unemployment claims
again declined in October and initial claims showed the
usual seasonal movement. The average workweek in manufactur
ing receded one-third of an hour to 39.5 hours, in consequence
of work stoppages in some durable goods industries and some
what reduced output schedules in others. In recent months,
employment in trades, services, and communications seems
to be showing less upward strength than earlier in the re
covery movement.
The flow of goods into the hands of consumers slowed
significantly in September. In October, lagging sales at
department stores and the lagging availability of new model
cars for retail delivery suggest little or no rise from
September for October retail sales.
After maintaining stability at a seasonally adjusted
rate of $16.7 billion from May through August, U. S. exports
fell sharply in September to a little under a $16 billion
rate, or to about the level of February-April. Additional
rise in imports in September and October suggests a further
shrinkage of the export surplus. This development is the
consequence of domestic recovery, stability to modest
recession in Europe in activity, a leveling out of Canadian
recovery, and continuing foreign exchange difficulties of
nonindustrial countries.

11/10/58
Tapering off of business inventory liquidation has
been a feature of domestic developments in recent months.
For the manufacturing sector, it is now evident that this
has reflected primarily a turnaround from liquidation to
inventory accumulation, beginning in July, in the auto
mobile industry. In distribution, inventory turnaround
began in June in nonautomotive lines, but at automotive
distributors liquidation continued through October.
Altogether these figures suggest further room for upward
stimulus to the economy from inventory trends.
The McGraw-Hill fall survey of business plans for
capital expenditures, just released, shows only a small
increase in such expenditures for 1959. But in the fall
of 1954, a similar survey projected for 1955 a 5 per cent
decline in expenditures. Manufacturing businesses project
a decline in capital outlays for next year, while commercial,
transportation, communications and mining businesses antici
pate an increase. Manufacturing businesses, however, project
a sizable increase--9 per cent--in their physical volume of
sales for 1959. Manufacturing businesses also report a sub
stantial proportion of existing capacity to be of an age less
than modern. Over half of present manufacturing capacity,
the McGraw-Hill indications are, was put in place prior to
1945 and over two-thirds before 1950.
The unevenness of recent movement of economic indicators
is occasioning in various quarters searching reappraisal of
the outlook, with some toning down of optimistic projections
because of inability to foresee forces that will convert
recovery into a period of expansionary boom. One such review,
symptomatic of reaction to slackening and more unevenness in
recovery pace, appeared in the New York Times of yesterday.
At this relatively advanced phase of recovery development,
skeptical outlook reappraisals are probably to be expected
in increasing numbers. It is to be hoped that they will
exert some salutary influence on the inflationary psychology
of markets, particularly financial markets.
Mr. Thomas then made the following statement with regard to
financial developments:
From the standpoint of the more immediate views of Fed
eral Reserve policy, financial developments have continued
to be generally satisfactory during recent weeks. A relatively
even keel has been maintained with respect to the availability

11/10/58
of reserves without appearing to result in undue re
straint upon or excessive encouragement to bank credit
expansion. The half a point rise in the discount rate
to conform to the realities of the market caused no
evident adjustment in the market. Yet in some broader
respects the situation is ominous with potentials for
unfavorable developments that will be difficult to con
tain.
Government securities markets have been generally
firmer since the latter part of September. Long-term rates
have been fairly stable, while short-term rates have de
clined. Additional Treasury cash issues have been well
absorbed--mostly outside the banking system. Perhaps some
of the firmness in the bond market has been due to the
moderately smaller volume of new capital issues by corpora
tions and State and local governments. Recent increases in
the liquidity of business concerns have contributed to the
absorption of short-term Government securities by nonbank
investors and the firmness of short-term rates.
Bank credit growth in October, although not striking,
was somewhat larger than in September. Business loans at
city banks showed little net change in the month compared
with a marked decline in October 1957 and a moderate in
crease in October 1956. There were, however, larger in
creases than usual in real estate loans, agricultural loans,
and all other loans. City bank holdings of Government
securities increased only slightly, notwithstanding a new
Treasury short-term issue during the period.
Both demand deposits and currency showed greater than
seasonal increases in October, largely reversing the season
ally adjusted declines of August and September. Time
deposits at commercial banks declined for the second month.
U. S. Government deposits showed a net decrease. Total
demand deposits adjusted and currency are about 2-1/2 per
cent larger than a year ago and time deposits are over
10 per cent larger.
Reserves have been supplied on balance during the past
month through System open market purchases. These operations,
aggregating over half a billion dollars, have provided for a
continued outflow of gold, a seasonal increase in currency,
and an increase in required reserves resulting from the
greater than seasonal deposit growth. Member bank borrowings
have generally remained below $500 million--mostly at reserve
city banks.

11/10/58
Reserves needed to cover seasonal currency and deposit
increases and an assumed further outflow of gold, after al
lowance for other market factors, should amount to approxi
mately $1 billion during the next 7 weeks. Although there
are some important uncertainties about the projected estimates
for this week and next, owing in part to holiday complications,
it appears that the present level of reserves is fully adequate
until after next week. In fact, action to absorb some reserves
during the current calendar week may be appropriate. Any
amount absorbed, however, would need to be replaced in the
following week or two when float declines and the effect of
Treasury financing is felt.
Heavy purchases will be needed in the Thanksgiving week
and then more in the last week of the year. In view of
liquidity needs during December, demands for reserves will be
heavy, with resulting pressures on the Government securities
market. Unless these pressures become too severe, however,
banks might be required to meet some of their temporary needs
by borrowing.
In view of the ominous nature of many aspects of prospec
tive economic developments, this Committee needs to face more
significant policy decisions tnan supplying seasonal needs for
bank reserves. It may not be adequate to follow a mechanical
policy guide of maintaining free reserves at $100 million.
The important question is what degree of restraint is appropri
ate.
The relatively satisfactory developments that have ac
companied the maintenance of that level of reserves and
borrowing during the past ten weeks cannot all be attributed
to monetary policies. Pressures for further credit expansion
were absent. There are indications, nevertheless, of a some
what greater than seasonal monetary expansion, particularly
during the past two or three weeks. By past standards, free
reserves of $100 million, which means member bank borrowings
of less than $500 million, are not particularly restrictive,
if conditions are favorable for expansion.
What are the threatening aspects of the current situation
that might call for more restrictive policies? The first, of
course, is the budget deficit. Another is the continued out
flow of gold, or rather the combination of factors responsible
for that outflow. The rise in stock prices based on specula
tion and on the retreat from fixed-return investments is
another. Finally, there is the complex of forces reflected
in wages, profits, and prices, which determine whether
appropriate adjustments are being made to maintain a balanced
economy or whether the course will be one of inflation or of
chronic underemployment of resources.

11/10/58 -11-
All of these aspects are interrelated and play upon
each other. They cannot be adequately controlled by mone
tary policies, but they can create situations in which
inappropriate monetary policies could add to maladjustments
and thereby augment inflationary pressures or prevent ade
quate employment of resources.
Analysis of the outlook for the Federal deficit has
previously been presented to the Committee and is familiar.
New factors that have been brought into the picture are (1)
the greater than previously estimated increase in corporate
profits and (2) the possible effect of the election on
expenditure programs. The higher corporate profits esti
mates may raise the Government's receipts for this fiscal
year by somewhat more than half a billion dollars above the
estimates of the Board's staff and as much as $1.5 billion
above that of the midyear Budget Review. This may, however,
be offset by increased expenditures.
Prospects for the longer term are not necessarily im
proved above previous estimates. For one thing, projections
already allow for substantial increases in incomes and
profits, and it is questionable whether, under the pressure
of wage increases and competitive market forces, corporate
profits could be any larger than those projected. Moreover,
election results presage the threat of substantial increases
in expenditures. Without higher taxes, a deficit is not
likely to be avoided in fiscal year 1960, or possibly in
subsequent years even with full employment.
A Federal deficit of the size indicated, along with
economic activity at the volume projected, would be highly
stimulating. It cannot be financed without inflationary
consequences unless severe restraints are imposed on the
private economy.
Outflow of gold, now being accompanied by some addi
tional build-up of foreign dollar holdings, reflects
basically increased productive capacity abroad and the
movement of capital. To some extent it also reflects what
may be called a flight from the dollar because of inflation
fears, corresponding to the domestic flight from bonds to
stocks. The improved competitive position of foreign
producers relative to producers in the United States is an
important factor, and is related to the persistent increase
in wages in this country. Contrast between the vigorous and
courageous action of the British in dealing with inflationary
threats and loss of reserves and the apparent attitude in

ll/10/58 -12-
this country toward those problems does not contribute to
confidence in the future of the dollar.
Action of the stock market since the election gives
continuing evidence of the inflationary potential in that
area. Rising stock prices are evidently being supported
by a flow of funds from other forms of investment of savings,
as well as by buying and selling among existing participants.
While the use of credit has been limited, inducements for its
use are strong and need to be resisted.
Problems in the area of wages, profits, and prices are
subtle, indirect in their effects, and difficult to control
through public policies. There seems to be little prospect
of abatement in the persistent pressure for increased wages,
notwithstanding the existence of unused resources. The fact
that recent, sharp increases in productivity are being
reflected in corporate profits and not in lowered prices adds
support to demands for wage increases. The maintenance of
prices, and in some cases, increases in prices, will further
detract from the competitive position of American producers
in foreign markets. They may also restrict the growth in
buying by domestic consumers. Any retarding effect of these
maladjustments may be used as a reason for further govern
mental actions of a stimulating nature, which would in turn
help to forestall rather than promote the adjustments needed
to maintain a balanced economy.
Under these circumstances, a restrictive monetary policy
appears to be appropriate. It is unlikely that credit re
straints will retard sound recovery and growth. Easy credit
could unquestionably contribute to developments of an un
stabilizing nature.
The Chairman then turned to Mr. Hayes, who presented the follow
ing statement of his views on the business outlook and credit policy:
Both business and credit developments in recent weeks-
if we exclude the stock market--have been characterized by a
high degree of moderation, in gratifying contrast with the
rapid and hectic changes of the May-August period. The
vigorous advance that marked the early stages of the recovery
has been replaced by a slower and really much more satis
factory rate of expansion, and most evidence points to the
continuation of this more gradual improvement over the next
few months. Continued recovery will probably have to rely
on more or less the same combination of factors that have
been at work in recent months--reduced inventory liquidation,

11/10/58
-13-
greater Government spending, and some gains in housing out
lays and consumer spending in general. Plant and equipment
expenditures do not seem likely to increase very significantly
in the months ahead, judging from the latest McGraw-Hill survey
and other recent surveys; nor do the lagging consumer spending
figures of the last couple of months, together with the latest
consumer surveys, point to any very pronounced upsurge in con
sumer buying. In fact, the cautious attitude of consumers in
the face of expanded personal income has caused a sizeable and
welcome increase in personal savings. The rate of recovery in
prospect for the coming months, as we see it, points to a
modest gain of perhaps 5 per cent for gross national product
in 1959. Whether or not this gain is attained or exceeded,
the recovery over the months just ahead will in all likelihood be
insufficient to bring unemployment to levels comparable to those
existing during previous periods of prosperity.
Despite some new upward pressure on finished goods prices,
the key price indices, both wholesale and retail, continue to
exhibit a large measure of stability. In view of the general
supply situation, the probability that current productivity
gains are quite substantial, and the expected continuation of
price declines for farm products, at least the near-term outlook
for price stability remains more encouraging than it has been in
several years.
Recent statistics on bank credit, both loans and invest
ments, are likewise reassuring in the sense that they do not
point to any appreciable build-up of potential inflationary
forces. Most notable, perhaps, has been the economy's demon
strated ability to finance the current Federal Government
deficit with a minimum of bank credit and a maximum of nonbank
buying. Thus the $200 million rise in reporting bank holdings
of Governments in the last four weeks contrasts dramatically
with a $4 billion increase in outstanding marketable Treasury
issues over this period. Since mid-year the reporting banks
have actually reduced their Government holdings. As for loans,
demands have been somewhat stronger than last year, but well
below those of 1956 and 1955. Loan demand has been especially
slow in New York and Chicago. Our estimates of the money supply
now point to a gain for the whole year of about 2%, a relatively
modest figure, almost the same as the average annual gain during
1951-57. Bank and nonbank liquidity in general, while well above
the levels of the 1957 boom, are still a long way below those of
1954.
On the whole the results achieved by recent credit policy
are gratifying. The shift away from active ease has been ac
complished smoothly--apart from the capital market disturbances

11/10/58 -14-
of last summer for which factors other than credit policy
must take a large share of the blame. An even tone has
been established in the money market, the banks have suf
ficient funds to accommodate their business customers, and
the Treasury has succeeded in placing a major portion of
its new debt with nonbank investors. A firm monetary
foundation has been prepared for the recovery, and System
policy should now remain in the more or less neutral zone
between ease and restraint that has prevailed in recent
weeks. A wait-and-see role for monetary policy at this
stage will allow the economy itself to determine the volume
of credit in use, and we can be prepared to step in if overt
signs appear that the business upturn is stalling, or that
it is beginning to expand at an unsustainable rate or that
excessive credit expansion is occurring. The proposed policy
will also be consistent with our objective of preserving an
even keel during the Treasury's cash and refunding operations
of the next few weeks. In terms of free reserves, I would
think that we could continue to have in mind a figure of
roughly $100 million, subject to the usual caveats.
It was unfortunate that our directors in New York could
not be persuaded, at their first meeting following the last
meeting of this Committee, that their fears concerning the
effects of a second and larger increase in the discount rate
were unfounded. Events succeeded where eloquence failed,
however, and I was glad to see our New York rate brought into
line within two weeks of the initial action taken by other
Federal Reserve Banks. As our delay was not lengthy, I trust
we avoided any encouragement of a public impression that there
was serious dissension within the System. Presumably no
further consideration of the discount rate will be called for
this year--and I believe the present directive is also quite
satisfactory under present conditions.
Having had an opportunity in the past month to talk with
a great many central bankers and other informed observers of
the American scene, I think it appropriate to emphasize in
this meeting a tendency of which I know this Committee is
already aware, i.e., the tendency abroad to look somewhat
askance at the dollar. It seems paradoxical that these fears
are especially prevalent at a time when the prospect here is
apparently for a low-pressure recovery with perhaps greater
price stability than we have known for several years past-
a point which I emphasized in conversations during my trip.
The fears in question seem to be due mainly to the heavy gold
outflow, the persistent boom in our stock market, and the fact

11/10/58 -15-
of a large U. S. Government deficit--together with doubts
as to the ability and willingness of this country to deal
firmly with inflationary influences, especially in areas
where monetary policy alone cannot be expected to bear the
whole burden. While we certainly must base monetary policy
on the realities of the economic and financial situation as
we see them, rather than on foreign impressions of our
problems, nevertheless we cannot afford to overlook the
views of our friends abroad. I would hope that natural
forces working toward reduction of the outward gold flow
would gain momentum in the coming months, and this by itself
may go a long way toward calming these fears, coupled with a
continued demonstration of actual over-all price stability
such as we are now enjoying and, I would hope, a trend toward
a lower Government deficit. I would think it unwise to let
the gold outflow itself affect our monetary policy directly,
i.e., in the way of a tightening move directed specifically
toward stemming the flow and unrelated to domestic economic
developments. I would also think it dangerous for any state
ments or changes in practices to be made in this country at
the Government level which would give the slightest encourage
ment to the idea either that the price of gold might be changed
or that any obstacle whatever would be placed in the way of free
conversion of dollar balances into gold by foreign central bank
holders. At a time like the present we have a particularly
heavy responsibility for-conducting our monetary and fiscal
affairs and our operation of the gold and dollar exchange
standard in such a way as to encourage maximum confidence in
this nation's currency and in the stability of that standard.
Mr. Erickson said that economic conditions in New England con
tinued to follow pretty much the national pattern. The manufacturing
index for September indicated further recovery, and nonagricultural
employment showed an increase of 10,000 from August, although insured
unemployment was still 27 per cent greater than last year. Shoe pro
duction, which had been lagging earlier this year, in September was up
12 per cent from a year ago so that for the first nine months it was

11/10/58 -16
within 1 per cent of production in 1957. Average hours of work
also increased recently, and construction contracts continued to
show gains particularly in public works and utilities. Department
store sales were still exceeding corresponding weeks of last year
as they had been since July 5. A sampling of mutual savings banks
showed deposits 6-1/2 per cent higher at the end of September than
a year earlier. Savings and loan share balances showed a rise of
10 per cent and time deposits in commercial banks also were up over
5 per cent, both compared with a year ago. A followup survey of
plant and equipment expenditures last month indicated that such
expenditures were larger than previously projected but less than last
year. A decline of l4 per cent in 1959 from 1958 was forecast, the
largest decrease being in durables. Mr. Erickson felt that for the
next few weeks credit policy called for no change in the Committee
directive, no change in discount rates, and the same degree of pressure
through open market operations that had existed recently.
Mr. Irons said that Eleventh District conditions were showing
moderate improvement, about as in the nation generally. Retail trade
was mixed with most of the larger district centers showing gains.
Retailers were expecting a good expansion during the next few weeks
and a strong holiday trade, particularly in nondurables. The petroleum
situation probably was improved. Construction had been quite strong
including residential building. Unemployment figures showed some

11/10/58 -17
improvement. The banking situation was generally satisfactory
with loan demand strong and loans rising, mostly real estate and
business loans. Consumer credit was down. Banks had sold Govern
ments, approximately offsetting the increased loans. Borrowings
from the Reserve Bank had been relatively low. Agricultural con
ditions were generally good and cash receipts from farm marketings
for the first eight months of this year were up sharply.
As to policy, Mr. Irons felt that the Desk had maintained a
reasonably satisfactory degree of pressure on the market during the
past three weeks. He saw no need for much change during the next
three weeks. The Committee should avoid any tendency toward ease,
and free reserves around the zero level would suit him. Commenting
on the distribution of free reserves, Mr. Irons noted that when the
total had been in the $100-150 million range recently, central re
serve city and many reserve city banks were borrowing. It looked as
though there was a pool of free reserves at the country banks, he
said, and figures showing small free reserves or net borrowed re
serves at reporting member banks as a whole could be misleading.
He would prefer that the Account Manager give more consideration
to the tone and feel of the market at the moment rather than to
attempt to anticipate some projected free reserve figure that might
be set as a standard. He hoped the Treasury bill rate and the
Federal funds rate would continue close to the discount rate.

11/10/58 -18
Mr. Mangels said that in the past the rate of recovery of
business in the West Coast area had been a little better than in
other parts of the country but more recently there were indications
that recovery in the Twelfth District was slowing up. In some areas
there had been no improvement from September to October. Employment
was levelling off, partly as a result of the increase in the labor
force, and the three Pacific Coast States now showed a 7-1/2 per
cent unemployment rate, the highest since before the Korean War.
Retail trade was lagging in relation to the rest of the United States.
Automobile sales had been disappointing thus far. Construction
seemed to be flattening out and there were indications of over
building of multiple unit dwellings. Demand for credit was reported
to be substantially less than had been anticipated. Demand deposits
had increased and there had been some borrowing at the Reserve Bank.
Consensus at a recent business outlook conference at the San Francisco
Bank was that a very moderate rate of recovery might be anticipated
for 1959, with none of the group overly optimistic. Looking ahead,
Mr. Mangels noted that plant and equipment expenditures were not
likely to send the economy off on an inflationary binge in 1959
and that productive capacity at present was large in relation to
markets at present prices.
Summing up, Mr. Mangels said that nothing pointed to a
serious impending situation in the civilian economy, but pressures

11/10/58 -19
were coming from Government spending and Government deficits.
Since credit policy could not be confined to restraint on the
Governmental sector of the economy, the chief influence of System
credit restraint would fall on the civilian economy, perhaps to
the disadvantage of the country as a whole. His view would be that
credit restraint should not discourage consumption too much while
there was excess productive capacity and large unemployment. If
the aim was to curb consumption, this best could be done by an
increase in taxes, which, of course, would also reduce the amount
of Government securities to be placed in the banks. In the light
of these comments, Mr. Mangels felt that recent credit policy could
be viewed as having helped to keep recovery on a healthy basis.
The Committee should be careful not to put too much drag on future
recovery by increasing restraint. A free reserve position of at
least $100 million would be desirable, and no change was needed
in the Committee's directive.
Mr. Deming said that the employment-unemployment picture
in the Ninth District highlighted nonagricultural activity. Basing
his comments on figures for insured unemployment only and noting
that total unemployment was higher, he described the seasonal pattern
as strong, reflecting in large part metal mining activity. The low
for employment usually occurred in February and the high in September,
the reverse being true for unemployment. With one exception,

11/10/58 -20
employment in each month since February 1955 had been higher than
in the comparable month a year earlier until December 1957. Since
then it had remained below the year earlier figure. In September
of this year employment was about 2 per cent below last year or
the comparable month in 1956. So far this year, unemployment had
averaged double that of 1956 and about 75 per cent more than in
1954, 1955, and 1957. From February to September this year, the
drop had been about the same in number as in previous years but
less in percent. Most of the present unemployment in the Ninth
District, Mr. Deming said, had occurred in metal mining, where
employment was down a fourth, transportation which was associated
with mining, and durable manufacturing.
District agriculture's cash income was 9 per cent ahead of
last year. Construction was also strong. City banks reported mild
demand for all types of credit, but country bank loan demand was a
little weaker than last year. Investments at both classes of banks
continued to grow. Retail trade in October failed to gain from
September.
Mr. Deming said the district picture did not show an out
standingly strong surge to prerecession levels, but rather a moderate
upward movement, as did the national picture. No strong inflationary
push was apparent in the district or the nation, except in the
financial markets where inflationary psychology seemed to reflect

11/10/58 -21
more long-run than short-run fear, plus some appreciation of
stronger profit possibilities. Mr. Deming said his analysis
indicated no present need for further restriction of credit.
He was satisfied with the Committee directive, discount rates,
and present open market policy for the immediate future. This
was consistent with an even keel policy during the Treasury's
financing, thus providing the happy circumstance of a policy
conveniently serving both the monetary and fiscal needs.
Mr. Allen said that steady improvement in business condi
tions continued in the Seventh District. There was more hiring in
the manufacturing industries, and farm income in the fourth quarter
was expected to maintain the improvement over last year that was
shown in the first three quarters. Retail sales had a good tone,
except for Detroit. Illinois Bell Telephone installed 24 per cent
more telephones in October than last year.
All automobile manufacturers except Studebaker-Packard had
their labor contract dilemma behind them. Production in October
was 259,000 units and schedules called for 500,000 plus in each of
the months Novemoer and December. These were expected to be ful
filled regardless of retail sales because they were needed to fill
the pipe lines. Actual demand for automobiles would not affect
production schedules before January. Loans at larger Seventh
District banks had not increased as expected, Mr. Allen said.

11/10/58 -22
Some bankers report applications for term loans as distressingly
constant or increasing but say they were mistaken in expecting
short-term credit to expand so long as inventories continued to
decline, even though the rate of decline had dropped. Very little
use was being made of the discount window by Chicago banks but an
increasing number of country banks were borrowing in the grain and
cattle feeder areas. Total discounts at the Chicago Reserve Bank
were running less than half those of a year ago.
Mr. Allen said he agreed that the long-term fundamentals
called for a monetary policy of restraint. On the other hand, at
the moment the argument was persuasive, particularly in view of
the Treasury financing, that the System should not move very far
in the direction of restraint. Recalling his remarks at the previous
meeting, Mr. Allen said he would work toward the zero point on free
reserves. This was about what had been done. Without being critical
of what the Desk had done during this period, he commented on remarks
by Seventh District banks that the System seemed to be doing just
what it had done every time the Treasury came into the market, that
is, the market had been made easier just prior to financing and it
could be expected to be tightened up when that was completed. Mr.
Allen said he still did not know a better guide in view of existing
conditions than reserve figures, and his inclination would be to
work down to the zero level of free reserves, erring on the side of
restraint if that could be done.

11/10/58 -23.
The rate of recovery in the Tenth District seemed lower
than for the country generally, Mr. Leedy said, but the district
started from a better position. Although he had been away for
several weeks, earlier suggestions of a need for more restraint
seemed to him reasonable. For the immediate future, with Treasury
requirements in the picture, there was little that the System could
do. However, recovery had gone beyond what was generally anticipated
a few months ago. Psychology was a factor to be dealt with aside
from the pure economics of the situation. Perhaps tho System had
made a contribution to this by the mildness of its approach and by
the fact that there happened to have been a lack of unity of views
as to what policy should be adopted. At present, Mr. Leedy thought
there was nothing dramatic to be done but to the extent any action
could be taken he would prefer to trend downward in the reserve
position.
Mr. Leach said that October reports indicated continued
economic recovery in the Fifth District. There had been modest
gains in production and sales in the cotton textile industry as a
whole, with substantial gains for industrial fabrics as a consequence
of increased requirements of automobile manufacturers. Textile in
ventories were still substantial but stocks held by hosiery mills
had been sharply reduced by orders for the Christmas trade. The
furniture manufacturing industry improved in September with production

11/10/58 -24
and new orders up from the preceding month, and further improvement
was indicated through October. Department store sales increased
moderately in October following a sharp drop in September. Gross
returns from flue-cured tobacco marketings, which account for over
a fourth of the district's total farm income, were 17 per cent higher
through October 31 than in the corresponding period of last year.
Mr. Leach said that, although he was considerably concerned
about existing inflationary psychology and developments in the stock
market, he saw nothing in the current rate of expansion in production
and consumption that would call for a change in open market policy.
The current Treasury financing and imminent refunding made it obvious
that the Committee should maintain an even keel at least until its
next meeting. He would expect free reserves to continue in the
neighborhood of recent averages and would hold the discount rate at
2-1/2 per cent. He saw no need for a change in the Committee's
directive at this time.
Mr. Mills gave recognition to the Federal Reserve System's
responsibility for controlling inflation, and especially its hand
maiden of speculation in the financial markets which, he said, must
always be a matter of paramount importance in developing System
policy. But judging from comments that had been made this morning,
he felt that almost morbid discussions of inflation emanating from
financial circles in this country had tended to provoke distrust

11/10/58 -25
abroad about the economic stability of the United States and the
position of the dollar in ways that served to aggravate the very
difficulties that require correction. That being the case, the
Committee might be well advised to set its objectives for monetary
policy less in the name of attacking inflation and more by quietly
addressing itself to the state of the domestic economy and the pro
vision of appropriate credit availability. A System policy devised
in that manner would, while exercising reasonable restraint over
the expansion of commercial bank credit, automatically exert the
kind of moderating influences over inflationary pressures that the
Federal Reserve System seeks to apply, but without loudly proclaiming
its concerns and parading them in front of the world. Mr. Mills said
he was one of those who believed that the System should follow a
policy of moderate credit restraint and particularly because of the
fact that we were witnessing, almost year in and year out, a glacial
progress in the total expansion of commercial bank credit. This was
reminiscent of the 1920s when country bank liquidity was seriously
depressed because loans reached a point where banks were no longer
able conveniently to perform their credit functions and, in the
necessity of restricting credit, became a factor in bringing about
the 1920 recession and the subsequent deflationary influences that
appeared later in that decade.
Mr. Mills said that it was his belief that the Committee
should focus its attention on the total growth of credit and should

11/10/58 -26
not let its vision be obscured by the fact that there had not been
a pronounced seasonal expansion of credit at city banks. He indi
cated that the growth of real estate mortgage and consumer credit,
especially at country banks, is susceptible of eventually freezing
bank credit operations in a way that does not hold true for the
more volatile and rapidly turning types of commercial loans. Bearing
this thought in mind, it seemed to him that the System's near time
policy objective should trend toward zero free reserves where that
could be done without conflicting with the Treasury's immediate
financing requirements. In so doing, he would favor continuing a
policy of flexibly open discount windows at the Federal Reserve Banks
that, by permitting the commercial banks within reason to supply the
reserves they required on their own initiative, would cushion any
abrupt market effects that might arise out of keeping pressure on
the supply of reserves.
Mr. Robertson said it seemed to him that the real problem
today was the expectation of inflation. He did not think there was
much the Committee could do about this before the next meeting because
it had to maintain an even keel during the next week at least. That
called for something between $100 million and zero free reserves.
After that, anything that could be done ought to be done to permit
the pressure to develop. For the present, he would maintain at least
the degree of pressure that had been maintained recently. He could

11/10/58 -27
see no reason to change the Committee's directive at this time and,
of course, no change could be made in discount rates now.
Mr. Shepardson said he was in agreement with most of the
things said at the meeting thus far. The rate of recovery seemed
fine. He would rather see a rate such as we had had than one that
was more explosive. It seemed to him that it would be much easier
to meet the situation ahead if the moderate rate of recovery continued,
and this could best take place if the present degree of pressure was
continued for the time being. Looking ahead, he felt there should be
additional pressure as it could be applied. It would be better to be
moving in that direction gradually rather than to have to make a
precipitate move toward tightness at a later period. It would be
desirable to trend toward zero free reserves during the next three
weeks and, as soon as the Treasury financing was completed, a gradual
trend toward greater tightness would seem desirable.
Mr. Fulton said that the recovery in the Fourth District was
gradual. There were hopes for a steel rate of 85 per cent in the
last quarter but that had not developed. The automobile industry
had not been ordering steel as anticipated and had in fact been
deferring deliveries. Increased production would, however, inevitably
require increased steel deliveries. There was no inventory accumula
tion. Department store sales were holding up fairly well. Unemploy
ment was declining gradually but one more area had been added to the

11/10/58 -28
substantial labor surplus category.
Mr. Fulton thought that the Committee should be trending
toward a zero to $100 million free reserve range, and that the
present degree of restraint should not be relaxed in any way. He
would supply reserves through the discount window if the banks
needed them. Demand for loans had not been up to expectations.
He would make no change in the discount rate or in the Committee
directive at this time.
Mr. Bopp said that the Third District continued to show
recovery but it was slower than for the United States as a whole.
Reserve city banks had a deficit of $40 to $50 million in reserves
but had gotten most of the funds they needed through the Federal
funds market and had used the Reserve Bank very little.
As to monetary policy, Mr. Bopp would maintain the degree
of availability that had prevailed over the past three weeks. He
would make no change in the discount rate or in the directive at
this time.
Mr. Bryan said that most Sixth District indicators continued
to show improvement, although the latest figures were not quite as
favorable as they had been running. Of especial interest, Mr. Bryan
reported an increase in borrowings from the Atlanta Reserve Bank,
well scattered over the district. Apparently the Sixth District was

11/10/58 -29
losing reserves to the rest of the country, a development that he
could not account for. There also had been a sharp increase in
currency circulation in parts of the district. Mr. Bryan said that
he was well satisfied with present System policy and saw no point
in making any changes at the moment.
Mr. Johns aligned himself with the belief that appropriate
policy should be gradually to restrict the availability of reserves.
He was distrustful of an instruction to the Desk in terms of free
reserves or the reserve level. The maintenance of a stated level
of free reserves might well result in greater expansion of the money
supply than would be desirable. He suggested that the need for
reserves between now and the end of the year might be met by
scheduling injections of reserves in a way to avoid having the
System Account in and out of the market within relatively short
periods of time. Mr. Johns said that he was in favor of increasing
restraint, fully realizing the Treasury's needs, because he believed that
some elevation of interest rates might in the long run assist the
financing of the Treasury deficit outside the banking system.
Mr. Szymczak said that System Account operations during the
past three weeks had been about right. The reduced rate of recovery
and the uncertainty as to the extent to which the recovery would con
tinue, along with the needs of the Treasury, made it necessary for the
System to maintain conditions in the market about as they were at

11/10/58 -30
present. He would, therefore, make no change in Committee policy
at this time.
Mr. Balderston stated that he agreed with the views expressed
by Mr. Szymczak.
Chairman Martin said that this was a very easy meeting for
him to come back to. It seemed to him that none of those who had
spoken desired a change in the Committee's directive or in discount
rates. On the level of reserves, he thought that nobody believed
that the Committee could set an exact target. He would place him
self with the group that believed restraint was called for, aside
from the even keel needed during the next few weeks. He hoped that
all of those present would fully digest what Mr. Thomas had put
forward as "ominous notes" in his remarks this morning. The Com
mittee should watch developments and, as it comes to conclusions,
it should, of course, take action. However, it was not possible to
do anything at this time other than to maintain an even keel because
of the Treasury financing. The Chairman then inquired as to whether
anyone wished to suggest a change with respect to the Committee's
directive.
Mr. Hayes said that while he would not suggest a change in
the directive, he would like to make sure that the consensus of the
Committee was to stay about where we are.
Chairman Martin stated that this was what he understood to
be the consensus.

11/10/58
-31-
Mr. Mills said that it was his impression that unless a
conflict with the Treasury's financing should arise, the Committee
intended to move the degree of restraint down from the present
plateau of $100 millions of free reserves and toward zero. As Mr.
Johns had indicated, there was an inherent problem of unwittingly
expanding the credit base if the supply of reserves was replenished
constantly in order to maintain some predetermined level. The System
had learned that lesson to its great sorrow in the spring months
when maintaining a $500-million level of positive free reserves be
came almost a fetish and led to a debacle as soon as a reversal in
policy was adopted.
Chairman Martin stated that this was a point the Committee
should constantly be discussing. He thought the majority feeling
was that no fixed level of free reserves could be set. At this
time, his views were clearly with those who believed that the Com
mittee should be trending toward the zero level consistent with
maintaining an even keel during the Treasury financing. He thought
that anything that did not result in an even keel in this period
would conflict with the Treasury's financing problem and that for
the present the Committee was circumscribed from taking any other
course.
Mr. Shepardson noted that at the meeting three weeks ago
it was thought the level of free reserves should range up to around

11/10/58 -32
$125 million. Actually, the level had gotten below that figure.
It was his thought, and he believed this was the view of several
other Committee members also, that if the situation permitted free
reserves to decline below a $100-125 million target, that would be
desirable. As he saw it, the Committee would not now desire to go
back up to the $100-125 million target.
Chairman Martin said he thought it had been the general
position that the level of free reserves was a guide position but
that the Committee must give the Manager of the System Account
discretion with respect to that guide. Shifts over a period of two
or three days could cause sharp swings in free reserve figures, the
Chairman said, and it was particularly difficult for the Manager to
determine what the feel and tone of the market was in those periods.
Mr. Shepardson said he agreed with this statement but that
if the Committee was going to have such a guide, it should be set a
little toward the side that the Committee hoped to move to.
Mr. Hayes suggested that in view of the Treasury's position
it was necessary during the period immediately ahead to keep the
"feel" of the market about what it had been during the past three
weeks.
Mr. Szymczak commented that this was necessary, especially
in view of the Treasury's financing needs which would involve new
money as well as a large refunding.

11/10/58 -33
Mr. Robertson said he thought we were all talking about
an even keel and about what constituted an even keel. What the
Committee was striving for at this time was to maintain an even
position, but he thought that if it found that it could slide down
the level of free reserves that would be desirable rather than to
let them go up to the $150 million level.
Mr. Hayes agreed except that if the maintenance of an even
keel necessitated going to $150 million, the figures should be per
mitted to go there.
Mr. Robertson concurred with this but said he hoped it would
not be necessary to go in that direction. He realized this was a
matter of judgment and he did not think there would be any antipathy
if the free reserve figure happened to move up as Mr. Hayes sug
gested, although he hoped that free reserves could be moving down
while the Committee was maintaining an even keel during the next
few weeks.
Mr. Thomas pointed out that the figures of free reserves
for the current week already indicated a level around $200 million
and that it would be exceedingly difficult to get that down to $100
million for the current week.
Chairman Martin said he did not think anyone could define
this level precisely. He also thought the guide position that had
been discussed was as good as anything the Committee had. Each

11/10/58 -31
member of the Committee would tend to weight his assessment of
these figures with his own predilections and with what he judged
to be the tone and feel of the market. In his own case, he had
frequently differed with the Manager of the System Account but he
realized that if he were in the Manager's position and calling the tune
he might be calling it exactly as the Manager did.
Mr. Shepardson agreed with this statement, adding, however,
that the man under the gun felt a lot more heat than anyone else.
This was why he had said before, and he wanted to repeat it again,
that the Committee should be cognizant of the position of the Manager
and that it therefore should "set the windage" so as to allow for the
extra heat that was felt up on the front.
Mr. Rouse then commented on the figures of free reserves over
the past week end which had reached $272 million reflecting a large
error in the projections. From the standpoint of the tone of the
market, however, this did not concern him when he saw the breakdown
which showed that New York banks had a deficit of $277 million in
their reserve position and that Chicago banks had only a moderate
amount of free reserves.
Chairman Martin suggested that the Committee approve a renewal
of the directive to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York without change
in the wording, and with the understanding that this discussion would
serve as a background for the Manager of the System Account in carrying

out the directive during the next three weeks.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted unan
imously to direct the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York until otherwise di
rected by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (in
cluding replacement of maturing securities, and allowing
maturities to run off without replacement) for the System
Open Market Account in the open market or, in the case of
maturing securities, by direct exchange with the Treasury,
as may be necessary in the light of current and prospective
economic conditions and the general credit situation of the
country, with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in
the market to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to
fostering conditions in the money market conducive to
balanced economic recovery, and (c) to the practical adminis
tration of the Account; provided that the aggregate amount of
securities held in the System Account (including commitments
for the purchase or sale of securities for the Account) at
he close of this date, other than special short-term certifi
cates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be in
creased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one
or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such certificates held at
any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in
the aggregate $500 million.
Chairman Martin then said that Mr. Hayes and he had been abroad
attending the annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund and
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. This was
the thirteenth such meeting that he had attended. Outwardly, every
thing was calm at the meetings but the feeling that he had gotten in

11/10/58 -36
individual conversations was one of general pessimism with respect
to the matter of inflation. There was more distrust than he had
heard before of the competence of anyone--he was not talking only
about the United States--to handle the problem of inflation effec
tively. This feeling of despair as to our ability to handle this
problem appeared in almost every quarter, and there was also a
feeling that the ultimate during the 1960s would be a repetition,
in one way or another, of what happened in 1929. This feeling went
along with the wholehearted and unanimous approval given to the in
crease in resources of the Bank and Fund. There was also some indi
cation, Chairman Martin said, that we might be accepting the
philosophy that we could "spend ourselves out of almost any
difficulty." While this might be a pessimistic view of the dis
cussions, Chairman Martin said that the attitude he had described
appeared sooner or later in almost every discussion he had during
the course of the meetings.
Continuing, the Chairman said that relatively few persons
with whom he had discussed monetary policy had talked entirely
frankly about Federal Reserve policy, but one man in whom he had
confidence did express his frank judgment that the Federal Reserve
was "saved by the bell" by the action it took in August of this year.
As far as this individual was concerned, the Federal Reserve was just
about to back out as an important force until it raised the discount

11/10/58 -37
rates in August. Chairman Martin said he cited this comment only
because it came from a very competent observer who had touched on
one of the things all of those around the table had realized was a
problem, that is, that the System was very quick to adjust when the
economy was moving down but that it was not as quick to act when the
situation changed and things started to look up. The commentator to
whom he referred had stated frankly that this was exactly the same
thing that had happened in his own country.
Chairman Martin then referred to a letter that he had re
ceived this morning from Under Secretary of the Treasury Baird dated
November 7, 1958, concerning a specific plan to be used by the Treasury
for exchange offerings in the refunding of the December maturities.
The plan contemplated that the Treasury would work toward a pattern
in which it would have only four regular issues of one-year certifi
cates outstanding, maturing in February, May, August, and November.
The exchanges proposed, to be offered to the public as well as the
Reserve Banks, would permit the Banks to rearrange their holdings
so that their portfolios would contain securities in approximately
equal amounts of the various maturities. Under Secretary Baird had
asked advice as to the willingness of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee to go along with the suggestion which he believed would be a
step toward a more orderly pattern of the Treasury's large short
term debt maturities. There was then distributed a copy of Under

11/10/58 -38
Secretary Baird's letter of November 7, 1958.
Question was raised as to how the problem contained in Mr.
Baird's letter of November 7 related to the proposal contained in
his letter of October 24, 1958, which had been the subject of a
memorandum distributed by Mr. Riefler under date of October 29,
1958, concerning a proposal for modification of refinancing procedures.
Mr. Riefler stated that the November 7 letter was an entirely
separate matter from the October 24 letter, to which a reply had been
prepared on the basis of responses made to his memorandum of October
29, 1958. The October 24 proposal had been one which the Treasury
believed would eliminate attrition. It would involve an offering
of new securities approximately equal to the amount of the maturing
securities and would give preferential allotments in full to all
subscribers tendering the maturing securities in payment of their
subscriptions. Since the provisions of the offering would not
distinguish in any way between the treatment given to securities
held by the Federal Reserve Banks and the securities held by other
investors, the draft reply transmitted to Committee members with
his memorandum of October 29 had taken the position that the
acquisition of securities by the Federal Reserve Banks pursuant
to such refunding would not be subject to the $5 billion limit
stated in section 14(b) of the Federal Reserve Act and that, subject

11/10/58 -39
to usual questions regarding monetary and credit policy and the
terms eventually set for the refunding security, the Reserve Banks
would be prepared to consider refunding some or all of their
maturing securities under such a proposal. None of the Committee
members or of the Reserve Bank Presidents not presently on the Com
mittee had differed with this conclusion and, pursuant to the
October 29 letter, it was expected that Chairman Martin would send
a reply to the Treasury today in the form of the draft distributed
on October 29 except for minor editorial changes.
Mr. Riefler went on to say that the November 7 letter from
the Treasury appeared to be concerned only with bringing about a
more even distribution of certificate maturities during each year,
that the Treasury felt that an important step would be taken if
Federal Reserve holdings of certificates, as well as public holdings,
could be somewhat more evenly distributed over the four maturities,
and that the Treasury would appreciate advice as soon as possible
as to the willingness of the Federal Open Market Committee to go
along with this suggestion.
There followed a discussion of this proposal during which
it appeared to be the view of all of the members of the Committee
that there would be no objection to the proposal for redistribution
of Federal Reserve holdings of Treasury certificates. Chairman
Martin suggested that Messrs. Riefler, Thomas, and Rouse be
* Refers to Mr. Riefler's memorandum of October 29, 1958.

11/10/58
requested to prepare a draft reply to be transmitted to the Com
mittee members and other Reserve Bank Presidents with a request
that if they had suggestions for change they send them to Mr.
Riefler by Wednesday afternoon, November 12, in order to permit
the Chairman to send a reply to the Treasury before the end of
that day. This suggestion was approved unanimously.
Secretary's note: Pursuant to the
foregoing discussion, Chairman
Martin sent to Under Secretary of
the Treasury Baird under date of
November 10, 1958, the following
letter:
"This refers to your letter of October 24, 1958, in
which you state that the Treasury has been exploring the
idea of refunding some of its maturing securities in a
manner whereby attrition would be eliminated.
"For that purpose you have been considering a plan
under which the Treasury would offer an amount of new
securities approximately equal to the amount of the
maturing securities, and would give preferential allot
ments in full to all subscribers tendering the maturing
securities in payment of their subscriptions. This would
apply to any holdings of the Federal Reserve Banks in the
same manner as to any other holdings. Subscriptions for
payment in cash would be allotted on an equal percentage
basis. Total allotments would approximate the amount of
the maturing issue. You enclosed a tentative draft of an
offering circular illustrating how the proposal would work.
"The Federal Open Market Committee has concluded that
acquisitions by the Reserve Banks pursuant to such a re
funding would not be subject to the $$ billion limit stated
in section 14(b) of the Federal Reserve Act, and that,
subject, of course, to usual questions regarding monetary
and credit policy and the terms eventually set for the
refunding security, the Reserve Banks would be prepared
to consider refunding some or all of their maturing
securities under such a proposal."

11/10/58
Secretary's note: In accordance with
the foregoing understanding the Secre
tary also transmitted to the Committee
members a draft of reply to the letter
of November 7, 1958, from the Under
Secretary of the Treasury and, having
received no suggestions for change
other than of an editorial nature, the
letter was sent by Chairman Martin to
the Under Secretary under date of
November 12, 1958, in the following
forms
"Your letter of November 7, 1958 outlines a plan for
exchange offerings of forthcoming maturities of Treasury
Certificates of Indebtedness. Under the plan, the Treas
ury would work toward a pattern in which it would have
only four regular issues of one-year certificates out
standing, maturing on or about February 15, May 15,
August 15, and November 15. The exchanges proposed, to
be offered to the public including the Federal Reserve
Banks, if the Federal Open Market Committee so chose, to
rearrange their holdings so that their portfolios would
contain securities in approximately equal amounts of the
various maturities.
"You will appreciate that it would not be appropriate
for the Federal Open Market Committee, in view of its
responsibilities, including the provisions of section
14(b) of the Federal Reserve Act, to make a definite
commitment with the Treasury with respect to its future
actions on a matter affecting the composition of its
portfolio of open market securities. However, the
Federal Open Market Committee has considered the ad
vantages to the Treasury which might ensue from this
proposed redistribution of its holdings and is disposed
to give most sympathetic consideration to seeking such
a redistribution if an appropriate opportunity is
presented."
Chairman Martin then brought up the question of dates for
meetings of the Committee to be held during the remainder of this

11/10/58 -42
year and early in 1959, at the conclusion of which it was agreed
that meetings would be scheduled for December 2, 1958, December
16, 1958, and January 6, 1959.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary