A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, October 21, 1958, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Balderston, Chairman pro tem.
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Irons
Mr. Leach
Mr. Mangels
Mr. Mills
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Erickson, Allen, Johns, and Deming, Alter
nate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bopp and Bryan, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Atlanta,
respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Daane, Hostetler, Marget, Roelse, and
Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Molony, Special Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Associate Adviser, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Keir, Acting Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Ellis, Mitchell, Jones, Tow, and Rice,
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Boston, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City,
and Dallas, respectively

10/21/58 -2
Mr. Einzig, Assistant Vice President,
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Anderson and Atkinson, Economic
Advisers, Federal Reserve Banks of
Philadelphia and Atlanta, respectively
Mr. Parsons, Director of Research, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
The Secretary stated that since neither the Chairman nor the
Vice Chairman of the Committee was able to be present at this meeting,
it would be necessary to elect a Chairman pro tem.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, Mr. Balderston was
elected to act as Chairman at this meet
ing in the absence of the Chairman and
Vice Chairman of the Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on September 30, 1958, were
approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York covering open market operations during the period September 30
through October 15, 1958, and a supplemental report covering the period
October 16 through October 20, 1958. Copies of both reports have been
placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Mr. Rouse reported that in terms of reserve averages, short-term
market rates of interest, and the general money market atmosphere, the
Desk had been able to carry out the Committee's instructions during the

10/21/58 -3.
past three weeks. Because of an unexpectedly large volume of float, the
period closed with free reserves on average above intended levels, but
this was temporary and had not bad an adverse effect.
The most important development in the United States Government
securities market had been the market acceptance of the new Treasury
issues, Mr. Rouse said, both of which were now trading at substantial
premiums after opening at a discount. Commercial bank underwriters had
had the opportunity to get out of their allotments with a profit, and
many had done so. Some banks had sold other short-term securities to
adjust reserves and kept the high-yielding new issues in portfolio.
Mr. Rouse added that the intermediate- and long-term markets were sick.
Trading volume was small, but press comments on the likelihood of in
creased Federal Reserve restraint and of a new offering of Treasury bonds
had helped to depress the market. Recent speeches by Treasury officials
implying the use of moral suasion in selling Government debt had not been
well received in the market; many people failed to understand an important
point in these speeches, namely, that the Treasury planned to rely upon
liberal pricing to sell its securities. The real root of the problem in
the Government securities market was the current Treasury deficit and
the prospect of large deficits in subsequent years as well.
Mr. Rouse reported that the new issue of January 22 Treasury
bills was auctioned at an average rate of 2.80 per cent, and the new
bills were trading this morning at 2.65 per cent. Most references to

10/21/58 -4
"the bill rate" referred to the rate on three-month Treasury bills,
Mr. Rouse noted, but at present there were actually three Treasury
bill markets: bills within one month of maturity were in general
trading at 1 1/2-1 3/ per cent; two-month bills around 2 per cent;
and January bills at 2 1/2 to 2 5/8 per cent. The four issues of
shorter-term Treasury bills actually had been trading at yields well
below the Federal funds rate.
In concluding his remarks, Mr. Rouse commented that projections
indicated a steady loss of reserves for the next several weeks, sug
gesting that the System Account would be a net purchaser of Treasury
bills during the three weeks before the next Committee meeting.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the open
market transactions during the period
September 30 through October 20, 1958, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
The Chairman referred to a memorandum from Messrs. Hackley and
Solomon distributed under date of October 16, 1958, regarding Reserve
Bank participation in Treasury refundings and asked that Mr. Riefler
comment on the subject.
Mr. Riefler stated that for some time the Treasury had been
discussing the possibility of a change in the procedure for refunding
securities so as to avoid attrition on the maturing securities and to
keep the maturing issue from acquiring a "rights" value in the market.
As stated in the memorandum from Messrs. Hackley and Solomon, Under

10/21/58 -5
Secretary of the Treasury Baird transmitted with a letter to Chairman
Martin, dated October 1, 1958, a memorandum containing a proposal for
consideration in connection with the Treasury's December 1958 refund
ing concerning which he asked "whether there are any legal or other
reasons which would preclude the System's participation." The proposal,
which was further set forth in draft circulars transmitted by the Fiscal
Assistant Secretary of the Treasury under date of October 9, referred
to the $9.8 billion issue of 3-3/4 per cent certificates of indebted
ness dated December 1, 1957, maturing December 1, 1958, of which the
Federal Reserve held approximately $7.8 billion and the public about
$2 billion. Proposal "A" was that these be refunded by offering $2
billion of new securities to the general public for which either cash
or the maturing securities would be accepted in payment but with no
allotment privilege being extended. There would be an additional
offering of the same securities to the Reserve Banks for exchange
and that exchange subscription would be allotted in full. An alternative
referred to as "B" would differ from "A" to the extent that the $2 bil
lion offering to the public would be with the condition that subscrip
tions accompanied by tenders of maturing certificates in payment would
be allotted in full, thus placing the terms for the public and the
Reserve Banks on the same basis.
The memorandum from Messrs. Hackley and Solomon took the posi
tion that under either alternative the Reserve Banks could acquire the
refunding securities without their being subject to the $5 billion

10/21/58 -6
limitation in section 14(b) of the Federal Reserve Act on purchases
of securities by Reserve Banks directly from the Treasury. Specifically,
the memorandum stated:
While it probably would be somewhat easier to justify
acquisitions under Alternative "B" as being exempt from
the $5 billion limit, it is believed that, all things con
sidered, acquisitions under Alternative "A" might also
reasonably be considered to be exempt from the $5 billion
limit. This would be on the ground that the security is
not only acquired as an exchange or refunding but also
(1) the security acquired by the Reserve Banks is clearly
a security which meets the test of the open market, and
(2) any differences between the treatment given the
general public and that given the Reserve Banks is in
favor of, rather than adverse to, the Reserve Banks. In
other words, the acquisition is not only an exchange or
refunding, but, in addition, there do not seem to be any
aspects of any effort to have the Reserve Banks acquire
securities from the Treasury on terms or conditions more
favorable to the Treasury than those available in the open
market.
With the memorandum there was presented for the consideration
of the Committee a draft of letter to Under Secretary Baird which would
state that acquisitions by the Reserve Banks of securities under either
of the alternatives would not be subject to the $5 billion limitation
and that, subject to usual considerations relating to monetary and
credit policy and the terms eventually set for the refunding securities,
the Reserve Banks would be prepared to refund some or all of their
maturing certificates under either of the proposed alternatives. In
response to Acting Chairman Balderston's call for comments, Mr. Bryan
inquired whether other alternatives which might avoid attrition and
rights values on the maturing securities had been explored. To this,

10/21/58 -7
Mr. Riefler responded that these were the two alternatives on which
the Treasury had now requested the comments of the Committee.
Mr. Allen noted that the memorandum from Messrs. Hackley and
Solomon had not been accompanied by copies of the letters, memoranda,
and circulars from the Treasury. While he did not argue the legal
point, he felt that the Federal Reserve Act intended to make a clear
distinction between open market purchases and transactions directly
with the Treasury. He thought it important from the standpoint of the
future that any securities purchases outside the $5 billion limitation
provided in section l4(b) of the Act should be clearly open market
securities in all respects. The Federal Reserve Banks should be
treated and should seek to be treated exactly like any other purchaser.
Mr. Treiber said that he concurred in the conclusion of Messrs.
Hackley and Solomon that acquisition by the Reserve Banks of new Govern
ment securities pursuant to alternative A or alternative B would not be
subject to the $5 billion limit stated in section 14(b) of the Federal
Reserve Act. He felt, however, that there was a question of policy as
to whether the Federal Reserve should concur in a proposal calling for
special treatment for the Reserve Banks as compared with other holders
of the same maturing securities. Additional comments by Mr. Treiber
on this point were substantially as follows:
As a people we are very fortunate in the United States
that our Treasury submits itself to the discipline of the
market in the management of the public debt. Only in special
circumstances for short periods of time to ease the money

10/21/58
market problems that arise at tax payment dates are special
arrangements made between the Treasury and the Federal Re
serve.
We think it has been important to be able to say that,
in connection with Treasury financing, the Reserve Banks have
the same status as any other person--as any other security
holder. Once there is special treatment for the Federal Re
serve, it might be more easily argued that the Treasury should
pay the Reserve Banks a lower interest rate or that the Treas
ury should receive more favorable treatment in some other way
in dealing with the Federal Reserve.
Because we believe that it is important to continue to
be able to say, without further qualification or explanation,
that the Reserve Banks have the same status as any other per
son in the market, we think that it would be unwise for
Alternative A to be used.
Accordingly we would suggest that a period be inserted
after the words "Federal Reserve Act" in the last paragraph
of the proposed letter to Mr. Baird, and that in lieu of the
remainder of that paragraph there be inserted a new sentence
expressing the view that it would be unwise for the Reserve
Banks to receive special treatment in connection with Treas
ury financing, and suggesting that Alternative A not be
adopted.
In the discussion that followed, Mr. Bryan again mentioned that
other alternatives might accomplish the results the Treasury sought. He
felt that any step toward the Treasury's objectives would be important
and that various alternatives should be considered.
Mr. Mills suggested that the issues were first, whether the pro
posal was legal, to which Counsel had answered in the affirmative, and
second, whether the procedure was one that the Federal Open Market Com
mittee wished to adopt. On the latter, he said that it had always
seemed to him that the portfolio of the System Account should be looked
upon essentially as the base reserve supply of the commercial banking

10/21/58 -9
system over a period of years. If this were the case, the composition
of the portfolio beyond holdings of Treasury bills became a matter of
indifference. It would not do violence to his conscience to accede to
the Treasury's request. In fact, to do otherwise would clothe the
System with a degree of chastity that he did not think pertained.
Mr. Leach said there was a real danger in offerings of securi
ties which would have the effect of giving the Federal Reserve special
treatment.
Mr. Szymczak added the comment that this was the course by
which some other central banks had found that they gradually slipped
into the position of being the means for financing the public debt
rather than having their Government go to the market for its funds.
While he thought the System might be willing to take securities such
as the Treasury's proposal contemplated, he doubted that it was wise
for the Committee to include a statement in its reply to Under Secretary
Baird which would amount to a commitment as to what it might do policy
wise in the future. He also questioned whether the Treasury would wish
to use the suggested procedure at this time in view of the market
situation.
Chairman Balderston said that it was obvious that there was a
difference of opinion regarding the Treasury's proposal, even though
there seemed to be acceptance of the view of Counsel that the Reserve
Banks legally could acquire securities issued under such a proposal.
A response to the Treasury was required, he said, but he questioned

10/21/58 -10
whether it was sufficient to give the Treasury the results of a vote
on the issue without also giving it the benefit of the different views
expressed at the meeting.
The type of reply that might be given to the Treasury was dis
cussed at some length and a number of suggestions for change in the last
paragraph of the draft letter were considered. In the course of the
discussion, Mr. Mills stated that he would be willing to move that a
letter be sent to the Treasury in the form of the draft submitted,
adding that he would be agreeable to placing a period after the word
"Act" in the last paragraph and deleting the rest of the sentence.
Mr. Treiber said that he would be willing to second a motion
such as that proposed by Mr. Mills.
There then developed a discussion of how such a letter would
be interpreted by the Treasury, especially in view of its question
as to whether there were legal or other reasons which would preclude
the System's participation in a refunding of the type proposed. In
clarification, Mr. Mills stated that while a letter such as he proposed
would only comment on the legality of the proposal, his motion would
contemplate that a deputation would call on the Treasury at the time
the letter was delivered and would state that in essence the Committee
acceded to the Treasury's proposal. Such a deputation also would give
the Treasury the substance of the discussion at this meeting.
The Chairman suggested that the only way to get a clear expres
sion of views to send to the Treasury was to vote on the two issues,

10/21/58 -11-
that is, whether its proposal was legal and, if so, whether as a
matter of policy the Committee felt that the System would wish to
participate in a refunding pursuant thereto.
Mr. Mills said that the Committee had an obligation to give
the Treasury a clear reply and that if the vote was unfavorable on
either issue the Treasury would be at liberty to renew its plea to
the Committee.
Thereupon, Mr. Mills moved that the
Committee approve the letter to Under
Secretary of the Treasury Baird in the
form of the draft submitted with the memo
randum by Messrs. Hackley and Solomon dated
October 16, 1958.
In the absence of a second, the Chairman
declared Mr. Mills' motion lost.
WM. Szymczak then moved that the last
paragraph of the draft of letter be amended
by placing a period after the word "Act" and
deleting the rest of the sentence, and that
the letter as changed in this manner be sent
to Under Secretary Baird with the understand
ing that the Chairman, or whoever might be
designated by the Chairman, would present to
representatives of the Treasury the substance
of the views expressed at this meeting.
Mr. Szymczak's motion was seconded by
Mr. Leach.
The motion was put by the Chair and
carried, Messrs. Balderston, Fulton, Irons,
Leach, Mangels, Shepardson, Szymczak, and
Treiber voting for the motion, and Mr. Mills
voting "no."
The Chairman then called for an ex
pression of views by the alternate members

10/21/58 -12-
of the Committee and the Reserve Bank
Presidents who had not voted on Mr.
Szymczak's motion, and the following
views were expressed: Favorable to the
motion, Messrs. Erickson, Allen, Johns,
Dening, Bopp, and Bryan.
Mr. Shepardson next moved that as a
matter of policy the Committee record the
view that action by the Treasury to use
Alternative "A" as set forth in the letter
to Under Secretary Baird in refunding
securities would be unwise.
This motion was duly seconded and
carried, Messrs. Fulton, Irons, Leach,
Mangels, Shepardson, Szymczak, and Treiber
voting to approve, while Messrs. Balderston
and Mills voted "no."
In response to the Chairman's request
for an expression of views by the alternate
members of the Committee and the Reserve
Bank Presidents who had not voted on Mr.
Shepardson's motion, Messrs. Erickson,
Allen, Bopp, and Bryan indicated that they
would favor the motion, while Messrs.
Deming and Johns indicated that they would
not favor such motion.
Secretary's note: The letter to Under
Secretary of the Treasury Baird was trans
mitted under date of October 21, 1958 in
the following form:
This refers to your letter of October 1, 1958 and Mr.
Heffelfinger's letter of October 9, 1958 regarding certain
securities which the Treasury might issue in refunding about
$9.8 billion of certificates that mature December 1, 1958.
You refer to the possibility of the Reserve Banks acquiring
the proposed refunding securities in replacement of the
maturing certificates held by them, and you ask, in effect,
whether these refunding securities so acquired would be
subject to the $5 billion limit stated in section l4(b) of
the Federal Reserve Act on purchases of securities by the
Reserve Banks directly from the Treasury.

10/21/58 -13.
Mr. Heffelfinger's letter enclosed tentative drafts of
two circulars which might be used, alternatively, to carry
out the refunding. Under Alternative "A" about $2 billion
of the new securities would be offered to the general public,
with either cash or the maturing certificates being accepted
in payment for the new securities, but with no allotment
privilege being extended to the maturing certificates. There
would be an additional offering of the same new security to
the Reserve Banks in an additional amount in exchange for
their holdings of the maturing certificates, with that ex
change subscription being allotted in full. Alternative "BM
would be substantially the same as Alternative "A", except
that with respect to the $2 billion offering to the general
public, subscriptions accompanied by a tender of maturing
certificates in payment would be allotted in full.
Upon careful consideration of both the alternatives,
the Federal Open Market Committee has concluded that
acquisitions by the Reserve Banks pursuant to either such
type of refunding would not be subject to the $5 billion
limit stated in section l4(b) of the Federal Reserve Act.
During the foregoing discussion, Mr. Keir withdrew from the
meeting.
In supplementation of the staff memorandum distributed under
date of October 17, 1958, Mr. Young presented the following statement
on the economic situation:
Two words--continuing recovery--well sum up the composite
of most recent news about domestic economic activity.
Third quarter GNP is now estimated at $440 billion, up
$11 billion from the second quarter. Main factors in the rise
were reduced inventory liquidation and increased Government
and consumer expenditures.
Industrial production this month is rising further and
broadly, with extra stimulus emanating from labor settlement
and new-model output in the automobile industry.
Over the summer months, pickup in sales and new orders
in manufacturing industries generally ran about even, but in
September new orders moved ahead. For durable goods indus
tries only, new orders have been a bit ahead of sales since
June. Since June also, each successive month has shown a
slow-down in liquidation of manufacturers' inventories.

10/21/58 -14-
New construction activity in September at $50 plus
billion, annual rate, was close to record levels. Housing
starts at a rate of 1.3 million units were at a three-year
high and for the year as a whole through September were
10 per cent ahead of the first nine months of 1957. August
construction contracts exceeded those of a year ago by
nearly one-fourth.
With industrial and construction activity rising further,
labor markets are strengthening. Unemployment in September
declined about twice the seasonal amount, and unemployment
claims for October are indicating further unemployment de
clines. Recent unemployment declines have favored especially
male workers and long-term unemployed. September gains in
employment were most marked in durable goods manufacture, in
finance, and in Government activities.
With more employment, hours worked per week up slightly,
and hourly earnings a bit higher, rising wage payments are
helping to raise personal income. In September, personal in
come at $358 billion was 3 per cent higher than the February
low. Though 1.5 per cent higher in current dollars than the
August peak of last year, income was off about 1 per cent in
constant purchasing power.
While personal income rose further in September, retail
sales slipped off 2 per cent from high July-August levels.
Declines were most marked in durable goods lines which in pre
ceding months had shown the greatest advance.
With forward-look model introductions in process, the
automobile market is being closely watched. While work
stoppages have slowed manufacturers' shipments and '58-model
sales have continued to lag, dealer deliveries have been
enough to cut significantly further into dealer stocks, bring
ing them to a fourth below last year at this time. Used car
prices remain firm and used car stocks have also now been
reduced to about a fourth under last year's October level.
The farm harvest prospect is for record crops, especially
price-supported crops. With improved range conditions and
bulging feed supplies, buildup of herds and maintenance of
feeder stocks is limiting cattle slaughter. Hog slaughter
recently has been about at seasonal levels, but output of
poultry meat has been up significantly.
For the past several months, wholesale prices have been
stable, with easing of farm prices offsetting strengthening
tendencies in industrial material prices and price markups
for some fabricated items. Strength in industrial material
prices has been most pronounced in metals; prices of a few

10/21/58 -15-
materials such as petroleum products, lumber, and wool
have eased or declined. Among fabricated products, the
number of price advances, while growing slowly, is
growing. The necessity of covering higher costs in
prices is again a featured subject of discussion in
trade periodicals.
The consumer price index, which showed a slight
decline in August because of lower food prices, may show
a further decline for September. But a phase is now
starting when recent price advances of autos and some
other durables will begin to register an influence on the
index. These increases and further rises in prices of
services may change the index drift before the year end.
Abroad, in major industrial countries the news is
mixed. In Canada, recovery has slowed, with labor strife
and auto model changeover contributing factors. In
Britain, mild recession appears to have been extended.
In France, some recession evidence is reported. In
Germany, activity over-all continues high, but with steel,
coal, and textiles still showing weakness.
The level of U. S. exports has not changed significantly
since April. With many important nonindustrial countries
still suffering serious internal inflation difficulties, and
with prices of various materials which they supply at lower
levels than last year, pickup in their purchases from indus
trial countries, including the U. S., is hardly to be
expected yet.
There had been distributed copies of staff memoranda dated October
17, 1958, concerning the outlook for member bank reserve positions and the
outlook for Treasury cash requirements. With further reference to finan
cial developments, Mr. Thomas made the following statements
Bank credit developments during the past two months or
more have conformed closely to a pattern that might be con
sidered as satisfactory under existing circumstances.
Developments in capital markets, in contrast, have not been
satisfactory in that the shift from fixed return assets to
equities seems to be continuing. Although bond markets
showed some improvement in the first half of October, they
have weakened again during the past week.
Since July, banks have met moderate seasonal loan
demands and have underwritten Treasury cash offerings of

10/21/58 -16-
securities, but have been able to sell large amounts of
securities to nonbank investors. As a result demand de
posits have increased less than seasonally and time deposits
have recently declined. The Treasury deficit has been
financed through offerings of short-term securities without
causing an inflationary expansion in the money supply. Bank
loan expansion has in recent weeks been larger than in the
corresponding period of 1957, but less than in some other
years. Bank acquisitions of the Treasury bills and note
issued this month were remarkably small.
This result has been obtained with, at the most, only
moderately restrictive monetary policies. Net free reserves
of member banks, which were reduced in August, have remained
close to $100 million since the beginning of September and
the discount rate has continued well below short-term open
market rates.
To some extent, the slackened monetary expansion along
with Treasudy deficit financing and general economic recovery
has been possible because of previously accumulated liquidity.
Demand deposits, after adjustment for seasonal variations,
increased by over 2 per cent in July, following an increase of
two per cent in the first half of the year. Time deposits
increased at a rate of over 1 per cent a month from December
until July. Further monetary expansion, other than seasonal,
has not been needed to finance economic recovery. The higher
level of interest rates has helped to attract some of these
available funds into other uses, such as short-term Government
securities. Turnover of demand deposits, seasonally adjusted,
has increased slightly in recent months but continued less
than a year ago.
Yields on Government securities rose in the latter part
of September after announcement of the Treasury financing, but
declined somewhat after the beginning of October. The market
was given reassurance by the favorable reception of the new
Treasury issues and the large share absorbed by nonbank in
vestors. Yields on short-term securities have continued higher
than they were prior to mid-September, reflecting in part the
influence of the increased supply of bills and short notes re
sulting from recent Treasury financing, as well as anticipation
of further growth in credit demands. The three-month Treasury
bill yield at around 2-5/8 per cent is well below rates prevail
ing in late 1956 and throughout 1957. Rates on open-market
commercial paper have been raised to 3-1/ per cent compared
with a low of 1-1/2 per cent in July and a high of 6-1/8 per
cent a year ago, and rates on finance company paper and bankers'
acceptances have also been raised.

10/21/58 -17-
Yields on long-term Government securities, after rising
in September to above the peak levels of 1957, also declined
somewhat after the beginning of October to around the levels
prevailing before the financing announcement. They have
risen again, however, during the past week to only slightly
below their earlier highs.
Although bond markets generally strengthened somewhat in
the first half of October, they are still influenced by the
tendency of investors to shift into equities. Notwithstanding
occasional setbacks, stock prices have risen to new high levels.
Yields on high-grade stocks have declined further below those on
high-grade bonds.
New issues of corporate securities, which were in relatively
large volume during September, have been much lighter in October.
Issues by State and local governments in October are expected to
remain close to the average for the year to date, if a large New
York State Power Authority issue is offered this month.
The trend of economic events and the prospective borrowing
needs of the Federal Government indicate the likelihood of grow
ing credit demands in the near future. To what extent these may
be supplied from accumulated and current savings and to what
extent growing demands for bank credit develop remain to be seen.
Seasonal monetary needs call for a further growth of over $4
billion in total bank credit by the end of the year. The Treas
ury will need to borrow additional cash of about $4 billion in
the period and nearly as much more in January. For the remainder
of the fiscal year after January, occasional Treasury borrowing
needs will be more than offset by retirements of debt.
In addition to seasonal needs for currency and required
reserves, the outflow of gold seems likely to persist. This
country's current payments and receipts for trade and services
with other countries are approximately in balance, while our
foreign investments and aid supply funds to foreigners who
continue to add to their dollar claims. Some of these claims
are kept in dollar balances--deposits or short-term securities-
holdings of which have been increasing recently, and some are
taken in gold.
The drain on bank reserves resulting from foreign gold
acquisitions and changes in foreign balances at the Reserve
Banks has amounted to about half a billion dollars in the
past three months. Some drain is likely to continue, although
the magnitude is difficult to predict. This is largely the
result of fundamental forces in our international economic
position, that can be changed only through the operation of
market forces and competitive factors. While the effects of

10/21/58 -18-
the drain on bank reserves may be offset by System open
market operations, this situation is one that calls for
a generally restrictive credit policy in this country.
More effective correctives, however, would be moves to
reduce the budgetary deficit and the checking of price
rises due to wage and other cost increases. The situation
would also seem to call for removal of some of the obstacles
to foreign trade and capital movements in many other
countries.
Customary seasonal currency and deposit growth, together
with an allowance for a further gold drain at the rate of
about $100 million a month, indicate a need for about $1.3
billion of additional reserves between mid-October and the
end of December. Except for about $300 million of temporary
needs in the next two weeks, most of these will develop after
the middle of November.
The task of supplying reserve needs through open market
operations is relatively clear and simple. The more difficult
problem facing the System as a whole is the question of the
discount rate. That rate is out of line with market rates.
Yet there is no indication that member banks have been increas
ing their borrowing to obtain reserves for undue credit expan
sion. As long as this situation continues there is no strong
need for a higher rate. An increase at this time might be
disturbing to an already shaky bond market.
There are, however, strong reasons for raising the rate
at this time. With economic activity fast moving to higher
levels and with a large Government deficit to be financed,
credit demands are likely to increase. Undue expansion might
easily develop in some sectors. A growing economy requires a
high rate of investment and saving and a level and structure
of interest rates which will keep these elements in balance.
The fear of inflation and the tendency to shift from fixed
return assets to equities also exert pressure for rising rates.
The discount rate will eventually need to be increased in order
to prevent bank credit based on borrowed reserves from being
drawn into financing dangerous developments of this nature.
As long as an adequate flow of money is available or is
supplied through open market operations to finance a sound
recovery and seasonal needs, banks should not need to increase
their borrowings. Under such circumstances a higher discount
rate would not be a particularly restrictive influence. Ex
cept for the psychological effect of an increase, it would
become restrictive only as credit expanded beyond the desired
limits. It would probably be less disturbing and more effec
tive to make the change before rather than after such a
situation developed. The schedule of Treasury financing
operations is also a consideration in determining the timing
of discount rate action.

10/21/58 -19-
Mr. Treiber next made a statement substantially as follows
Over-all business activity continues to expand, but the
expansion now appears to be proceeding less rapidly than in
earlier months. There are still a number of uncertainties-
for example, the reception of the new model automobiles and
the effects of the sharp rise in interest rates, especially
in the construction field.
Recent data suggest that the econoy may encounter more
difficulty in pushing to new high ground than had appeared
earlier, when most observers were impressed with the shortness
of the recession and the vigor of the recovery. It may prove
difficult to make much headway in reducing the present un
desirable high level of unemployment.
Bank credit is not expanding rapidly. This is true as
regards holdings of Government securities as well as business
loans. The commercial banks bought substantial amounts of
the recent Treasury issues but they have also sold a substantial
amount of Government securities. The underwriting job appears
to have been effective.
In general, prices have continued to be stable. The stock
market, of course, has been an exception. We were glad to see
the Board's action increasing margin requirements, thereby
minimizing the extent to which further extensions of credit
might contribute to the upward pressures in the stock market.
For the remainder of the year we do not see any major in
flationary pressures that are monetary in nature.
The problems of Treasury financing are difficult but not
unmanageable. It looks as if the Treasury may be announcing
the terms of a $3 billion cash offering in the first week of
November. After that it will have the problem of refunding
$12 billion of securities maturing on December 1 and December
15. Early in the new year the Treasury will again have to
come to the market with a cash offering.
We have been concerned over the rapid rise this summer
in interest rates. Expectations, of course, had much to do
with the speed and height of that rise. In our opinion, the
state of the economy and the prospective demands for bank
credit do not call for any steps on our part to encourage
further increases in interest rates at this time. The System
has sought, over the last several weeks, to promote stability
in the money market and in the Government securities market.
The effort has been reasonably successful.
In our opinion, in the period until the next meeting of
the Committee, the System should continue to seek to promote

10/21/58 -20-
stability in the money market and the U. S. Government securi
ties market. We should seek to avoid any action that might
cause a deterioration in market atmosphere. Such a policy
would include:
(a) no change in the directive; and
(b) probably the maintenance of free reserves
at about the level of recent weeks.
The discount rate poses a difficult problem. The present
rate is substantially out of line with short-term money market
rates and there are good arguments for raising the discount
rate for technical reasons. But to bring the discount rate
fully into its historical relationship with short-term market
rates would require an increase to something like 2-3/4 per
cent, and an increase of that size would almost certainly be
regarded as a vigorous move toward further credit restraint.
It would be likely to set off a new round of interest rate
advances. On the other hand, another increase of 1/4 per cent
would obviously fall short of restoring a more usual relation
ship of the discount rate to market rates. An increase of 1/2
per cent would come closer to establishing a more normal
relationship, but might be construed as a further step toward
a more restrictive credit policy, even if it were announced as
merely a technical adjustment.
Every Thursday in recent weeks at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York we have had an extensive discussion of the
discount rate, including the possibility of increasing the
rate at some appropriate time following the completion of the
Treasury's recent financing efforts. Our directors feel
strongly that the rise in interest rates generally has been
much too rapid and has gone too far for the present state of
business recovery. They are impressed by the continued high
level of unemployment and the continued uncertainties in the
outlook for further recovery--some, in fact, stemming from
the sharp rise in interest rates. Consequently, they would
strongly oppose action that could be construed as validating
the rise in market rates which they regard as excessive.
They fear that such action might cause further advances in
interest rates and renewed unsettlement in the capital markets,
and put a new road block in the way of further recovery.
Indeed some of our directors would prefer that through open
market operations, the existing degree of restraint be reduced,
thus encouraging a reduction in money market rates and in this
way narrowing the gap between the discount rate and money
market rates.
The officers of the Bank are impressed by the case for a
technical correction in the level of the discount rate, and

10/21/58 -21-
have so informed the directors. But we, in turn, have been
impressed by the directors' conclusion that any step toward
more restraint would be unwise and by their conviction that
a rise in the discount rate now would be interpreted as such
a step. We believe that this is a situation calling for the
best collective judgment and appraisals of the System as a
whole and hope that it may be furthered by today's discussion.
We are impressed with the important part now played by
market expectations. Last fall there was a rapid and sub
stantial reduction in interest rates even though the easing
action of the Federal Reserve at that time was relatively
modest in extent. This summer, as evidence of an upturn in
business became clear, the market turned around in anticipa
tion of a shift in Federal Reserve policy and the turn was
accentuated b the collapse of speculation in Government
securities and by spreading discussion of the outlook for a
persistent inflationary bias in the economy, which encouraged
investment in equities rather than fixed-interest securities.
In these circumstances, the financial community was unusually
sensitive to Federal Reserve policy actions. Each step taken
in the direction of reducing credit ease was interpreted as
the prelude to other moves. The combined result of all these
influences was a rise in market rates of extraordinary rapidity,
and a correspondingly sharp fall in bond prices.
The prices of Government securities have fluctuated so
greatly in the last twelve months that public confidence in
Government securities has been severely shaken. We think that
the period of greater market stability in recent weeks has been
highly desirable and that the System should use its best efforts
to promote a further period of stability, not only in the in
terest of successful Treasury financing but even more in the
interest of further business recovery.
Mr. Johns said that evidence of the strength and rapidity of eco
nomic expansion was mounting and was significantly more observable now
than a few weeks ago. The time was approaching when the full impact of
the Federal deficit would be felt, it seemed reasonable to expect that
consumer expenditures would rise as disposable income increased, and busi
nessmen appeared more confident about the future than they had been in the

10/21/58 -22
recent past. Private domestic investment appeared likely to be
higher in the fourth quarter than in the third, primarily because
of expected larger outlays for inventories, and it seemed reasonable
to anticipate further growth in outlays by State and local govern
ments.
All things considered, Mr. Johns said, it was his view that
the current degree of monetary restraint was inadequate. Federal and
private borrowing should be financed in a noninflationary way and the
Federal Reserve System should create conditions conducive to that end.
At its present level the discount rate had remained significantly
below short-term money market rates for about two months, which could
reasonably be taken by observers to mean that the System considered
present money market rates too high and intended to cause or permit
those rates to decline. In Mr. Johns' opinion, the Reserve Banks
should not now administer the discount window in a fashion conducive
to borrowing by member banks. Therefore, he had concluded that the
discount rate should be increased at least to 2-1/2 per cent and
possibly to 2-3/ per cent. In view of the Treasury's needs and
taking into account the even-keel policy discussed at the September 30
meeting, there should be a reasonable period of stability before and
after Treasury financing operations. Accordingly, it seemed to him
that a discount rate increase should take place not later than the
first of November. If so, a special meeting of the directors of the

10/21/58 -23-
St. Louis Bank would be necessary. He was prepared to request the
Chairman to convene such a meeting, with a view to considering a
discount rate increase, at whatever time seemed most appropriate in
the light of plans of the other Reserve Banks--if in fact there were
such plans--to take action between now and the first of November.
As to open market operations, Mr. Johns said that he would
favor working toward a somewhat tighter situation than had prevailed
during the past few weeks. He would not seek to impede an adjustment
in interest rates--in this case an upward adjustment--which would tend
to make Government securities more attractive to nonbank investors.
Mr. Johns pointed out that the period was approaching in which it would
be necessary to supply some reserves because market factors would tend
to tighten. He suggested that these be supplied according to a time
schedule determined by the Open Market Committee so as to minimise
System intervention in the market, thereby enabling the market to
discern the System's intentions and not be confused by frequent
operations for the purpose of ironing out short-run fluctuations in
reserves. Mr. Johns said he was pleased to read in a market advisory
letter yesterday a warning that readers should not be surprised if the
Federal Reserve were to permit the reserve position to fluctuate
somewhat, even within a short period, from free to net borrowed re-
serves, nor to be surprised if the Federal Reserve did not attempt to
offset factors such as float. Therefore, he suggested that the

10/21/58 -24-
Committee schedule injections of reserves, at least for the next three
weeks, in some regular time sequence. He felt that the reserves in-
jected in the next three weeks should be in the range of $50-100 million
per week, and that float and Treasury balances should be allowed to
fluctuate without being offset.
Mr. Bryan said that recovery in the Sixth District was apparently
broad and general, and this also seemed true nationally. There had been
an astonishing revival of borrowings from the Atlanta Bank, quite general
throughout the district. With 5 per cent of the nation's reserves, Sixth
District borrowings from the Reserve Bank were now running about 14 per
cent of the nation's total. Deposits had gone up rapidly and loans of
commercial banks were showing a good trend.
With regard to policy, Mr. Bryan's inclination was to make an
adjustment in the discount rate. The System now seemed to be telling
the investing public two different things: the open market instrument
was saying one thing and the discount instrument another. It was his
view that the two instruments should tell the same story. If this was
true, the System's choice at this point was either by open market opera-
tions to bring down the level of short-term rates to a level more con-
sonant with the discount rate, or to bring up the discount rate.
Present economic circumstances indicated the latter. While this was
his view, Mr. Bryan said that he was not sure whether the directors
of the Atlanta Bank would take the same view.

10/21/58 -25-
Mr. Bopp reported that a recently completed survey by the
Philadelphia Bank of capital expenditure plans of firms accounting
for 60 per cent of manufacturing employment in metropolitan
Philadelphia indicated 1959 capital expenditures 14 per cent less
than in 1958, employment in March 1959 about the same as in September
1958, and operations in the second quarter of 1959 at 78 per cent of
capacity compared with 73 per cent in the third quarter of this year.
Little change was expected in inventories. Smaller capital outlays
in 1959 than this year were planned by both durable and nondurable
goods manufacturers. The decrease for durables was a little over 2
per cent and for nondurables 23 per cent, the latter mostly in the
chemical and petroleum industries. Manufacturers in Lehigh, Trenton,
and Wilmington had plans to spend about the same for capital improve-
ments next year, an increase in nondurables offsetting a decrease in
durables.
Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Bopp noted two principal
problems. The first and most important was whether recent objectives
with respect to the degree of ease or restraint appeared appropriate
for the next few weeks. There was evidence that national recovery
was continuing, though at a somewhat slower pace. September data,
seasonally adjusted, showed a small decrease in retail sales while
industrial production and personal income rose less than in any of
the preceding four months. Manufacturers' new orders were down in

10/21/58 -26-
August following three successive increases. Inventory liquidation
continued, even though at a reduced rate. Business firms planned to
spend less for plant and equipment in 1959 than in 1958, and public
acceptance of the 1959 automobiles was still uncertain. Furthermore,
it appeared that actions taken had been successful in instilling wide-
spread confidence that the Federal Reserve was resolved to deal firmly
with the threat of inflation. For these reasons, Mr. Bopp believed
that the System should try to maintain about the same availability of
credit as in recent weeks.
The second problem, Mr. Bopp said, was a technical one; namely,
that the discount rate was far out of line with short-term market rates.
The present spread was creating some confusion and uncertainty as to
System intentions but, on the other hand, it would be unfortunate if
an increase in the discount rate should be interpreted as a decisive
move toward a more restrictive policy under present circumstances.
In view of the forthcoming Treasury financing, including the probable
new borrowing in November and refunding of certificates maturing
December 1 and of the bond issue maturing December 15, the alternatives
were to raise the discount rate in the next few weeks or to wait until
around the first of the year. Particularly after reading the minutes
of the last Committee meeting, Mr. Bopp said he believed that an in-
crease of 1/2 per cent in the next two or three weeks was the preferable
course. He felt it would be fortunate if some Reserve Banks could raise

10/21/58 -27-
the rate this week, in view of the expected rise in free reserves to
about $250 million. At the Philadelphia Bank, an executive committee
meeting was scheduled for this Thursday, but Mr. Bopp said that he
would be happy to call a meeting of the full board of directors and
recommend an increase in the discount rate of 1/2 per cent if some of
the other Reserve Banks deemed it feasible to move this week. Mr. Bopp
added that in view of the considerably slower pace of recovery in the
Third District than nationally, he thought it was understandable that
the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia would not want to be the first
or the only Reserve Bank to recommend an increase in the discount rate.
Even though the market probably had largely discounted a rate increase,
he thought it desirable to explain the increase as primarily a technical
adjustment to bring the discount rate into better alignment with the
short-term market rates.
Mr. Fulton said that the steel industry was undergoing a rapid
increase, and operations were better in everything but oil casing pipe
and structural steel. The increase had not shown up yet in automobile
steel because of strikes, but expansion there was expected. Despite
this upturn, unemployment throughout the district was still high and
no areas had been removed from the substantial labor surplus category.
Construction activity was running about 9 per cent above last year
because of a rise in heavy construction. Banks had been borrowing
but there were no continuous borrowers at the Reserve Banks.

10/21/58 -28-
Mr. Fulton stated that he would like to propose an increase
in the discount rate to his directors, but at their joint meeting
earlier this month there had been a consensus that the rate should
not be increased at that time. He did not know what the board would
do if it met next week. On open market operations, Mr. Fulton thought
the Committee could be tending toward a zero reserve position. The
posture of the System should be to announce and maintain a degree of
restraint.
Mr. Shepardson commented that the country was experiencing a
healthy, stable recovery, and he thought it desirable for the System
to lend support to that type of recovery rather than to try to push
things too fast. The level of unemployment was a matter of concern,
but it seemed to be a natural corollary of the increase in productivity
and this situation could not be expected to improve rapidly. In his
opinion it was important that the System keep "ahead of the game," as
long as there was in prospect the inflationary pressure of the Federal
deficit, the effects of which would become more pronounced in the
months ahead. The situation would certainly not seem to call for any
lessening of restraint; in fact, he preferred open market policy a
little more restrictive than it had been. In terms of reserves this
might mean "thinking on the down side rather than on the up side."
Turning to the discount rate, Mr. Shepardson noted that it
posed two problems. First, there was the disparity between that rate

10/21/58 -29-
and short-term open market rates. He felt that the discount rate
should be brought into better alignment with market rates as promptly
as possible, particularly in view of Treasury activities in the next
few months. This appeared to involve increasing the rate fairly
promptly or being boxed in for perhaps three months. Thus, he favored
action at this time to increase the rate by 1/2 per cent and, as he
had said, he also would favor a little more restriction on reserves
if the System could clear the atmosphere as to the discount rate
promptly. This course seemed preferable to the uncertainty that
would exist as long as the disparity between the discount rate and
short-term market rates continued. He would not favor as an alterna-
tive freeing of reserves to bring the bill rate down more in line with
the discount rate. In summary, he would like to maintain the relative
stability that had prevailed recently and yet leave no doubt as to the
posture of the System in meeting the longer-range problem of Federal
deficit financing.
Mr. Mills said that the policy views that he had expressed in
recent meetings had focused largely on the financial factors rather
than the economic factors bearing on System policy and had brought
out his belief that the System should avoid pressure that would be
damaging to an already unhealthy United States Government securities
market. Of recent days, however, his reasoning had shifted to a
belief that the System should be following a more restrictive policy
than he had thought necessary earlier. This was for the reason that

10/21/58 -30-
as he viewed developments through the summer and fall, the Federal
Reserve had fallen captive to problems that had arisen out of its
earlier policy actions so that it now was faced with the unenviable
choice of directing its efforts to succor within limits the Govern-
ment securities market or else to accept as an objective the more
immediate necessity of contending with an inflationary psychology,
especially as it had expressed itself in stock market speculation.
Mr. Mills said he sensed a slightly more temperate view on inflation
than in recent weeks, but notwithstanding that fact the System had an
obligation to direct policy on the side of restraint on the expansion
of bank credit as being a possibly contributory influence to inflation
and the closely related problem of speculation. This policy would
comprehend that the System would wait to provide new reserves until
they were clearly needed by the commercial banking system in order to
meet the legitimate demands for credit that were imposed upon it.
That is, instead of leading with the provision of reserves, the System
would only follow a clearly expressed demand.
Relating that problem to a change in discount rate, Mr. Mills
said that there should be no precipitate increase in the rate. An
increase should be delayed long enough to permit the commercial bank-
ing system and the market to adjust to a moderately more restrictive
credit policy. As the effects of a more restrictive policy penetrated
through the banking system it might be reasonable to anticipate addi-
tional demands for discounts, and Mr. Mills felt that those demands

10/21/58 -31-
might be freely met, as a means of providing a marginal supply of
reserves at the initiative of the banks, until the adjustments in
the market had been completed. He hoped these adjustments could be
completed in advance of the Treasury's next approach to the market.
If by that time the movement of rates in the market indicated a
discount rate considerably out of line with the structure of market
rates, then the discount rates should be raised.
In response to a question from the Chairman, Mr. Mills said
this adjustment conceivably might work itself out before the next
meeting of the Committee.
Mr. Leach reported continued economic gains in the Fifth
District. Employment had shown steady growth and unemployment had
steadily declined.
After commenting on several specific fields of district
activity, Mr. Leach said that he thought the shift in System credit
policy to less ease prior to the recent Treasury financing was appro-
priate to the expansion of business that had occurred. However, the
continuing growth in activity did not call for reducing reserve avail-
ability to the extent of bringing about net borrowed reserves.
With respect to discount rate action, Mr. Leach had some mis-
givings as to the possible effect of an increase on the market but
thought it would be better to take the risk now as there might not
be a more favorable time in the near future. Also, he assumed that

10/21/58 -32-
a rate increase had been fairly well discounted. Accordingly, he
favored a 1/2 per cent increase sometime between now and the first
of November, primarily to bring the rate more in line with the changed
economic situation and with short-term interest rates. He would seek
public understanding that such rate increase was not for the purpose
of increasing restraint materially. While it was true that member
banks had not abused the low rate, it appeared that the System would
be frozen in for the next three or four months and it was not possible
to know what would happen during that period. Taking all things into
account and realizing the discount rate must go up sometime, it seemed
to him that there might not be a better time to act than between
October 23 and October 30. Whatever restraint would result from an
increase in the discount rate plus maintaining free reserves close to
the zero mark would be as much as he considered necessary now. The
Committee's current policy directive still seemed to Mr. Leach to be
appropriate, even though there had been substantial economic recovery
since it was adopted.
At Chairman Balderston's request, Mr. Tow commented to the
effect that economic conditions in the Tenth District were continuing
on the favorable side. Developments in agriculture showed a striking
improvement in the Tenth District position compared with the country
as a whole. Construction contracts were showing sharp improvement in
recent weeks. Nonfarm employment had changed little recently, but

10/21/58 -33-
this picture might accelerate as automobile employment picked up.
With respect to commercial banking, Mr. Tow reported a marked
increase in agricultural loans. Banks had taken steps to improve
their liquidity by reducing holdings of Treasury notes and bonds.
Time deposits at reporting member banks had shown evidence of shifting
to other investments with more attractive rates of return. At country
banks, however, time deposits were still going up although at a less
rapid rate than earlier.
Mr. Allen stated that although the rapid rise in some measures
of recovery may have slowed in September, most people in the Seventh
District who follow economic trends were expecting a continuance of
the general rise in activity for some time to come. Improvement in
district employment was evidenced by the fact that in September the
Labor Department had raised the classification of Peoria, Kenosha, and
Cedar Rapids. At present no localities in the nation were classified
in the "A" category while the only two classified in the "B" category--
1.5 to 3 per cent unemployment--were Cedar Rapids and Washington, D.C.
Record crops of wheat, soybeans, barley, and grain sorghums had been
expected for some time, and corn was now added to the list. The corn
crop was especially good in Iowa and "soft" corn would not be the
problem it was last year for the early frost did little damage.
As yet, little evidence was seen of a pickup in loan demand,
Mr. Allen said. A drop in commercial and industrial loans following

10/21/58 -34-
the September tax borrowing offset 4O per cent of the early Septem-
ber gains, approximately the national experience. Continuing inventory
liquidation by industry was undoubtedly a factor. In the first half of
September, 14 per cent of the new business credit reported by Seventh
District banks was for maturities in excess of one year, compared with
10 per cent last year. Reserve pressures on the large district banks
increased sharply in the past two weeks as they acquired Treasury
securities. Borrowing at the Chicago Bank remained relatively small
but some larger banks had been net buyers of Federal funds. Mr. Allen
suggested that more of those banks should take advantage of the current
market to dispose of recently acquired Government securities and thus
put themselves in a better position to serve the Treasury again in the
near future as underwriters.
Mr. Allen continued by saying that although he was rather
impressed by the discount rate views presented by Mr. Treiber, he
leaned more to the view expressed first by Mr. Thomas and then by
others that in the near future the rate should be increased by 1/2 per
cent as a means of coordinating the instruments of monetary policy.
The next meeting of the Chicago directors was scheduled for October 30.
As to reserves, he agreed that the Committee should lean on the side of
restraint but not too much. He would like to see reserves kept at
approximately the recent levels for the next three weeks, with emphasis
on the lower side.

10/21/58
-35-
Mr. Deming reported no striking changes in the Ninth District
economy, and recovery was proceeding about as elsewhere. Consumer
buying had been slower than seemed natural but had picked up in the
past week or two. Financial markets suggested a widespread infla-
tionary psychology but there was no run to get into goods. In fact,
there was widespread feeling that in the short run the forces of infla-
tion were under reasonable control, and such fear as existed related
mainly to the long run.
Mr. Deming thought the System must recognize the signals in
the financial markets. The present posture of mild restraint was
appropriate. The point about mildness was important, he said, and
reflected the facts of continued high unemployment, the quite natural
slowing down in the rate of recovery highlighted by the pause in con-
sumer buying, and the capacity-productivity factors. He would not wish
to foster higher interest rates at this time. Unless private credit
demand showed a greater than moderate seasonal increase he would hope
that the general rate pattern would hold for the immediate future.
This implied that the present level of restraint was about right for
the immediate future.
With respect to the discount rate, Mr. Deming said a rise was
called for primarily as a technical matter. He hoped this could take
place within the next two weeks. Because such an increase would be
primarily technical, it seemed to him important that the System move

10/21/58 -36-
together and extremely important that the New York Bank move among
the leading Banks because of its location in the financial center.
Mr. Mangels reported continued improvement in the West Coast
economy but at a somewhat slower pace than in recent months. Employ-
ment had increased in several categories and a truckers' strike, which
affected over-all employment in September, had now been settled. How-
ever, for the district as a whole unemployment was higher in September
than in August, a rise in California more than offsetting a decrease
in the Pacific Northwest. Heavy construction awards, which in August
were 11 per cent below a year earlier, bounced back in September.
Steel production increased 12 per cent over August and aluminum pro-
duction also increased. Prices for copper, lead, and zinc were up.
Although fir lumber prices had dropped again, plywood prices were firm
at $80, a peak figure for 1958, and lumber producers were still optimistic
about the remainder of 1958. Vacancies in multiple unit dwellings were
continuing to appear in Oregon and other parts of the district,
particularly southern California, where rates as high as 10 to 25 per
cent were reported in some areas. Interest rates on construction loans
to contractors were going up and banks were beginning to shy away from
long-term commitments to purchase mortgages. The wheat and cotton crops
were about 8 per cent higher than in 1957, but production of citrus
fruits was down. Cash receipts of farmers in August were about 7-1/2
per cent below August 1957. Department store sales were off about 1
per cent in the four-week period ended October 11.

10/21/58 -37-
After commenting in some detail on business and banking
figures for the Twelfth District, Mr. Mangels said that while
activity still continued to increase at a reduced rate, demand for
bank credit was not heavy--no more than seasonal--and auto sales
thus far did not indicate that they would spark a business upsurge
in the near future. Plant and equipment expenditures were not booming.
The only real exuberance was in the stock market, but this did not
signify a rapid and sustained upsurge in business. Long-term interest
rates were as high as during the boom and the Treasury would be coming
into the market again in December for new money. Nonbank investors
seemed hesitant to buy Treasury issues on even a short-term basis.
All things considered, Mr. Mangels felt that the System should
not tighten any further. He favored maintaining free reserves around
$100 million, and the policy directive seemed satisfactory.
With reference to the discount rate, Mr. Mangels pointed to
the difficulty of explaining to the public that a rate increase had
been made for technical reasons. His inclination would be to withhold
action at this time. He did not think this would mean having to wait
as long as four months. He made it clear that he was speaking for
himself and that he did not know how his directors felt about the
matter.
Eleventh District conditions continued highly favorable, Mr.
Irons said. While there had not been an upsurge recently, on the

10/21/58 -38-
other hand that district had not had a very sharp decline in activity
earlier. Some improvement had appeared in the petroleum industry,
and most other nonagricultural measures on which he commented indicated
favorable developments. Nothing in the district differed materially
from national developments so far as he could see.
On policy, Mr. Irons agreed that the discount rate should be
changed. A 2-1/2 per cent rate seemed consistent with the level of
market rates. No steps should be taken through open market operations
to bring about a lower level of market rates. Therefore, it was appro-
priate to move on the discount rate. By moving, the System might dispel
some of the uncertainty that Mr. Treiber had mentioned. Timing was
important in view of prospective Treasury activities. The next meeting
of the Dallas Bank Board of Directors was scheduled for November 13,
Mr. Irons said, but a meeting of the executive committee would be held
on Thursday of this week and he would be willing to try to convert that
executive committee meeting into a meeting of directors at which he
would recommend an increase in the discount rate to 2-1/2 per cent.
An increase in the rate this week he thought would quiet speculation
on the discount rate for some little time. He felt open market opera-
tions had been mildly restrictive and he would not urge a much more
restrictive level in this area, but he would not be disturbed if free
reserves ranged around the zero level or $50-75 million.

10/21/58 -39-
Mr. Erickson reported continuing recovery in the First District.
Over 15 successive weeks ending October 11, electrical output had been
higher than in the comparable period last year. In each week of a 14-
week period ending October 11, department store sales exceeded last year;
in the last few weeks the increases exceeded the national average. Shoe
production had been running 2 per cent behind last year but the present
outlook was favorable, with forward buying at the shoe show the largest
in five years. Insured unemployment declined for 11 weeks through
September 27 but remained substantially higher than a year ago. Use of
the discount window since the first of this month had been much smaller
than in recent months. Last week participants in the Regional Outlook
Conference gave forecasts of gross national product during the second
quarter of 1959 ranging from $440 to $475 billion, with a median of
$456. Forecasts for the industrial production index ranged from 138
to 151 with a median of 145. Participants seemed much more optimistic
than at the preceding Conference but there was quite a bit of appre-
hension about financing--from the standpoint of both the Government
and the markets--as well as about the prospect of inflationary diffi-
culties over the next six months.
Mr. Erickson saw no reason to change the Committee's policy
directive. He favored continuing the degree of restraint of the last
three weeks, with free reserves around $100 million.

10/21/58 -40-
After considering all aspects of a discount rate change, Mr.
Erickson said he felt the rate should be increased to 2-1/2 per cent.
He did not know whether the Boston Bank directors would reach the same
conclusion, noting that Boston was the last Reserve Bank to move to
the present 2 per cent level. Nevertheless, Mr. Erickson said he
intended to recommend a 2-1/2 per cent rate at the next meeting of
the directors.
Mr. Szymczak said he was impressed with the fact that the
Government had a deficit and would continue for some time to have a
deficit. This was the heart of the problem before the Committee be-
cause the market interpreted this fact to mean that the System would
have to provide more reserves. There was a trend toward inflation
which seemed irresistible and this being the case the policy the Com-
mittee had been pursuing and would have to pursue was bound to be
unpopular. Mr. Szymczak felt that the Committee should continue its
present policy despite some unemployment. Similarly, the discount
rate must be changed. The fact was, he said, that a rate increase
had already been discounted. An increase should be as much on a
uniform basis through the System as possible and should be made
as soon as possible. While a statement that the change represented
a technical adjustment might be desirable, Mr. Szymczak commented
that we could not be sure how the market would interpret the change.
He agreed with Mr. Mills that the System would have to provide

10/21/58 -41-
additional reserves during coming weeks, including consideration
for the needs of the Treasury. He would lean in the direction of
some free reserves during this period. Mr. Szymczak said he thought
no change in the Committee's directive was needed at this time, that
the policy it had been pursuing was correct, and that, while addi-
tional restraint on inflationary forces would be desirable, he did
not think it feasible to increase the general level of credit restraint
at this time.
Acting Chairman Balderston said that the consensus seemed to
call for no change in the Committee's directive and for a free reserve
target about the same as during the past few weeks, but perhaps with
some inclination toward more restraint.
Mr. Treiber said that if an adjustment in the discount rate
were to be made merely for technical reasons, not accompanied by
another turn in the program of restraint through open market operations,
the possibility of adverse effects would be small. Nevertheless, the
New York Bank's directors had been fearful of another turn in restraint
that might lead to adverse market developments. He did not know what
the directors might do with respect to the discount rate at their meet-
ing this week, but he agreed with Mr. Deming that when a technical
adjustment in the discount rate was made there was great merit in
having the New York Bank among the first group of Reserve Banks making
such an increase, and he also thought it desirable that several Banks
participate in the initial action.

10/21/58 -42-
In a discussion of meetings of directors of Reserve Banks, it
appeared that five or six of the Banks might have meetings this week
at which a change in the discount rate would be considered. The Chair-
man stated that it would be desirable to have the System move as a unit,
but if a group of the Banks acted to increase the rate on Thursday of
this week, that action would indicate to the market the nature of
System policy and changes by other Reserve Banks could follow along a
few days later.
Mr. Deming reiterated his view that an adjustment at this time
would be for technical reasons and that, because of this, he considered
it especially important that the Reserve Bank in the country's principal
money center be among the first group of Banks to move. If this could
not be the case, his personal preference would be to delay action a few
days.
Mr. Bryan commented that if action were taken by several Reserve
Banks and particularly if New York was included in the group--which he
agreed would be highly desirable--the System's posture would be clearly
indicated and it would not matter much when the other Banks followed
along.
The Chairman then reverted to the Committee's directive and
open market policy, calling for additional comments as to policy.
Mr. Szymczak stated that, as Mr. ills had indicated, the
System would be having to put reserves into the market for seasonal
and other factors.

10/21/58
-43-
Mr. Leach said that he was not sure there was a consensus
for greater tightness through open market operations, in fact, he
would have thought the comments indicated little change in the degree
of tightness to be sought through open market operations.
Mr. Treiber said that he thought it highly desirable that there
be about the same target for open market operations, that he believed
that in present circumstances it would be undesirable to aim toward
greater restraint at the same time that an increase in discount rates
was being made.
Acting Chairman Balderston said that he personally agreed with
this view and that unless there were objections it would be understood
that the Committee was agreed on a range of free reserves between now
and the next meeting about the same as during the past three weeks.
No disagreement with this suggestion was indicated.
The Chairman then inquired whether any change in the directive
or in its limits was considered desirable, and no suggestion for change
was made.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re-
serve Bank of New York until otherwise
directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (in-
cluding replacement of maturing securities, and allowing
maturities to run off without replacement) for the System
Open Market Account in the open market or, in the case of
maturing securities, by direct exchange with the Treasury,

10/21/58 -44-
as may be necessary in the light of current and prospective
economic conditions and the general credit situation of the
country, with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in
the market to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to
fostering conditions in the money market conducive to
balanced economic recovery, and (c) to the practical admin-
istration of the Account; provided that the aggregate amount
of securities held in the System Account (including commit-
ments for the purchase or sale of securities for the Account)
at the close of this date, other than special short-term
certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for
the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be
increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one
or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short-
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such certificates held at
any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in
the aggregate $500 million.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held at 10:00 a.m. on Monday, November 10, 1958.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary