A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, June 17, 1958, at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Irons
Mr. Leach
Mr. Mangels
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Szymczak
Messrs. Erickson, Allen, Johns, and Deming,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Bopp, Bryan, and Leedy, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Atlanta,
and Kansas City, respectively
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Daane, Marget, Walker, and Young,
Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Associate Adviser, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Jones, Chief, Consumer Credit and Finances
Section, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Keir, Economist, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Ellis, Mitchell, Tow, and O'Kane, Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Boston, Chicago, Kansas City, and San

6/17/58 -2
Francisco, respectively; Messrs.
Larkin and Coombs, Assistant Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York; Messrs. Balles
and Einzig, Assistant Vice Presi
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Cleveland and San Francisco,
respectively; Mr. Parsons, Director
of Research, Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis; and Messrs. Anderson and
Atkinson, Economic Advisers, Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and
Atlanta, respectively
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on May 27, 1958, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York reviewing market developments and open market operations since
February 26, 1958, and dealing in detail with operations during the
period May 27 through June 11, 1958, along with a supplemental report
covering commitments executed June 12 through June 16, 1958. Copies
of both reports have been placed in the files of the Federal Open
Market Committee.
In comments supplementing the reports which had been dis
tributed, Mr. Larkin drew attention to the magnitude of operations
in the System Open Market Account since the last meeting of the
Committee. During that period the Account purchased approximately
$600 million of Treasury bills, which was more than the Management
had envisioned at the time of the last meeting and perhaps more than

6/17/58 -3
the Committee had envisioned. Despite these operations, however,
Treasury bill rates had risen gradually and the average rate at
yesterday's auction was .95. Furthermore, the New York city banks
had encountered some reserve shortages, primarily because of the
substantial increase in their loans to Government securities dealers.
In the two weeks which ended June 11, these loans increased more than
$700 million, and at the same time dealer holdings of Government
securities increased by an even larger amount. This reflected dealer
absorption of securities during the Treasury financing and dealer
absorption of securities sold by corporations raising cash to meet
their June 15 tax liabilities.
Mr. Larkin said that although the Treasury's refunding opera
tion was well received by the market, the sheer weight of exchanges
into the new 2-5/8 per cent bonds had caused some uneasiness toward
that issue.
In response to a question by Mr. Leach, Mr. Larkin recalled
that at the last Committee meeting there was discussion of the
speculative movement into rights, with concern expressed that per
haps some of these holdings might be dumped on the market in the
period when the Treasury's books were open and thus bring pressure
on the market. That did not happen, however, and it might be assumed
that most of the speculative holdings had been exchanged for the
2-5/8 per cent bonds. This fact, together with the magnitude of
the exchange, had led to caution in the market place with regard to

6/17/58 -4
these new securities, but the market nevertheless performed quite
well quotationwise until yesterday, when some pressures appeared
for the liquidation of speculative holdings. This depressed prices
on the 2-5/8s and also on the new 3-1/ per cent bonds. In general,
the market was cautious, and it was now facing a distribution
problem.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the open market transactions during
the period May 27 through June 16,
1958, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
In supplementation of the staff memorandum distributed
under date of June 13, 1958, Mr. Young made the following statement
on the economic situation:
The stock market is still saying, with even stronger
emphasis, that economic recovery, possibly inflationary
recovery, is either under way or just around the corner.
The further economic information available for this meet
ing is confirming our report at the last meeting that
bottoming out of recession is in fact occurring. While
the information is generally on the encouraging side,
some of it is black and is a counterweight to the white.
Perhaps the best approach for today's report is to sift
the whiter from the blacker information. On the white
side, we have these items:
(1) A one point rise in the index of industrial
production in May, mainly reflecting a rise in durable
goods output. Current information points to a further
rise in the index for June. Electric power output is
also up in June, and freight car loadings are showing a
quite dramatic rise.
(2) Pickup in housing construction activity in May
to a million unit start rate, and a developing volume of
financing activity for both new and used houses that
would suggest builder and lender expectations of a very
active market ahead.

6/17/58
(3) Further large inventory decline in April, carrying
inventory liquidation one more step closer to the point where
even reduction in inventory liquidation may function as a
stimulating factor.
(4) Further slackening in the pace of decline in manu
facturers' sales and, in May, a rise at durable goods manu
facturers in new orders.
(5) Strengthening of the labor market in May and exten
sion of labor market improvement into June.
(6) Further rise in personal income in May--for the third
month in succession, with more rise in June now indicated.
(7) Additional strength in retail trade, particularly at
nondurable goods stores. While sales of autos and other durable
goods are running well below a year ago, sales of autos have
improved recently and the decline in sales of other durables
has slackened. At department stores, sales in June are holding
up well.
(8) Further gain in agricultural income and a bright
prospect for crops and farm income in the months ahead.
(9) Strengthening of prices in primary metal markets,
especially of copper and steel scrap. While special factors,
such as prospective new governmental stockpiling, have been
influences in the turn-up in copper, inventory supplies of
primary metals are now such as to make these markets highly
sensitive on the upside to both increases in demand and
decreases in supply.
(10) Capital market activity continues at a high level
and bank credit expansion has now proceeded for four months
at the monthly rate of 1 per cent. Active cash balances have
been rising over these months at the most rapid rate since
1952.
(11) Lastly, account should be taken of the resiliency
shown by European industrial activity in holding up in the
face of significant contraction in U. S. activity and in the
face of reduced import capacity on the part of raw material
supplying areas.
As we suggested, however, there is black information as
well as white. On the blacker side, we can list:
(1) The Department of Commerce-SEC release of new plant
and equipment spending estimates, indicating that such spend
ing had declined more than earlier reports and that spending
during the rest of 1958 is to be further scaled down.
(2) The newly-revised information on the value of con
struction activity, showing a larger decline from December
through May than had been disclosed earlier, with declines
continuing in the value of private residential, industrial,
and public construction from April to May.

6/17/58
(3) The speculative character of the recent bulge in
steel activity, with warehouse demand especially heavy,
according to trade reports, in anticipation of a $5 a ton
rise in the steel prices on July 1.
(4) The continued sluggishness of the new automobile
market, the continuing threat of major work stoppage in this
industry, and the not too hopeful reports on new model design
for 1959 cars.
(5) The further decline in consumer instalment credit,
which, though diminishing in amount, is still operating as a
contractive influence on consumer spending.
(6) The failure of prices for fabricated industrial
commodities to show response to contracted demand.
(7) The possible vulnerability of the current level of
stock prices in view of the sharp rise in customer credit that
has accompanied the recent market advance.
(8) The failure of the Canadian economy, which led the
U. S. economy in recession, to show bounce-back from its re
cession bottom.
(9) The indications from very recent European informa
tion that British and Continental economic activity may be
weakening, with the next move downward. And finally:
(10) The undercurrent of concern about the future role
of gold that seems to be present in international markets.
We infer from this inventory of the hopeful and caution
ary items of intelligence now at hand that the haze obscuring
the outlook has not suddenly lifted, and that it is the better
part of wisdom not to conclude as yet that a recovery pattern
has definitely taken form. On the other hand, one cannot deny
the possibility that an accelerating recovery movement is now
shaping up.
Mr. Thomas made the following statement on financial develop
ments:
In the past three or four weeks, demands on capital mar
kets, including the Treasury bond offering for cash, have been
heavy. Some of these demands have been met from a continued
substantial expansion in bank holdings of securities and loans
on securities. Bank reserves have been absorbed by increases
in required reserves and currency and a continued gold outflow,
and reserves have been supplied by rather large but selective
System purchases of securities. On balance free reserves of
member banks declined and have been at a lower level than they
were in May.

Notwithstanding the heavy demands in capital markets
and the decline in free reserves, the money market con
tinued relatively easy until the past week, when the
customary large-scale last-half-of-June financial turnover
began to be felt. Long-term rates showed little change and
short-term rates during most of the period continued at very
low levels reached in the latter part of May.
Treasury financing operations were effected with remark
ably slight repercussions in the market, but the real effect
may be just beginning with settlement yesterday for the com
mitments made. Heretofore the principal tangible effect has
been in dealers' purchases of maturing issues and commitments
for purchases and sales of when-issued securities. These
operations resulted in considerable churning of funds in the
market, but until the past week dealers had little difficulty
in covering their financial needs by borrowing temporary
liquid funds. These funds are now being needed to meet mid
June obligations for taxes, dividends, and other payments,
and other pressures are beginning to appear in the market.
Dealers' committed positions in securities and borrowings
are at record levels and a large portion of financing needs
will have to be obtained from the banking system in the next
two weeks. Business payments to the Treasury and for other
purposes may also necessitate a considerable amount of busi
ness borrowing at banks.
In the absence of maturing tax securities to pay off, the
Treasury's cash balance will increase sharply in the next ten
days to a high figure of over $9 billion. The resulting rise
in deposits will increase bank reserve needs. The Treasury
balances will be drawn down sharply in subsequent weeks, but
it is possible that they are adequate to cover cash needs
until October. An early increase of $100 million in the weekly
Treasury bill offering probably could assure sufficient funds
until that time. Treasury cash borrowing needs, however, will
be very heavy in the October-December quarter--probably about
$6 billion.
New issues of securities by corporations have continued
moderately large in June, though less than a year ago. In the
second quarter, corporate issues are expected to total about
$2.7 billion, or a little over $400 million less than last
year. Finance companies, whose public offerings of long-term
securities have recently been negligible, account for about
half of this drop. Issues of industrial corporations have
declined, while offerings by utility companies have continued
somewhat larger than a year ago. State and local government

6/17/58 -8-
issues have been somewhat less in June than in April and
May, but the quarterly total was larger than in the same
period of other recent years.
Yields on long-term securities--both new and outstanding
issues--have continued relatively firm, notwithstanding the
Treasury bond offering. Distribution of some of the new
issues has been rather slow, but perhaps no more than should
be expected in view of the demands on the capital market.
Total loans and investments of banks in leading cities,
as indicated by partial figures for June 11, increased by
about $1.7 billion in the three weeks ending on that date,
compared with an increase of $1.1 billion in the same period
last year, which included payment for a new Treasury issue.
The larger increase this year reflected principally increases
in loans to dealers in securities and in holdings of securi
ties other than those of the U. S. Government. Bank holdings
of Government securities have continued to increase. Business
loans increased only moderately in the week of June 11,
following declines in the two previous weeks, whereas last
year they increased considerably in the first two weeks of
June. As previously mentioned, further large increases in
business borrowing are to be expected this week and perhaps
next.
Demand deposits at city banks continued to increase in
June somewhat more than last year, following a less than
seasonal contraction in May. It is estimated that demand
deposits and currency at all banks showed a seasonally ad
justed increase of about $500 million in May, to a figure
nearly $1 billion larger than a year ago. U. S. Government
deposits have declined seasonally in recent weeks, but as
mentioned will begin to increase sharply this week. Time
deposits have continued to increase at a rapid pace at com
mercial banks and moderately at mutual savings banks.
Estimates for the first four months of the year indicate
that nonbank holders have reduced their holdings of Govern
ment securities, particularly bills and certificates, in
contrast to an increase in total holdings in the same period
last year. This would indicate that the growth in liquidity
has been predominantly in bank deposits.
Short-term money rates have risen somewhat in the past
two weeks, following a decline during May to a relatively low
level. This shift accompanied a decline in free reserves from
over $500 million to around $4OO million. The tone of the New
York money market, however, at first seemed relatively easier
than it had been in May. This reflected largely the distribu
tion of reserves among banks and also the ability of securities

6/17/58
dealers to obtain financing from nonbank sources. This
atmosphere has changed, however, in the past week. Fed
eral funds rates have been closer to the discount rate
and yields on Treasury bills, which declined to about
5/8 per cent, have approached the 1 per cent level.
Reserves have been absorbed in recent weeks by
greater than seasonal increases in required reserves and
in currency and by a further, though slackening, outflow
of gold. In the meantime reserves have been supplied by
System open market operations, aggregating around $900
million in the past four weeks.
An abundant supply of reserves will be needed during
the next two or three weeks to meet the heavy liquidity
needs of this period. Recent System operations together
with the usual mid-month float increase, may be adequate
to cover needs this week and next. Reserve needs in the
subsequent two weeks will be increased by the holiday
currency demand, as well as by the usual end-of-month
decline in float, and they may be further enlarged by a
continued increase in required reserves, if there is heavy
borrowing at banks to cover tax and other payments at the
time. This is an uncertain element. In any event, in the
absence of further System operations free reserves are
likely to continue during July and most of August and
September at below $400 million. On the basis of usual
seasonal factors they will decline further in the last
quarter of the year.
The question of policy is how and when these reserves
should be supplied. System policies and the response of
the banks to those policies have resulted in bank credit
expansion during the past four or five months at a
seasonally-adjusted annual rate of 12 per cent and sharp
declines in short-term rates to exceedingly low levels.
Much of this credit has directly or indirectly financed
long-term commitments. Some of it has evidently been
speculative or at least is believed to be of a temporary
nature. In view of the changed tenor of current business
statistics, indicated by Mr. Young's review, the major
policy question to be determined is whether there should
be some moderation of the recent vigorous policy of ease.
Mr. Hayes presented the following statement of his views on
the business outlook and credit policy:
Business statistics in the last three weeks have
been generally encouraging, suggesting that the low

6/17/58 -10-
point of the recession may be close at hand, although it
is not clear that it has already been reached--and there
is certainly no evidence yet pointing to any substantial
recovery during the remainder of 1958. High levels of
consumer and Government demands seem now to be roughly
offsetting recessionary forces generated in the invest
ment area of the economy.
Perhaps the most obscure element in the outlook is
the probable trend of aggregate inventories. The present
rate of liquidation is almost certainly less than the
steep rate of the first four months of the year, and the
speed of liquidation should drop further in coming months;
but stock-sales ratios, even after some decline in April,
are still high, and the process of inventory correction
may still take some time. The direction of consumer
spending, as well as price developments, particularly in
the area of raw materials, will doubtless be a crucial
influence on inventory trends.
Well-sustained personal income and consumer spending
have been major stabilizing factors to date. Aided by
high farm income, large transfer payments, and the first
increase in wage and salary payments since last August,
personal income rose in May to a level less than 1 per cent
below that of August. Consumer cash outlays, i.e., con
sumption expenditures less changes in consumer credit, have
increased in each quarter throughout the recession. However,
the future trend of consumer spending is still a major
question mark.
The latest SEC-Commerce figures on plant and equipment
expenditures show a considerably sharper than expected drop
in the first quarter, suggesting that there is greater
flexibility in capital expenditure plans than had been
generally thought. We can, however, find encouragement in
the projection of a much slower rate of decline--only about
$1 billion (annual rate)--in each of the ensuing three
quarters. Declines of this magnitude could of course be
offset by relatively modest gains in consumer spending or
in public expenditures. Although actual defense spending
has so far shown no upward tendency, a gradual but sub
stantial rise is expected over the next year; and this
factor, together with recent increases in Federal pay
scales, and the extension of unemployment benefit payments,
points to a substantial and rising Government deficit.
Among recent rather favorable developments have been
some improvement in residential building starts and in new
orders, a continued pickup in steel output and a leveling

6/17/58 -11-
of industrial production as a whole. However, the better
level of housing starts, which is especially marked in
apartment units, may reflect greater speculative building
activity rather than a genuine improvement in underlying
demand. The upward trend in the steel industry may be
attributable in large part to expectations of higher prices
at the end of this month, and in part to a rebuilding of
seriously depleted inventories. It seems questionable
whether much stress should be laid on the modest drop in
unemployment in May on a seasonally adjusted basis, since
unemployment is likely to remain at a relatively high level
for many months unless production rises sharply, I believe
probabilities still favor a slow recovery rather than a
sharp and rapid one.
The price outlook is more encouraging than at any time
in the last few years. Farm prices are now declining at
last, and the general wholesale price index seems likely to
hold steady or even to move lower over the rest of the year,
with the consumer price index perhaps showing a similar trend
after some months' lag.
As for Treasury finance, we can probably assume with
safety that the Treasury will not be in the market again for
new money until around the middle of August. (Our estimates
indicate that their needs will come sooner than Mr. Thomas'
forecast of October.) But the Treasury will be faced with
another substantial refunding--the August 1 maturity,
probably combined with the September 15 maturities.
In spite of the mildly improved business outlook, I
think the present is emphatically not the time for backing
away from our policy of outright monetary ease or for
creating any public impression that we may be backing away
from it. The policy we have been following in recent weeks
should be continued until there are much clearer signs of
imminent recovery. I think we should be gratified by the
extent to which banks and others have restored some of the
liquidity lost during the years of credit restraint. As
usual, it is hard to set policy in terms of any specific
free reserve figure. Although a level of about $500 million
seems as satisfactory as any, I would prefer to see the
Manager give greater weight to the feel of the money and
capital markets. Despite the favorable reception of the
Treasury's recent financing operations, I think we must
continue to give close attention to the capital markets
to assure as receptive an atmosphere as possible for new
corporate and municipal issues. While I would see no

6/17/58 -12-
objection to our letting free reserves fall appreciably
below $500 million at times when the market feels easy
and when the banks in the money centers are well supplied
with reserves, I would be fearful of going much below
that level--and would, in fact, welcome appreciably
higher figures--during periods when the money centers
feel tight.
To my mind the need for substantial additional re
serves to take care of holiday currency requirements,
coupled with the prospect of rising seasonal reserve
needs in August and later months, points to an opportunity
in the very near future for the System to take an addi
tional step toward its long-term objective of attaining
somewhat lower levels of reserve requirements. If such a
move is made, however, it would be highly desirable that
any accompanying publicity stress the point that it is
designed to meet these seasonal and long-term needs and
should not be looked upon as a sign of increased appre
hension on the part of the System as to the business
outlook.
As for whether the discount rate should be reduced
further, I believe this is a relatively unimportant ques
tion at this time. A case might be made for lowering the
rate, say to 1-1/2 per cent, chiefly to achieve a lower
level from which to effect decisive increases when strong
signals of credit restraint are once again called for.
We could also justify some modest reduction as a move to
"clear the air" by bringing the rate down to the "rock
bottom" figure reached in the last two recessions and by
reducing the unusually wide spread between the discount
rate and short-term market rates. However, this last
is not a very weighty argument when borrowing by banks
is at such a low level, and I would be somewhat reluctant
to change the rate mainly for technical reasons when no
additional signal of credit policy is needed. It is even
conceivable that a rate cut might be misconstrued by the
market as an indication that the System is more worried
over the outlook than we actually are. This could have
unfortunate results just at a time when business develop
ments are giving some basis for somewhat greater optimism
or less pessimism. Against this it may be contended that
the market has already discounted a further reduction to
some extent. On balance I think I would prefer to leave
the 1-3/4 per cent rate unchanged, especially if there
is any likelihood that reserve requirements may be reduced
in the near future, since I see no reason to confront the
public with a double signal in the direction of a policy
of greater ease under present conditions.

6/17/58 -13
Mr. Johns said he agreed with Mr. Hayes that this was not
the time to back away from the present policy of monetary ease or
to give the public appearance of doing so. At the last Committee
meeting, he said, it was his understanding of the majority view
that the Desk would not be expected to concentrate too much upon
the statistic of free reserves. Rather, the Desk would be expected
to rely to a considerable extent on the feel of the market, and in
doing so the Account Management might find it appropriate to permit
the free reserve figure to drift somewhat lower than the target. He
now found himself in the position of regretting that the feel of
the market was not so sensitive as to prevent in the past week an
appearance of tightening, or at least less ease. He wished that
this had not occurred, although he realized that perhaps it could
not reasonably have been prevented. For the next three weeks, he
would hope that this trend could be arrested and that operations
in the Account might make it clear that the posture of the System
continued to be one of ease. In his view there should be no
alteration of current policy in the direction of less ease, and
certainly not in the direction of restraint.
Mr. Johns recalled that at the last meeting he had argued-
and he was clearly in the minority--that there were good reasons
for a further reduction in the discount rate. Although he still
agreed with Mr. Hayes that arguments could be made in favor of

6/17/58 -14
a reduction in the rate, he did not wish to reiterate the argument
he made at the last meeting. In spite of the economic information
that had become available in the last three weeks which was con
sidered by many to be of an encouraging nature and to indicate a
bottoming out of recession, it seemed reasonable to him to anticipate
that in the next few weeks or months there might be deterioration in
some of the indices. In the forthcoming summer months, he would not
be surprised if, for example, great strength failed to appear in
the index of industrial production, and employment and unemployment
statistics likewise might give the appearance of deterioration. The
fear he had was that there might be public misunderstanding if set
backs occurred which were essentially of a seasonal character. If
so, it might be more important to be in a position to counteract
any such developments at the time than to anticipate them by doing
something now.
Mr. Johns went on to say that, like Mr. Hayes, he would
prefer to see some of the additional reserves which would almost
surely be needed in the coming weeks supplied through a further
reduction in reserve requirements. He wished again to emphasize
the view he expressed at the last Committee meeting that it would
be desirable to accomplish at least part of that by a reduction
in reserve requirements against time deposits.
Mr. Bryan said that at the meeting of the Atlanta Board
of Directors last Friday, at which representatives of the branch

6/17/58 -15
boards were present, the economic discussion was led by the
directors rather than the staff and the underlying tone of the
reports made by directors representing various lines of business
and industry was distinctly more optimistic than it had been.
The only sour notes came from the textile industry, where dis
couragement seemed to be endemic, and from rice milling, a
specialized agricultural industry hardly representative of the
general agricultural picture.
Mr. Bryan went on to say that statistics for the district
seemed to be behaving quite well, rather better than he reported
at the last meeting of the Committee. Some of the figures still
were moving down but others showed signs of bottoming out and the
district did seem to be performing better than the national
averages. For the first time, therefore, he was encouraged, but
he felt there could be some setbacks to the present atmosphere of
confidence, which might be a little premature.
As to policy, Mr. Bryan said he realized that if the System
continued a policy of active ease, and especially if the degree of
ease should be increased, it might get into difficulty in the event
that recovery should take hold in boom proportions. However, he
did not foresee such a development and he would like to continue
the present policy of ease. He was impressed by the fact that
although the commercial banks had recovered a substantial degree

6/17/58 -16
of liquidity as the result of System policy, they would nevertheless
go into the next period of recovery with liquidity ratios which were
unfavorable when contrasted with those prevailing at the time of the
previous recovery movement. This meant that the probabilities of an
explosive loan expansion such as occurred in 1955 and 1956 were con
siderably reduced.
Mr. Bopp said that he could generalize for the Third District
fairly accurately by saying that although there had been some improve
ment, conditions in the district were still significantly below a
year ago. The evidence of a bottoming out of recession, as indicated
in the staff memorandum, was encouraging, but in his opinion the
situation called for continuing the policy of monetary ease. Since
the Treasury had issued a long-term bond and long-term yields were
relatively firm, he would not do anything in the short-term market
which might be subject to misinterpretation. On balance he would
be disposed to recommend a reduction in the discount rate of at
least 1/4 per cent as a clear signal to the market that the policy
of ease was being continued. Also, since it appeared that in the
relatively near future additional reserves would be required, he
would favor a reduction of reserve requirements against time
deposits. He would not change the existing policy directive.
Mr. Fulton said that the Fourth District continued to lag
behind the rest of the nation and that statistics for the district

6/17/58 -17
failed to show improvement. The recent increase in the steel rate
was temporary in nature, being attributable largely to orders in
anticipation of a rise in the price of steel, which seemed imminent
come the first of July. Despite the fact that there was some volume
of orders coming in from small steel users whose inventories had
been reduced to low levels, steel men expected the month of July to
be the worst month of the whole year. While they did expect some
pickup in August, with initial orders for steel for the new model
automobiles, it appeared that the automobile manufacturers were
going to play the situation close to the vest.
Mr. Fulton then commented on the reasons for a recent reduc
tion of $2 a ton by companies furnishing steel to Detroit. His
explanation indicated that this local situation had no bearing on
the general picture with respect to the price of steel, and it
continued to be the expectation, he said, that the price of steel
would go up. By and large, the outlook was for a continued low
level of production and that, along with low levels in the metal
working industry, would reflect itself in increasing unemployment.
Additional cities in the Fourth District had been added to the
category of distressed labor areas, and in those areas the situation
had had some effect on food sales, including the selection of foods.
While there had not been a drop in total sales from last year, the
rate of increase had diminished. Department store sales for the
district were down about 5 per cent on the average from last year,

6/17/58 -18
against a drop nationally of about 2 per cent, and automobile sales
were down sharply in the Cleveland and Cincinnati areas. Bank loans
were moving down, but to some extent that might be attributed to a
desire on the part of the banks to obtain the degree of liquidity
which was lost some time ago. No indication of softness was seen
yet in published prices, and some indication of price maintenance
might be found in the fact that two recent wage negotiations had
culminated in new contracts calling for wage increases of approxi
mately 5 and 7 per cent, respectively.
Mr. Fulton expressed the view that the present degree of
ease was appropriate to the situation and said that most assuredly
he would not want any indication of tightness to develop in the
market. In his opinion the Desk had done a good job since the
last meeting in the light of the conditions surrounding the Treasury
financing, and he would like to see the present degree of ease
maintained. He subscribed fully to the thinking that a reduction
in reserve requirements to supply reserve needs in the immediate
future would be quite appropriate, provided the action was ac
companied by an explanation of the reasons therefor, but he would
not touch the discount rate at this time. He felt that there was
not at this time a great deal of confidence on the part of busi
nesses or individuals that the recession had hit bottom. Despite
the thinking of some people that a bottom had been reached and
that a turn-around was imminent, he did not believe that any

6/17/58 -19
immediate developments in that direction would be of such a
magnitude as to indicate that recovery was here and that the
System should tighten its reins.
Mr. Robertson said that to him the economic report indi
cated very clearly a leveling out or possibly an upward movement.
Although the System ought to try very carefully to catch the turn
before inflationary forces emerge, he did not feel that this was
the right time to start tightening. Rather, this was a time to
sit still and watch carefully, making sure that no indication was
given of any tightening or, on the other hand, any easing. He
would refrain from any action on reserve requirements or the dis
count rate and would seek a level of free reserves of about S4OO
million, with leeway on either side to account for the tone of
the market. While this was not the time for action, it was,
however, a time for thinking. It might be necessary, for example,
to do something about margin requirements in view of the volume of
credit going into the stock market; he commented on the fact that
stock prices have risen disproportionately to the earnings records
of corporations. Although no action might be called for at this
time, that situation should be watched carefully.
In summary, Mr. Robertson said, he would maintain as even
a position as possible for the next three weeks.
Mr. Mills said that his comments at this meeting would focus
upon the mechanical functioning of credit policy. In that connection,

6/17/58 -20
until the present digestive period of Treasury financing was over,
along with the tax payment period, he believed that it would be
necessary for the Manager of the Account to give whatever assistance
might be required to the market to allay any suspicion of a change
in the direction of System policy. However, when that short period
was past it would seem appropriate to implement the line of reason
ing expressed by Mr. Thomas which would call for moderating the
degree of aggressiveness with which reserves had been supplied
through the commercial banking system over the past months. To
that end he would propose a line of policy such as indicated in the
following statement:
1. Continuing to believe that System policy, in
supplying reserves in recent weeks, has been overgenerous
and that as
2. the objective was reached and the economic purpose
achieved some time ago of raising the money supply, there
is
3. a distinct risk that any further heavy injections
of reserves seeking to maintain a positive level of free
reserves in the $500-million range would abet the specula
tive factors in the U. S. Government securities market that
are already in evidence, and
4. would have the more serious effect of underwriting
a new inflation by creating excessive liquidity, in the
process of which
5. support would be given the existing rigidities in
the wage-price structure that stand in the way of sought
after economic adjustments.
Therefore, under these circumstances,
6. advantage should be taken of the interval before
a new Treasury financing operation to allow natural factors
affecting the supply of reserves to have free play, to the
end that
7. System policy will set adequate credit avail
ability as its objective and only supply such reserves as
are necessary for that purpose, which would mean that

6/17/58 -21
8. rather wide fluctuations in the prices of
intermediate- and long-term U. S. Government securities
should not be a cause of concern or a reason for
specific System action, except in the unlikely case of
a disorderly market, but
9. rather should be regarded as a reflection of
the working of free market forces that would presumably
eliminate some of the speculative elements now in the
market.
10. The conduct of a System policy looking to these
objectives would contemplate that the Manager of the
System Open Market Account would be guided largely by
the feel of the market when supplying reserves, rather
than any set level of positive free reserves as a goal.
11. In keeping with this policy, another reduction
in reserve requirements would not be made unless further
substantial withdrawals of gold or a pattern of downward
movements in the supply of reserves to levels as low as
those that have been projected for near-by weeks should
make that action necessary.
In further comments, Mr. Mills said he believed there should
be no concern if the level of discounts at the Federal Reserve Banks
should rise, because seemingly that would indicate that some of the
excessive reserves would be squeezed out of the market as the banks
adjusted their positions to a more realistic scheme of reserve
supplies. He did not believe that any change should be made in the
discount rate at the present tie.
Mr. Leach said that although on balance there was no evidence
of further decline and only slight evidence of further improvement in
the Fifth District, there was nevertheless a definite optimistic
attitude that was striking by reason of its prevalence. The complex
diversification of the textile industry made it difficult to get a

6/17/58 -22
clear and comprehensive picture of the current situation, but he
did not sense in recent developments any material changes for
better or worse. At the joint meeting of the Bank's directors
last week, two of the directors expressed the opinion that although
many marginal producers had gone out of business, still others would
have to go before much fundamental improvement in textiles could be
achieved. Reports from a number of residential builders and lenders
indicated a sharp upturn in building activity last month that had
continued this month. The most common rate on conventional loans
now ranged between 5-l/4 and 5-1/2 per cent, with the average on
the low side, and many prime mortgage loans were being made as low
as 5 per cent. Increased building activity had strengthened the
demand for lumber and firmed prices, and retail lumber yards ap
peared to be more willing to stock up than they had been. The West
Virginia picture had brightened slightly since the last Committee
meetirg. Production of bituminous coal had increased a little even
though exports, which had been giving indications of leveling off,
declined. The latest report on insured unemployment showed a de
cline, 18 per cent of which was due to expiration of unemployment
benefit rights.
Mr. Leach went on to say that the opinion was expressed by
several of the directors at the joint meeting last week that the
recession had not consisted solely of minus signs. Many things
long needing to be reviewed and improved in business had received

6/17/58 -23
a searching scrutiny, with consequent cost-cutting improvements in
efficiency of operation and administration.
Mr. Leach said he did not believe that there had been suf
ficient change in the economy to warrant a change in current policy
or in the degree of ease maintained. Current projections indicated
that additional reserves would have to be supplied in the near future
to maintain the degree of ease that had been the System's goal, and
he believed that this should be done through the medium of reserve
requirement changes rather than through open market operations.
Although he thought that a case could be made for a reduction in the
discount rate, he would not favor a reduction because, regardless of
the facts, it would very probably be interpreted by some as a move
toward further ease. He believed that the System had already made
its contribution and he would not like to give any indication of
wanting to ease further. A reduction in reserve requirements like
wise might be regarded by some as an indication of further ease in
the absence of some statement explaining why the action had been
taken.
Mr. Leedy said that there had been no material changes in
the Tenth District since the last meeting of the Committee. As to
policy, he agreed with those who favored continuing during the next
three-week period about as at present. It seemed to him that the
Desk had accomplished quite a bit in making very large purchases of
Treasury bills in an attempt to maintain about the degree of ease

6/17/58 -24
contemplated. In view of these purchases it was rather surprising
to him that the bill rate had edged up to the extent that it had.
Projections for the period after the next two weeks indicated that
over the longer period, with seasonal demands coming into the
picture, some permanent addition to reserves would be required, and
he would like to see those reserves supplied by a reduction in reserve
requirements. However, as had been suggested by others, he thought
that an effort should be made to obtain general understanding that
the action was not a further anti-recession move.
Mr. Leedy did not see that any purpose would be served at
the present time by a reduction of the discount rate. Certainly the
rate need not be reduced as an anti-recession measure, and he had
some concern that a reduction might be interpreted as being of that
nature. Actually, with the low level of borrowings at present, the
question seemed somewhat academic. Rather than to undertake to lead
the short-term market by any indication on the part of the System
through the discount rate, he would prefer a later adjustment, if
that should become necessary in the light of the rates established
by the market.
In summary, Mr. Leedy said, he would continue as at present,
neither increasing the degree of ease nor reducing it in the period
immediately ahead, and he would take no other actions aside from
supplying needed reserves through a reduction in reserve require
ments when that became essential.

6/17/58 -25
Mr. Allen said that the accumulating evidence that the
economy had begun to move up slowly from its low point was showing
up in the Seventh District in a number of ways. First, in all of
the States of the district there was some improvement in labor
market conditions. New claims for unemployment compensation were
still running substantially above last year, but in recent months
the percentage of increase over a year ago was declining. Second,
department store sales, while markedly poorer than in the nation
as a whole, were improving. Third, building activity showed signs
of picking up more than seasonally. F. W. Dodge figures on contract
awards for Region V, which includes Minnesota and the Dakotas in
addition to Seventh District States, showed that in April the decline
from a year ago was only 4 per cent, much less than in earlier months.
Fourth, steel pourings at the present time were above 60 per cent of
capacity in Detroit and over 70 per cent of capacity in Chicago. The
low in April was 12 per cent for Detroit and 54 per cent for Chicago.
Fifth, cash r eceipts from farm marketings were showing very notice
able improvement in Iowa, with March receipts 20 per cent above a
year ago. Wisconsin was somewhat above last year, whereas Illinois,
Indiana, and Michigan were slightly below. Crop conditions over
most of the Seventh District were favorable, which meant that in
parts of the district conditions were substantially improved from
a year ago.

6/17/58 -26.
Continuing, Mr. Allen noted that commercial and industrial
loans of all weekly reporting banks in the nation dropped another
$128 million in the three weeks ended June 4, of which total Seventh
District banks accounted for almost one-fourth, with metal firms
representing a large part of the drop in the district. In the week
ended June 11, Chicago banks showed an increase of $21 million in
commercial and industrial loans, which was undoubtedly associated
with corporate tax payments. For obvious reasons, it was not
expected that tax borrowing would come close to a year ago or even
to March of this year. Money market banks as a group continued to
maintain a surplus reserve position and borrowings at the discount
window were practically negligible.
Mr. Allen said that at the joint meeting of the head office
and Detroit Branch directors held on June 12 the following were
among some of the things mentioned. First, the steel industry had
not decided whether to increase prices on the first of July. There
were differences of opinion and those who argued against an increase
mentioned industry statesmanship and the threat of competing metals.
It was believed, however, that prices would be increased. Second,
the Sears Roebuck fall catalogue was to show price reductions
averaging 1-1/2 per cent. Third, effective the first of July there
would be decreases of 1/2 per cent in the rate paid on savings
deposits by a number of institutions. In some cities where savings

6/17/58 -27
and loan associations are active, both those associations and the
banks were going to reduce by 1/2 per cent and thereby retain exist
ing differentials. Fourth, the favorable crop conditions would
benefit the railroads in the area, which would be particularly
welcome to those roads that had had hard going. Fifth, the directors
from Michigan differed as to whether the existing contract stalemate
in the auto industry was working to the benefit of the unions or
management, but there seemed to be a majority feeling that time was
on the side of the unions. Sixth, in Flint, where unemployment is
high, bank deposits were steady, collections were excellent, and
the mortgage business was picking up. It was said that persons
with unencumbered homes were taking mortgages in order to retire
indebtedness of various types, perhaps with encouragement from
mortgage lenders. Seventh, the late May surge in auto sales was
minimized in some quarters by the widespread use of selling con
tests. However, one study showed that new car sales had hit a
cyclical low and had turned upward. Another recent poll indicated
that consumers were planning to buy more cars in the next twelve
months than an earlier survey had indicated. It was understood
that the average introduction date for 1959 models would be some
what earlier than last year. New car inventories on May 31 were
755,000, which was below the figure on the same date a year ago,
but the present inventory represented 45 days' sales whereas a

6/17/58 -28
year ago the figure was 34 days. Production for the second quarter
was estimated at 1 million cars, while the estimates for the third
and fourth quarters were 600,000 and 1,250,000, respectively.
Thus far, Mr. Allen said, it seemed agreed that the economy
had begun to move upward, however slowly. The chief worry in recent
months, as far as he was concerned, was not that the country had
experienced a recession, because that was to be expected following
the sustained boom and the general level of business had been quite
good. Rather, it had been his worry that the recession would con
tinue in a downward spiral. Inflationary tendencies were still
such that he felt the System must try to call the turn and shift
from its policy of ease just as soon as the upward movement seemed more
definite, but he was not yet willing to say that in his judgment such
a time had come. For the next three weeks, he felt that the System
should do its best to stay just about where it was, erring neither
on the side of ease nor on the side of restraint. Perhaps, however,
the signs would be clearer three weeks from today to the point that
an overt act one way or the other would be in order. In concluding,
Mr. Allen said he was not one who would argue that temporary or
seasonal reserve needs should be met by a reduction of reserve
requirements. Instead, he would say that those needs should be met
by open market operations.
Mr. Deming said that there had not been much change in
conditions in the Ninth District. Agricultural prospects had

6/17/58 -29
diminished a little due to lack of adequate rai
sections, but the situation was not serious and in fact was still
quite good. Almost certainly, farm income would be higher than
last year. On the nonagricultural side, expansion had been of
something less than seasonal proportions. Nonagricultural
employment in May was 1,360,000, about 35,000 less than in May
1957, while unemployment was estimated at 69,000, or about 36,000
more than a year earlier. Although unemployment had fallen
seasonally in the last three months, the total number of un
employed had continued to exceed last year's totals by about the
same amount. In other words, the actual number of unemployed had
fallen each month by about the same amount as last year but the
decline started from a higher total. Roughly one-third of the
employment drop in May from year-ago levels was in mining, with
iron ore mining accounting for about 60 per cent of the decline
and copper mining about 4O per cent. Thus mining employment was
about 25 per cent less than a year ago, and it looked as though
it was going to hang there for the balance of the year. Copper
mining appeared to be showing a little more strength at the
present time and the Anaconda Copper Company had just announced
a price increase, so things might be looking a little better in
Montana. In summary, the Ninth District was going along about
as it had been and was not being affected as seriously by the

6/17/58 -30
recession as some other regions.
As to policy, Mr. Deming said he agreed with those who
advocated about the same conditions as had prevailed for the
past three weeks. He was content with current policy and with
its execution.
Mr. Mangels said that some recent rather preliminary
reports covering business activity in the Twelfth District
indicated that the usual spring pickup might be developing a
little more favorably than appeared earlier. In the State of
California, manufacturing employment increased more than seasonally
in May, but for the district as a whole employment gains were about
what was expected on a seasonal basis. In the Seattle area, air
craft employment was a little better, while in Southern California
there were reports that some companies expected to release about
5,000 employees within the next few months. Steel production in
the district increased 8 per cent in May over April and production
was now at about a 75 per cent rate, some 15 per cent higher than
the national average. In the lumber business there had been some
improvement in both April and May. Douglas fir orders improved
in both months and plywood prices strengthened because of improved
demand, but in other types of lumber the situation was about as it
had been, with little change in demand. In the construction

6/17/58 -31
industry, heavy engineering contracts showed a 25 per cent
increase in May over April, although the total was still below
a year ago, while FHA and VA applications were about double the
level of May 1957. Bank loans had not changed much, but were
up a little in the last three weeks, and San Francisco banks
reported that applications for loans to pay taxes were nominal.
Demand deposits were down but time deposits continued to increase.
There had been no announcement of any change in the savings de
posit interest rate but it was quite generally expected that
effective the first of July there would be a reduction to about
2-1/2 per cent. The strategy appeared to call for announcing at
about the same time a reduction in mortgage loan rates, and ap
parently savings and loan associations also were going to follow
somewhat the same technique. Borrowings from the Federal Reserve
Bank had been nominal; as to Federal funds, the large banks had
been buying and selling in about equal amounts although at lower
levels than in the past.
Mr. Mangels said that he sensed a somewhat firmer undertone
of confidence in the area on the part of both businessmen and the
public. The possibility was seen that the recession might be ap
proaching bottom, with the further thought, however, that the
bottoming-out process might take some time. There appeared to be
no shortage of credit for constructive purposes, but Mr. Mangels

6/17/58 -32
was somewhat concerned about the amount of credit being used for
speculative purposes, particularly in the Government securities
market. He did not feel that the present degree of monetary ease
should be increased, and he suggested that $500 million of free
reserves be used as an objective, with the thought of staying
rather close to that figure. He would not favor any change in
the discount rate at this time nor would he like to recommend any
change in reserve requirements at this time. The directive seemed
to him satisfactory, although perhaps at the next meeting or some
time thereafter, the Committee might want to give thought to a
change.
Mr. Irons said that on balance national developments were
on the encouraging side; perhaps for the last six weeks or two
months the trend had been in that direction. As to the Eleventh
District, he would not take time to identify the various develop
ments but would simply say that economic conditions in the district
were unusually good. At the most recent board meeting, directors
from the branches suggested by the tenor of their reports that if
this was a recession they would not do anything to discourage it.
The oil industry, of course, was a drag on the economy but the
situation there seemed to be improving.
As to policy, Mr. Irons said that in the light of the
economic situation he would feel strongly against taking any action

6/17/58 -33
which would add to the present degree of ease. Like Mr. Mills,
he believed the System had been liberal in providing reserves,
and he would be delighted if the market would firm up a little,
In other words, he favored a policy of ease but not one as
aggressive as that followed until recently. During the past
three weeks, he said, the Account Management had done an excellent
job under difficult conditions. It had managed to take up some of
the sloppiness in the market and, by de-emphasizing the statistic
of free reserves and being concerned more with the feel of the
market and short-term rates, it had brought about a better situation.
Mr. Irons said he would not favor any change in the discount rate
since he saw no reason for a change; neither would he favor a
reduction in reserve requirements at this time for he did not
think that a reduction would accomplish the objective of meeting
the anticipated seasonal situation. Banks would not be likely to
sit still and hold reserves waiting for a time in the future.
Rather, if reserve requirements were reduced now and $400-$500
million of additional reserves were provided, the banks would act
to invest the funds quickly and subsequently, when seasonal require
ments appeared, the banks would be found to be fully invested. With
that in mind, he believed it would be better to feed in reserves
gradually, and as needed, through open market operations. If they
were supplied by a reduction in reserve requirements now, additional

6/17/58 -34
reserves might have to be supplied later, thus providing a
"double dose." Mr. Irons agreed with Mr. Robertson that the
situation in the stock market should be watched closely in the
light of the increasing amount of credit going into the market
and that a change in margin requirements could be indicated in
the not too distant future. He would not want to recommend
changing the policy directive although, as he had said at recent
Committee meetings, if anyone wanted to delete the word "further"
from clause (b) of the directive, he would favor that.
Mr. Erickson said that although not too many statistics
were available for the month of May, those that were available
indicated somewhat more strength than in April. Nevertheless,
he could not say that optimism was evident in the First District.
Most manufacturing indices were following roughly the national
pattern, but shoes for the first four months of the year were
12 per cent below last year, as compared with a drop of 5 per
cent nationally. Insured unemployment declined during May but
for the month was still more than double the year-ago figure.
Department store sales were up 3 per cent for the first week in
June, but for the year to date they were 3 per cent behind 1957.
The April collection record was better than last year, strength
continued in the main store sales relative to basement sales, and
there had been an unexpected increase in dress sales. The

6/17/58 -35
Massachusetts consumer price index dropped .2 per cent in May,
which was the first decline since last August. Registrations
for summer camps began slowly this year, but by the end of April
operations at 85 per cent of capacity were assured.
Mr. Erickson said that when he considered all factors, in
cluding seasonal factors, he would make no change in the policy
directive or in the discount rate. He felt that the present posture
of ease should neither be increased nor decreased, and certainly the
target should not be changed. He would leave it to the Manager of
the Account to judge the feel of the market.
Mr. Szymczak said that although he would like to take a
position similar to that expressed by Messrs. Mills, Robertson, and
Irons, he was a little confused. There were many uncertainties in
the economy and there would be a need for additional reserves due
to seasonal and other factors. He felt that the Committee ought
to vary the free reserve position, with changes in the level from
time to time as the market permitted. He would favor reducing
reserve requirements at a suitable time and then using open market
operations in reverse to permit a varying degree of positive free
reserves, thus getting away from a set figure. Margin requirements
should be considered in the course of time, but he did not feel
that there should be any change in the discount rate at present.
For the purpose of departing from a fixed pattern of free reserves

6/17/58 -36
as well as for the purpose of providing for seasonal needs, he
would change reserve requirements now, since there might not be
a chance to do so later.
Chairman Martin referred to comments which he had made at
the last Committee meeting about Federal Reserve policy and said
he continued to feel that the current policy was about right. If
so, he suggested, the System ought not to force its luck unduly.
For the first time, he detected a feeling around the country that
monetary policy might be too easy, and this was something that
ought to be taken into consideration. On the matter of public
psychology and interpretations of System policy, if it were not
for the flowing reserve picture the best thing, in his opinion,
would be to do nothing at all and let things stay just about where
they were. With labor negotiations in progress and the wage-cost
price relationship still a fundamental problem in the economy, he
felt that it would be simply asking for trouble to take any overt
action which would have to be explained. In his opinion, for
example, a reduction in reserve requirements could not be explained
satisfactorily on the basis of technical long-run considerations.
Likewise, there would be great difficulty in attempting to explain
that a reduction in the discount rate was not an anti-recessionary
movement or an indication that the System considered the country to
be in a bearish period rather than a period of leveling off. He
was not certain and he might be wrong, but personally he would not

6/17/58 -37
want to take action. In making these comments, he brought out,
he was talking about the period of the next three weeks.
Continuing, Chairman Martin said that the present situation
was not one of recovery, boom, or decline. He then expressed the
view that the best thing to do for the next three weeks would be to
try to follow the color, feel, and tone of the market and not get
unduly easier or tighter. He felt that the Account Management had
done a good job in this respect during the past three weeks, respond
ing when it had to respond. Unlike Mr. Johns, he thought that at
times it would have been desirable to be a little less easy.
Chairman Martin then said that it was his own view, and,
he believed, the majority view--with some variations in degree-
that there should be no change at this time in the policy directive,
the discount rate, or reserve requirements. What might happen after
the next Committee meeting on July 8 was, of course, a different
story, since the summer doldrums were approaching. He would not want
to give labor negotiators or others any indication of Federal Reserve
thinking on policy, he would not want to validate a price level or
to invalidate it, and he would not want to play a larger role than
monetary and credit policy should appropriately play. While in his
own view, and apparently that of the majority, the System should
stay about where it was now, the situation should be watched care
fully during the next three weeks. For the feel, color, and tone

6/17/58 -38
of the market, responsibility should be placed on the Management
of the Account. Then, three weeks from now, another look could
then be taken at the situation.
Mr. Hayes questioned whether there was a clear majority
opinion against a change in reserve requirements, stating that
he sensed quite a lot of feeling that this was an opportunity to
take such action. With reference to the comments made by Mr. Irons,
it appeared from looking at the reserve projections of the New York
Bank, and perhaps from the projections of the Board's staff also,
that there would be an almost immediate reserve need and the banks
would not have a chance to use the reserves to expand their invest
ments.
Chairman Martin replied that he fully understood the point.
However, in his view it would be almost impossible to explain a
reduction in reserve requirements to the public on the basis of
technical considerations, and he felt that it would be a great
mistake to attempt such an explanation.
Mr. Mills commented that, leaving aside the technical
problem mentioned by the Chairman and turning to the point of view
expressed by Mr. Hayes, it appeared to him that the anticipated
need for substantial amounts of reserves might, if the projections
were realized, make a reduction of reserve requirements the only
logical choice. The alternative would be very large purchases of

6/17/58 -39
Treasury bills by the Account, and if the Account were to go in and
purchase aggressively against the available supply of bills at a
time when corporations and banks were back in the market, there
would be a strong possibility of depressing bill yields to a very
low level and increasing the spread between the bill rate and the
discount rate to a point that would be distinctly unrealistic. He
would not like to reduce reserve requirements but he was inclined
to believe that this might be the only reasonable choice in the near
future if present reserve projections came to pass.
Mr. Fulton stated that Mr. Mills' comments reflected his own
thinking, and Mr. Leach said that in suggesting a reduction in reserve
requirements he had had in mind that he would not like to see the bill
rate driven down too far.
After some further discussion of the reserve projections,
Chairman Martin said that the Board of Governors would bear the
problem of reserves in mind.
With regard to the decisions to be made at this meeting,
the Chairman inquired whether in his previous comments he had
correctly outlined the majority position as to general policy,
and no dissents were heard. Turning to Mr. Rouse, the Chairman
asked whether he saw any need for a change in the directive and
Mr. Rouse replied in the negative.

6/17/58
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York until otherwise
directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges
(including replacement of maturing securities, and allow
ing maturities to run off without replacement) for the
System Open Market Account in the open market or, in the
case of maturing securities, by direct exchange with the
Treasury, as may be necessary in the light of current
and prospective economic conditions and the general
credit situation of the country, with a view (a) to
relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs
of commerce and business, (b) to contributing further by
monetary ease to resumption of stable growth of the
economy, and (c) to the practical administration of the
Account; provided that the aggregate amount of securities
held in the System Account (including commitments for the
purchase or sale of securities for the Account) at the
close of this date, other than special short-term certifi
cates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be
increased or decreased by more than $1 billion
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with
discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue
participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such
amounts of special short-term certificates of indebted
ness as may be necessary from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided that
the total amount of such certificates held at any one time
by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggre
gate $500 million.
Mr. Hayes reported that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
had discussed with the New York Clearing House Association the publica
tion of aggregate figures for Clearing House banks on required reserves,
borrowings from the Federal Reserve Bank, and Federal funds borrowings.

6/17/58 -41l
He recalled that in its report last year the Clearing House
Association made such a proposal, except that the figures
were to be made available only to the Clearing House banks.
The New York Bank, on the other hand, felt that it would be
helpful if those figures could be made public. A letter had
now been received under date of June 2, 1958, stating that
the Clearing House Association had discussed the matter and
had concluded that the proposal was not acceptable. However,
the Clearing House would be willing to accept the plan if it
were expanded to provide for making public similar information
for banks in other cities.
Mr. Hayes said that although he had some sympathy for
the position of the Clearing House, he thought that the signifi
cance of the matter had been greatly exaggerated. He went on
to say that he had reported to the Presidents' Conference
yesterday and had suggested referring the question to the Federal
funds study group, which was already preparing to consider the
desirability of collecting broader statistics than the Clearing
House had suggested. If this were done, the Clearing House could
be told that the System was looking into the matter and would be
unable to give any definitive reply in the near future.
Chairman Martin inquired whether any objection was seen
to handling the matter along the lines suggested by Mr. Hayes,

6/17/58 - 2
and no objection was heard.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, July 8, 1958, at 10:00 a.m.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Assistant Secretary