A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
on Monday, August 4, 1958, at 3:00 p.m. This was a telephone
conference meeting and each individual was in Washington except
as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of
those participating
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Irons (Dallas)
Mr. Leach (Richmond)
Mr. Mangels
Mr. Mills
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Vardaman
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes (New York)
Mr. Allen, Alternate for Mr. Fulton (Chicago)
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Young, Associate Economist
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market
Account (New York)
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Keir, Acting Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Chairman Martin asked Mr. Rouse to review for the Committee
conditions in the Government securities market, the color, feel, and
tone of the market, and his plans for operations in the System Account.
Mr. Rouse replied that, to put the matter briefly, he might
say that in a sense the Account Management had run out of a directive
from the Committee, for redundant reserves had been recaptured. For
the past four day he said, the market had not been very active and

8/4/58 -2.
movements pricewise had been of a rather minor character, although
today' price movements were probably a little wider than during
the last three days of last week. There was some activity in
Treasury bills at a definitely higher bill rate. The market began
to feel a little sluggish last Friday due to a lesser availability
of funds, largely stemming from a redistribution of deposits from
the city to the country banks, and the market today reflected this
same degree of relative tightness. The Treasury bill market had
moved up 18 to 20 basis points, and in today's auction the average
rate apparently would be a little above 1.15, with a stop-out at
1.20.
Mr. Rouse said that on the basis of the New York Bank's
projections average free reserves for the current statement week
would be about $381 million, but for the following week the average
would be about zero, primarily reflecting an increase in required
reserves because of the increased Treasury tax and loan account
balances resulting from sale of the tax anticipation certificates.
Estimates of the Board's staff were higher, being $565 million for
the current statement week and approximately $300 million for the
following week, attributable principally to differences in esti
mates of required reserves. In this connection, he noted that
recently the estimates of the Board's staff had developed to be
somewhat the more accurate.

8/4/58
Looking ahead, Mr. Rouse saw no real tightness in the
money market. It appeared that funds were available below the
discount rate.
Chairman Martin stated to Mr. Rouse that he thought the
latter had handled the situation very well over the past few days,
and Mr. Rouse commented in terms that the actions taken to re
capture redundant reserves had reflected the views expressed by
the members of the Open Market Committee.
Chairman Martin then said that the situation appeared to
contain some elements of danger from the standpoint that System
Account operations might overshoot their mark. When the figures
came out, they might constitute something of a shock and the
Manager of the Account therefore should be given considerable
latitude, for he might want to buy for the Account in the next
few days. Lower reserve levels should be sought, but in as
orderly a way as possible and without undue disturbance to the
Government securities market. It was possible that there might
be another difficult period of open market activity,
Mr. Rouse stated that there was always that possibility,
as the Committee realized in the discussions toward the end of
last week. Nevertheless, the Committee had felt that the Account
should sell as many bills as it could last week, and then, as
Chairman Martin had suggested, do what was necessary.

8/4/58 -4
Chairman Martin then stated that when it came to a
possible change in the policy directive there was some question
in his mind about taking such action at a telephone meeting.
There would be differences among the members of the Committee
with regard to what certain words actually meant. Therefore, it
seemed to him that it would be preferable to give the Manager
of the Account maximum leeway within the framework of the existing
directive and leave the directive unchanged until the meeting of
the Committee on Tuesday, August 19.
Reference was made by Mr. Rouse to the comments made by
the Committee members at the meeting on July 29, following which
the Chairman said that, speaking for himself, he would want to
give the Manager whatever authority he needed to move in the di
rection that the Committee was discussing at that meeting without
causing any more disturbance in the market than necessary. The
important thing, he said, was to have a meeting of the minds as
to how operations in the Account were going to be conducted rather
than to worry about exactly what was said at the last meeting. The
Chairman then asked for expressions from the other members of the
Committee, with the understanding that the comments would supersede
what was said at the July 29 Committee meeting.
Mr. Treiber said that he was in agreement with the general
appraisal by Chairman Martin of the difficulties with which System

8/4/58 -5
open market activities might be confronted. The international
situation was still delicate, adjustment was still going on in
the market, weak holdings of securities were still overhanging
the market, and some holders of the 1-5/8 per cent certificates
were seeking to dispose of them. The commercial banks would be
gradually completing the underwriting process on the tax anticipa
tion certificates by selling as demand developed. While he believed
that there should be less ease than had prevailed, say a month ago,
on the other hand he would want to avoid tightness that would cause
any kind of unsettlement. He was delighted at the economic upturn
that had become evident during the last couple of months and would
like to see it continue at a stable rate. There had been adjustments
of rates throughout the markets and he would not want to see them
pushed too far by monetary action. It seemed desirable to have a
continuation of free reserves at about the current level, say $300
to $00 million, without creating a feeling of tightness and while,
of course, being alert to market developments.
Mr. Irons said he felt that what the Account had done in the
past few days was entirely in line with the directive and the in
struction given by the Committee. In his opinion the Account had
done an excellent job in recapturing the reserves that the Committee
regarded as redundant. It had accomplished the task quickly and
apparently without untoward consequences thus far. He agreed with

8/4/58 -6
Chairman Martin that it was undesirable to move too fast and that
one could not ignore the possibility of problems developing in the
market as the figures unfolded. The important thing was the longer
run objective, even though it might be necessary to deviate from it
from time to time, and judgment with regard to any such deviations
should rest with the Manager of the Account. He should have a very
considerable leeway to meet short-run spot situations as they ap
peared to be developing in the market, even though for a short
period he was deviating from the major objective on which all of
the members of the Committee appeared to be in substantial agreement.
Mr. Irons said that he did not have any figure for free reserves in
mind. The direction in which the Desk had been moving was desirable
and in line with the major objective.
Mr. Mangels recalled that at the Committee meeting on July 29
he had said that he was hopeful of free reserves getting down to about
$500 million. In other words, something not too far from that might
be satisfactory. He had not been thinking in terms as low as $300
$400 million, and he felt that somewhere between $400 and $500 mil
lion might be better. The Chairman had expressed the thought that
System operations might have gone a little too fast, and the same
thought had been in his own mind. He would consider it desirable
to aim for free reserves between $00 and $500 million, with what
ever latitude was needed by the Desk.

8/4/58 -7
Mr. Allen stated that the Desk had been more successful
than he had thought possible in getting rid of redundant reserves.
However, just because it had gotten rid of them he did not think
that a change in the directive until the next Committee meeting
was necessary. He would leave the directive alone. He felt that
the Manager of the Account should have considerable latitude with
respect to free reserves, going between $300 and $600 million in
the light of market conditions.
Mr. Leach expressed the view that what had been done by
the Desk was fine and that it was fortunate that the Desk had
found it possible to get rid of redundant reserves so quickly.
General policy, he felt, ought to be one of less ease. He thought
that the estimated $381 million free reserve level was all right
for this week, and that next week there would not be too much of a
problem, although free reserves should not be allowed to get down
to zero. While he was in favor of a lower level of free reserves,
he would not want to get there too rapidly, for he would not want
to upset the market. If there was an understanding that the Com
mittee was working toward lower levels of free reserves, and if
some figure was kept in mind as a general benchmark for the Manager
of the Account, that in his opinion was about as good a directive
as the Committee could give. As to the policy directive, he felt
that it would be difficult to agree on language over the telephone.

8/4/58 -8
His thought would be to suggest $400m illion of free reserves
just as a benchmark, with plenty of leeway to vary from that
level. As he had said, he would not want free reserves to get
down to the zero level.
Mr. Vardaman said that the primary objective of the Desk,
as expressed in the last Committee directive, was to eliminate
redundant reserves. That having been accomplished, there was the
problem of establishing an interim policy to last until further
notice or until the meeting of the Committee on August 19. He
would dislike to change the policy directive at a telephone meeting,
and it seemed to him that the best that could be done was for all
of the Committee members to express their thoughts. For his own
part, he would say that the objective of the Desk from now on should
be to see that redundant reserves did not return and to maintain free
reserves in a range somewhere between $400, or perhaps $300, million
and $600 million, with the understanding that the Desk had to have
the very broadest leeway in operating the Account.
Mr. Mills said that he was very much in agreement with
Chairman Martin's reasoning which would, as he understood it, con
template tapering down on free reserves but always bearing in mind
the risks that were involved if doing so would produce too tight a
market. Especially in his own mind was the probability that a
recovery, if it took hold, would at some point involve an expansion

8/4/58 -9
of commercial bank credit to commerce and industry. When that
point was reached, it would be necessary to have a reserve atmos
phere that would accommodate those needs, with the greater part
of an expanding volume of bank credit provided for by commercial
banks from their recently increased holdings of United States
Government securities. If that were done, and if the expansion
of bank credit contained within reasonable limits, System policy
would have permitted the divestment of such securities without
creating a market so tight as to defeat its own purpose by in
volving the commercial banks in heavy depreciation costs. The
commercial banks must be in the forefront of System policy decisions
formulated to avoid a market tightness that would handicap their
operations. In addition, there were the approaching and continuing
needs of the Treasury which the System has a first responsibility
to accommodate.
Mr. Shepardson said he was extremely gratified that the
Desk had been able to recapture redundant reserves so promptly.
This had been accomplished far more expeditiously than he had
thought possible. With regard to the directive, he felt that it
was still adequate to meet the situation, and he would prefer not
to change it at a telephone meeting. The Committee seemed to be
in agreement that the trend should be in the direction of less
ease than had prevailed, but he was concerned that the movement

8/4/58 -10
not be too precipitate. The differences in the reserve projections
of the Board's staff and the New York Bank indicated uncertainty as
to what level might eventuate. In the circumstances, he would leave
considerable leeway and discretion in the hands of the Management of
the Account with a view to maintaining a favorable market atmosphere,
generally trending in the direction that the Committee had discussed.
Mr. Balderston said that he too was gratified with the results
that the Desk had been able to achieve in so short a time. Because
of the differences in the reserve projections of the New York Bank
and the Board's staff, he had the feeling that the Committee should
leave discretion with the Desk, but he would hope that between now
and August 19 the Desk could aim at some reduction of free reserves,
using as a guide $200-$400 million. He noted that the projection
of the Board's staff was $296 million during the week when the
New York Bank estimated net borrowed reserves of $9 million. There
fore, he felt that the Committee could not pinpoint a target for the
Desk and merely must indicate a general direction. He hoped it would
be possible so to conduct operations as to preserve a neutral attitude,
which to him meant neither ease nor restraint until the Committee
could see more clearly how business was going to be after Labor Day.
Until that time he would like to see neutrality, which in about a
month should mean free reserves of zero.

8/4/58
-1
Chairman Martin said that he thought the main point was
the matter of atmosphere and conditionn in the Government securi
ties market. There was some question in his mind about Mr.
Balderston's free reserve range of $200-$400 million, but in any
event he did not think the level was as important as the nature
of the market that resulted from it. He recalled that the Com
mittee had experienced great difficulty from being more or less
tied to a free reserve figure of $500 million. One should be
careful, he said, about projecting anything. He said that he
would like to have Mr. Rouse's feeling about trying to move in
the direction of less ease, but doing so with a minimum of upset
to the Government securities market.
Mr. Rouse said that much depended on what expectations
were generated in the market. Last week average free reserves
were at the level of $530 million and this week they would be more
like $400 million, but he did not think that would cause much dis
turbance. It was really a matter of playing by ear. He thought
that the Account Management understood what the members of the
Committee had in mind and that the Management could get along
without any change in the directive at this time. In the sense
that Mr. Vardaman pointed it up, to keep from having redundant
reserves would be quite a good directive. As he saw it, the
Desk could function with that understanding, and the Committee

8/4/58 -12
could get together quickly if necessary.
Chairman Martin then asked Mr. Rouse if he felt sure that
he had a sufficient understanding of what was in the minds of the
Committee members in order to proceed, and Mr. Rouse replied in
the affirmative. It would, he said, require a good deal of leeway.
Chairman Martin then stated that he thought it was clear
that the majority of the Committee did not want to tie the Manage
ment of the Account to any precise free reserve figure.
In conclusion, Mr. Rouse said that he would proceed accord
ing to his understanding of the Committee's thinking.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.