A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, January 6, 1959, at 10:00 a.m,
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Irons
Mr. Leach
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Deming, Alternate for Mr. Mangels
Messrs. Erickson, Allen, and Johns, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bopp, Bryan, and Leedy, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Atlanta,
and Kansas City, respectively
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Daane, Hostetler, Marget, Roelse, Walker,
Wheeler, and Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Molony, Special Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Associate Adviser, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Keir, Acting Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Ellis, Mitchell, Jones, and Tow, Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Boston, Chicago, St. Louis, and Kansas City,
respectively

1/6/59 -2
Mr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Anderson, Economic Adviser, Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Mr. Parsons, Director of Research, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Mr. Brandt, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meetings of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on December 2 and December 16,
1968, were approved.
Under date of December 29, 1958, there had been sent to each
member and alternate member of the Federal Open Market Committee, and
to each President not currently a member of the Committee, a copy of
the report of audit of the System Open Market Account made by the
Division of Examinations of the Board of Governors as at the close of
business November 7, 1958. The report, which has been placed in the
Committee's files, was submitted to the Secretary of the Committee
under date of December 16, 1958, in accordance with the action of the
Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting on June 21, 1939.
Chairman Martin inquired whether any of the members of the
Committee wished to comment on the report, and there was no indication
to such effect.
Accordingly, the audit report
was noted and accepted without objection.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New

1/6/59 -3
York covering open market operations during the period December 16
through December 30, 1958, and a supplemental report covering the
period December 31, 1958, through January 5, 1959. Copies of both
reports have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market
Committee.
In his comments on recent open market developments, Mr. Rouse
stated that the money market had functioned more smoothly this Decem
ber than in other year-end periods. The market had been somewhat
tighter than in recent weeks, but there had been little impact on
short-term rates of interest. Treasury bill rates reached a peak on
December 16 but since then had moved downward. The tightness in the
money market toward the end of the year was relieved by a substantial
flow of funds from country banks to the money centers, a movement that
had since been reversed.
Mr. Rouse went on to say that the prices of intermediate and
long-term bonds had declined by as much as four points since late
November, reflecting primarily continuing discussion of the possibility
of an offering of long bonds by the Treasury this month. The announce
ment of the terms of the Treasury's offering was expected toward the
end of this week. Prices of corporate and municipal bonds had drifted
lower in seasonally quiet trading. Projections of bank reserve positions
indicated that seasonal factors would supply reserves over the next
few weeks, but the System Account had ample amounts of Treasury bills

1/6/59 -4
that could be redeemed or sold to offset those reserve effects. The
Account bid in yesterday's auction to run off about half of its $259
million holdings of bills maturing January 8.
Mr. Rouse pointed out that the supplementary report on open
market operations distributed to the members of the Committee this
morning contained reserve projections only for the current statement
week and the three succeeding weeks, whereas in the past, projections
for a period of sixteen weeks ahead had been shown. From the stand
point of operations, he said, only the shorter-range projections were
useful. The Research Department of the New York Bank was preparing to
make a study of the basis of the longer-range projections, and if as a
result of this study it became possible to improve them, the practice
of including the longer-term projections in the supplementary report
would be resumed. Until that time, however, it was planned to show
only the shorter-range estimates in the report.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the open market transactions during
the period December 16, 1958 through
January 5, 1959, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
The staff economic and financial review at this meeting was
in the form of a visual-auditory presentation, participants including
Messrs. Thomas, Young, Marget, and Koch, along with Mr. Brill of the
Board' s staff. By permission of the Committee, Miss Burr of the

1/6/59
Board's staff and Mr. Storrs of the Richmond Reserve Bank joined
the meeting for this presentation.
A copy of the text of the presentation has been placed in
the Committee files. Following the meeting, copies also were sent
to the Committee members and alternate members and to the Presidents
not currently on the Committee. A summary of portions of the presenta
tion follows:
The current picture of the economy is one of maturing
recovery. Output is back, or nearly back, to prerecession
levels. This means that problems of sustainable growth
have now replaced problems of recession. Among these new
problems the threat of resumed inflationary tendencies is
clearly forecast from a financial point of view.
The behavior of commodity prices during the recession,
the speed and generality of the economic recovery, the
persistent rise in common stock prices, the pace of monetary
expansion early last year, and the size of the current
Federal deficit have encouraged expectations of further
creeping inflation and strengthened views that continuing
inflation is inevitable.
A key question for Federal Reserve policy now is what
rate of monetary expansion would contribute best to the
sustainability, without inflation, of prospective economic
expansion. While the present ratio of money supply to GNP
is significantly lower than after the recovery period 1954
55, it is still higher than the average ratio of the 1920's-
by some 10 per cent. Hence, there may remain some margin for
further increase in the rate of money-use, but it is probably
smaller than at the beginning of the last expansion period.
Perhaps the rate of growth in the money supply for the years
ahead could be somewhat greater than in the comparable
period of the 1954-57 recover-expansion, without inflationary
consequences, but growth in the money supply always needs to
be determined in the light of tendencies in velocity of
money and of developments affecting the quality of credit.

1/6/59
With resumption of business borrowing, prospective large
demands for mortgage loans, and the financing needs of govern
ments--particularly State and local--total demands on the
capital markets will increase along with further expansion in
economic activity. While the total supply of loanable funds
in the economy is still very large and economic expansion to
a new high level is not likely to be seriously hampered by
lack of funds, saving will need to be encouraged so as to
cover the bulk of financing demands and to keep the demand
pressures on bank credit creation within tolerable limits.
In a situation of this type, economic pressures may be
expected to sustain a relatively high level of interest rates.
As to current System policy, the vigor of the upsurge in
activity generally, the strengthening of private credit demands,
and the persistence of inflationary psychology--particularly in
financial markets--suggest that monetary expansion should be
temporarily held to a moderate rate. Banks should be under
pressure to borrow reserves needed to cover credit extensions
in excess of seasonal needs, and, to maintain the discipline
of the discount window, System discount rates should be kept
closely in line with market rates. Such a policy points to
an early lifting of these rates.
Pursuit of a policy of limiting monetary expansion to a
noninflationary volume is facilitated, at this time, by the
fact that bank reserve positions were allowed to contract some
what during last December and early January. On the other hand,
it is handicapped to some extent by the imminence of more cash
financing by the Treasury. Even to keep bank reserve positions
relatively steady, the System will need to absorb a half bil
lion dollars or more of reserves that will be made available
to member banks in the immediate future as a result of a
return flow of holiday currency and seasonal decline in de
posits and required reserves. Under the circumstances, it is
important that these reserves be absorbed promptly--perhaps a
little in advance of their availability to member banks--in
order to prevent their commitment to speculative and other
undesirable uses.
Mr. Hayes made the following statement of his views on the busi
ness outlook and credit policy:
The most striking economic news since our last meeting
has been the announcement of external convertibility for
sterling and other major European currencies, the French
devaluation, and related financial developments in Europe.

1/6/59
While it is very hard to estimate the ultimate detailed
effects on domestic business conditions, the chances are
that there will be little near-term effect one way or the
other. In general, the changes are distinctly constructive,
indicating important progress toward a more viable world
economy, which should bring significant benefits to the
United States in the long run.
The outlook for continued recovery has firmed up since
our last meeting. It is encouraging to note that almost all
branches of activity shared in the recent advance and that
consumer buying in the Christmas season was apparently some
what better than expected.
Price developments have shown contradictory tendencies,
with continued declines in spot and future prices of raw
materials, as well as food products (and in sensitive whole
sale prices), whereas the consumer price index and industrial
wholesale prices have exhibited some slight upward pressure.
At the same time prices of equities have soared to new peaks.
Looking ahead, we find that the view is very widely held
among informed economists that the prospect is for a continued
moderate recovery during 1959. Unfortunately there is also a
predominant view that reasonably full employment will continue
to elude us for many months ahead and that prices will show
some upward tilt, although probably very moderate in degree.
One key question is whether the current and prospective
strength of consumer buying will cause an upward revision in
business spending for plant and equipment, besides a significant
inventory accumulation. There are also major uncertainties in
the automobile outlook and in the future course of the stock
market, with related psychological influences on business
expectations and plans.
It is never easy to draw a clean-cut line, either concep
tually or statistically, between recovery and long-term
expansion. In a sense recovery will certainly remain incom
plete as long as the rise in output and income is not suffi
cient to absorb workers who became unemployed during the
recession. Yet growth of the economy can take place under
conditions when workers who enter the labor force or become
unemployed because of automation or other improvements in
efficiency fail to find employment. We can, I think, agree
that as long as unemployment remains a problem, economic
policy must aim at expansion, provided additional employment
does not produce an inflationary situation by pressing
against limited capacity of facilities and inelastic supplies
of materials.
We must concern ourselves at this time with two aspects
of the Treasury's activities--first, the timing of the cash

1/6/59 -8
financing scheduled for announcement this week, and of the
large refunding due two or three weeks later; second, the
serious question whether the Administration's highly laudable
goal of a balanced budget will actually be attained in fiscal
1960.
Recent credit statistics have shown greater expansion
than we realized a month or two ago, I am thinking especially
of the larger-than-expected growth in loans and investments in
country banks, bringing the increase in loans and investments
of all commercial banks to around $13 billion for the first
eleven months of 1958. We now look for a full year increase
in the money supply of around 3 per cent, higher than earlier
forecasts but still not disturbing in view of the fact that
the money supply was virtually unchanged from the end of 1955
to the end of 1957.
As for credit policy, we should certainly recognize that
recovery is proceeding on a broad base and is likely to con
tinue. We must not overlook either the persistence of large
unemployment or the continued evidence of speculative fever
in the stock market. It seems to me worth noting that
recovery, or the existence of prosperous business conditions,
does not per se require a policy of restraint, and that we
should move toward restraint only as and when we see real
evidence of price pressures or financial excesses.
For the present it is, I believe, appropriate to continue
a moderately firm rein to prevent the accumulation of exces
sive liquidity. The modest tightening which has recently
occurred in reserve positions should not be intensified, but
neither should it be relaxed. To this end we should act
promptly to absorb the return flow of currency and to prevent
the expansion of the reserve base that would otherwise occur.
While the desirable degree of restraint may be symbolized by
net borrowed reserves of about $100 million, I think the
Manager should seek to maintain the present degree of tight
ness as indicated by the feel of the market. This flexibility
is especially appropriate now inasmuch as seasonal factors
in January could lead to a greater feeling of ease than the
figures alone might suggest. On the other hand, with the
possibility of a long-term Treasury offering in January,
we may find our monetary policy assisted by debt management
policies in providing a degree of pressure in the money and
capital markets.
With respect to the discount rate, there are serious
drawbacks to a change from the standpoint of Treasury and

1/6/59 -9
international considerations, and fortunately economic
conditions do not require an immediate change. The
even keel policy clearly points to the desirability of
an unchanged rate for several weeks. Furthermore, I
have some fear that a discount rate rise at this
particular time might be construed abroad as an un
cooperative and unnecessary defensive response to the
European move to convertibility, which after all is
much more indicative of European economic strength than
of dollar weakness.
Mr. Johns said that as he interpreted the discussion at the
last Committee meeting, there was a rather strong consensus, almost
approaching unanimity, to the effect that the System's posture should
be one of growing monetary restraint. This was a somewhat stronger
position than previously, he thought, but it was not dissimilar as to
direction from the consensuses at the last couple of meetings or even
before that. As he viewed the situation, it was extremely doubtful
whether there had actually been restraint, either during the past
three eeks or somewhat further back into the last quarter of 1958.
As a matter of fact, he felt that the System had not been restrictive,
or at least not restrictive enough. From preliminary estimates, it
appeared that the active money supply, seasonally adjusted, rose
at an annual rate of about 6 per cent in the fourth quarter of
last year, while the use of the money supply had been relatively
high and rising. Interest rates generally were still at about the
early October levels despite rising levels of business activity and
greater than seasonal demands for credit, and loans at weekly
reporting banks rose more than seasonally during the four weeks

1/6/59 -10
ended December 24, the increase having been 2.3 per cent compared with
the seasonal growth of about 1.7 per cent. Also, total member bank
reserves rose about $1.3 billion in the fourth quarter through Decem
ber 26, whereas in the like periods of 1955, 1956, and 1957 the
average increase was about $.7 billion. In only one statistic that
he desired to mention did it appear that there had been any compliance,
or gesture of compliance, with the decisions of the Open Market Com
mittee in the direction of greater restraint. In the last three weeks
free reserves of member banks had drifted lower, but they were pre
vented from falling further by net System Account purchases of about
$1.5 billion of Treasury bills during the fourth quarter through
December 26. This compared with net purchases during the corresponding
period in 1957 of about $1 billion and purchases averaging $1.1 billion
in the like periods of 1955 and 1956. Accordingly, it was his view
that the Committee's expressed decisions had not been fulfilled. In
making this statement, he did not intend nor did he wish to imply any
criticism of the Management of the Open Market Account, for in his view
the fault lay with the Committee itself due to the kind and manner of
instructions that had been given to the Manager of the Account. He did
not wish to go into that further today but at some future time he pro
posed to discuss the matter to a greater extent.
Turning to policy for the next few weeks, Mr. Johns said he
agreed with the suggestion made by Mr. Thomas during the chart show

1/6/59 -11
to the effect that absorption of currency returning from circulation
and of reserves resulting from other factors should proceed somewhat
in anticipation of the economic impact of those developments. In
short, he would seek to be tighter by open market operations, for in
his opinion the time had come to make restraint a reality. He would
hope that during the next three weeks there might be no purchases of
securities by the Account and no attempt to offset short-term wiggles
in the reserve position. He had expressed the opinion at the last
Committee meeting that an adjustment of the discount rate should be
made promptly, and he continued to feel that a rate adjustment was
overdue. However, he did not know what that feeling implied in terms
of timing in view of the Treasury's forthcoming trips to the market
for new cash and then for refunding. If this meant that the Reserve
Banks were prevented from making a discount rate change until the
middle of February or thereafter, he felt that it would be regrettable
and unfortunate. As to timing, however, he would want to have the
benefit of the discussion at this meeting.
Mr. Bryan said that the statistics for the Sixth District
seemed to conform in general to the national figures and that the
recovery appeared to be solidly-based and continuing. With regard
to national policy, he said that he was alarmed by certain factors
that were not, strictly speaking, on the economic side. By this
comment, he referred to what he considered the very real possibility

1/6/59 -12.
that in the forthcoming extraordinarily crucial session of Congress,
policies might be decided upon that would make inflation a certainty
for many years to come. Mr. Bryan went on to say that his own thinking
as to System policy was rather negative in the sense that he felt that
policy at this immediate juncture should not become easier. In fact,
he tended to agree with Mr. Johns that, if anything, it should become
more restraining. He had some apprehension that, in view of the
seasonal factors now involved, the System could very easily get itself
into a situation where its absorption of reserves would not be on a
sufficiently massive scale and a position of ease would inadvertently
develop. This, he felt, would be a very grave blunder. Therefore, he
had been thinking in terms of an open market operation that would take
as its principal guide to policy in this immediate period not the
figures of free reserves or net borrowed reserves but the actual be
havior of short-term rates in the market, his idea being that it would
be a very real mistake in the face of rising corporate liquidity, and
apparently a considerable corporate demand for short-term instruments,
to permit short-term rates to back away from the recent levels and
perhaps go below the discount rate. Like Mr. Johns, he believed that a
change in the discount rate was overdue, but he did not see how a change
could be accomplished at the moment.
Mr. Bopp said that, going into the New Year, business sentiment
in the Third District was cautiously optimistic. The general expectation

1/6/59 -13
was that business activity would continue to improve but that
absorption of the unemployed would be slow. There was as yet no
boom psychology. In view of the forthcoming Treasury financing,
he felt that the principal problem for monetary policy was to try
to maintain an even keel despite the seasonal return flow of cur
rency and other factors tending to supply reserves to the market.
Fortunately, the System's holdings of bills maturing in January
appeared ample to absorb reserves created by the return flow of
currency and other factors. Therefore, he favored maintaining
about the same degree of pressure on reserves as during the past
three weeks, and he would emphasize the importance of the feel of
the market rather than the statistics as a guide to day-to-day
operations. He would not favor a change in the directive or in
the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Fulton reported that the Fourth District was participating
with the rest of the country in the recovery movement, and in this
connection he noted that the low point of the recession in that
district may have been about the lowest in the country. The steel
industry had recently been receiving considerably more orders than
in the past few months, possibly in expectation of a strike later
this year. The automotive industry had informed some mills that it
would buy eight months' supply of steel within the next six months,

1/6/59 -14
and orders were coming in for steel inventory from various other
users. Accordingly, the steel manufacturers felt that they would
have an operating rate of perhaps about 78 per cent in the first
quarter of this year and 86 per cent in the second quarter. No
matter what happened after that, however, they felt that the rate
would go down to 45 or 50 per cent for a period of weeks during the
third quarter. If there should be a strike, the rate would be down
and if there should be no strike, inventories would take care of the
needs of users. For the year as a whole, it appeared that steel
operations would probably average a rate of around 75 per cent. In
the automotive industry, there had for some time been projections of
possibly 5.2 to 5.5 million cars this year, but the thinking now was
between 5.5 and 6 million, the upward revision reflecting the fact
that the new-model automobiles seemed to be experiencing better
acceptance by the public than was the case earlier. Certain types
of steel were now rather tight and the mills producing them were
scheduling a high rate of operations for the first quarter.
Mr. Fulton continued by saying that department store sales
in the district had been surprisingly good during the Christmas
season but that sales for the year as a whole ran 2 or 3 per cent
behind 1957. Unemployment was not being alleviated to an extent
comparable to the rise in industrial production, and there continued
to be a number of spots of substantial unemploument. All in all, it

1/6/59 -15
might be said that the Fourth District was experiencing a gradual
rise in activity.
As to policy, Mr. Fulton expressed the view that absorption
of redundant reserves should be undertaken promptly, and in a volume
that would permit no ease whatsoever to get into the banking system.
Like Mr. Bryan, he felt that the present structure of short-term rates
should be maintained and not allowed to drift downward. Because of
increased business and economies effected during the recession,
corporations had become considerably more liquid, and he believed
there was a considerable amount of funds available from that source.
In his opinion, the Desk should keep a weather eye on the structure
of rates rather than any particular amount of net borrowed reserves,
and member banks should be required to come to the discount window
to obtain any needed reserves. He would not favor a change in the
discount rate at this time. In a concluding comment, he suggested
that there was more ebullience in the stock market than anywhere
else at this time, and that whatever could be done to dampen the
ardor in that sector would be of substantial benefit.
Mr. Robertson said he concurred with Messrs. Johns and Bryan
that economic conditions were such, and had been such for quite a
little time, as to call for an increase in the discount rate. He
considered it regrettable that an adjustment of the rate had not been
made. He also concurred in the view of Mr. Johns that open market

1/6/59 -16
operations in the past three weeks had not achieved the degree of
restraint that he personally had thought desirable or even the lesser
degree of restraint which appeared to be contemplated at the last
meeting of the Open Market Committee. He regretted the "feather touch"
that had been followed. However, it seemed obvious, in view of the
Treasury financing announcement later this week, that the Committee
had no alternative except to maintain an even keel throughout the
financing period and perhaps even into the refunding period. This,
he said, connoted action to offset easing factors that were bound to
appear during this period. He saw no need for any change in the
directive or for any change in policy, since it seemed necessary to
maintain the same degree of restraint as existed at the moment. He
concurred in the view that the guide to open market operations should
not be the amount of net borrowed reserves but the rate structure in
the short-term area.
Mr. Mills said he was confident there would be general agree
ment that the broad direction of System policy should be on the side
of credit restraint. To the extent that there were differences, those
obviously reflected judgments as to what degree of restraint was
attainable without disrupting securities markets or without interfering
with a legitimate movement of economic recovery by choking off the
availability of credit. Personally, he believed the degree of restraint
exerted since the last meeting of the Open Market Committee had been

1/6/59 -17
appropriate and had accomplished the purposes that were intended by
the majority of the Committee. It was inevitable, he said, that the
discussion today should focus on the discount rate and the propriety
of an increase in that rate. In his view, the System should by all
means avoid a dramatic rate change which in essence would be an action
taken in a vacuum. In other words, at a time such as this there were
more than normal reasons for changing the discount rate only in order
to bring it into alignment with the movement of the market rates in a
free market. In that connection, he brought out, it was necessary to
decide in what sector of the market the System wished to produce an
alignment. The long-term sector essentially has to do with the move
ment of investment and capital funds, and in his reasoning the short
term sector, particularly as symbolized by the yield on Treasury bills,
was the sector of alignment toward which the System should point its
policy. The yield on Treasury bills, he observed, had not at this time
moved far out of alignment with the discount rate. In fact, if one
looked at the "ask" side--the yield on bills obtainable by purchasers
there was no lack of alignment. For that reason, he suggested that
when consideration was given to an increase in the discount rate, the
thinking be realistic and the action taken in accord with whatever
alignment might be necessary at the time.
As to the movement and direction of interest rates, Mr. Mills
said that a period when there was a seasonal withdrawal of reserves

1/6/59 -18.
accompanying a return flow of currency from circulation could, of
course, be capitalized on by the System to bring pressure on interest
rates and perhaps to bring short-term rates to a level that within a
reasonable time, and consistent with Treasury problems, would justify
an increase in the discount rate. As that time approached, and if
advantage were taken of it, the thought occurred to him that System
considerations would be concentrated very largely on its domestic
responsibilities. As Mr. Hayes had brought out, however, the Federal
Reserve likewise has international financial responsibilities. An
increase in the discount rate following a rise in the yield on Treasury
bills might be regarded by the domestic and international financial
communities as an action on the part of the System to recognize the
outflow of gold during the past year or eighteen months, and through
such recognition to state tacitly that the System proposed to subject
the domestic economy to the discipline that is implicit in a gold out
flow by terminating a policy of acquiring U. S. Government securities
to offset gold withdrawals. Mr. Hayes, he noted, was concerned about
the possibility of actions in the United States market being inter
preted abroad as contrary to supporting the steps taken by foreign
countries to firm their currencies and bring them toward convertibility.
On the other hand, it was possible that where question had been raised
about the stability of the dollar, an action taken on the disciplinary
side of System monetary policy would bring credit rather than discredit

1/6/59 -19
on System intentions. If nothing else, it was quite likely that an
upward movement of Treasury bill yields in the United States to
equality with, or above, the yield on Treasury bills in the United
Kingdom would tend to stem the outflow of gold from the United States.
Moreover, it might draw gold back to this country because of the more
attractive investment opportunities offered in the U. S. Government
securities market.
Mr. Leach said that in the Fifth District the year 1958 closed
with continuing evidence of gradual economic expansion. The textile
industry continued to enjoy a better market but had not yet returned
to industrywide six-day operations. Cigarette manufacturers closed
out a year of operations well above the 1957 level, and 1958 was a
banner crop year for Fifth District farmers. After a rapid rise in
November, business loans of weekly reporting member banks rose slowly
in December to produce an over-all increase of about seasonal propor
tions.
Mr. Leach expressed the opinion that in view of the imminent
Treasury financing an even keel policy was clearly appropriate for the
period immediately ahead. This suggested a moderate amount of net
borrowed reserves as the desired bench mark, and the latest projections
indicated that only moderate action by the System would be required to
maintain such a level. That action presumably should take the form of
a runoff of Treasury bills. After expressing the view that prompt

1/6/59 -20
absorption of any redundant reserves was very important, Mr. Leach
said that, as he saw it, the Desk had maintained just about the
degree of tightness that he sensed the Committee as a whole intended
at the last meeting. He felt that this degree of tightness should
continue, with the Manager of the Account guided by the general feel
of the market and not solely by free reserve or net borrowed reserve
figures. Obviously, no change should be made in the discount rate
while following an even keel policy, and he saw no reason to change
the directive at this time.
Mr. Leedy said he was one of those who felt that it would
have been well to have had more restraint in the periods between
the last two Committee meetings, particularly the more recent period.
He said this without any criticism of the Desk, for the Desk had had
a very difficult problem, but in his own thinking he would have
preferred more restraint than had actually been accomplished. If a
change could be made in the discount rate, he would favor that course,
for he did not share the apprehension of Mr. Hayes about possible mis
understanding of the purposes involved in such a move. With the
Treasury cash financing immediately ahead, however, he did not see
an opportunity to adjust the discount rate. For the present, he
felt the System could do little more than what it had been doing in
the recent past, but he hoped that the System could move somewhat
further in the direction of restraint.

1/6/59 -21
Mr. Allen referred to the annual meetings of economic and
statistical associations held in Chicago last week and said there
was a remarkable degree of unanimity on the business outlook, to
the effect that the uptrend in activity would continue for the next
several months at least. The very high level of Christmas retail
trade seemed to him to be the biggest business news in recent months,
with the statistical increase over a year ago particularly noteworthy
because Christmas trade was considered strong last year. He was
pleased to note that department store sales in the Seventh District
were as good as those in the nation as a whole during the Christmas
period, following a poorer performance earlier in the year. He went
on to say that employment had risen in all Seventh District States
in recent months and, while employment was below last year and un
employment higher, new claims for unemployment compensation during
November and early December were below the previous year in all
States of the district. Despite easier job markets, wages and
salaries had continued to rise during 1958. For example, a survey
of 42 large Chicago employers indicated a rise in the average pay
of white-collar workers of 2-1/2 per cent in the six months from
May to November. No evidence was seen as yet that higher interest
rates were hampering the rise in construction activity in the Seventh
District. Total contract awards in November were 10 per cent higher
than last year, compared with 9 per cent higher for the nation as a
whole.

1/6/59 -22
Mr. Allen reported that the atmosphere in Detroit was one
of optimism, a characteristic of this time of year. Sales in the
first part of December averaged 18,100 cars daily and it was under
stood that sales in the final 10 days of December were a little
better. Because Chrysler was in effect out of the picture due to
lack of stock, the showing for the last 10 days was more optimistically
regarded than would otherwise be the case. Production schedules for
January were projected for 580,000 to 590,000 cars, and for the entire
first quarter 1,500,000 or even a little more, while January inventory
totals of 600,000 were almost 200,000 below the figure of a year ago.
That inventory, incidentally, did not include approximately 80,000
imported cars. As a reflection of the current optimistic atmosphere,
the professional forecasters in Detroit were talking of 1959 sales
in terms of not less than 5.5 million domestic cars and 500,000
imported cars. Unemployment was expected to continue large in
Michigan, however, because automobile manufacturers were using over
time in order to avoid sharp reductions in force later on.
Turning to the financial picture, Mr. Allen said that year-end
pressures on Seventh District banks resulting from corporate tax pay
ments and seasonal credit needs appeared to have been somewhat lighter
than usual. In the four weeks ended December 24, loans to business by
district weekly reporting banks rose $67 million, compared with $9
million last year, while loans on securities increased $72 million
to a level of $500 million--the highest volume since the midyear

1/6/59 -23
Treasury financing. This doubtless was related to unusually large
dealer positions in Government securities. The year-end pressure
on reserves had been strongest at the large banks of the district;
in recent weeks, Chicago central reserve city banks had shown a
deficit position after being in a surplus position for the better
part of several months. In the statement week ended December 31,
borrowing at the Reserve Bank's discount window and purchases of
Federal funds exceeded excess reserves by $70 million, a somewhat
smaller deficit than for the same period a year ago but considerably
larger than at any time since last April. Two of the largest banks
had indicated that they expected their positions to ease by reason
of substantial loan liquidation in the month of January.
In a concluding comment on the economic situation in the
district, Mr. Allen said that some users of steel had indicated that
they expected within the next month or so to place orders for the
third as well as the second quarter.
Turning to policy, Mr. Allen said that economic considerations
would suggest, if they did not actually require, more restraint and an
increase in the discount rate to maintain what Mr. Thomas had referred
to as discipline of the discount window. However, any discussion of a
rate change at this time seemed academic. He agreed with those who
had pointed out that the System must give consideration to the Treasury
financing and that it should try to maintain in the next few weeks the

1/6/59 -24
degree of restraint that now existed. He was not inclined to be
critical of the Desk, for in the periods between the last two Com
mittee meetings he felt that it had done what the Committee requested.
For the ensuing period, he would try to stay about as at present, and
he considered it important to mop up excess reserves as fast as pos
sible. He would not favor action on the discount rate until after
the next meeting of the Committee at least.
Mr. Deming said that at the end of 1958 most business indi
cators in the Ninth District, as in the nation, pointed to further
recovery in economic activity. In the Ninth District, however, the
trend had been obscured by the sharp contraction normal for this time
of year. For example, both manufacturing and nonmanufacturing
employment in the Twin Cities was lower today than it was two months
ago. On the other hand, the drop in manufacturing employment was
only one-third as large as last year and in nonmanufacturing-
virtually untouched by the recession--the drop was about equal to
last year. These developments were normal for good years and the
iron ranges of Michigan and Minnesota remained about the only real
soft spots in the district.
Mr. Deming went on to say that Ninth District banking pre
sented a somewhat different picture from that of the nation. As of
mid-December, member bank loans were approximately $145 million higher
than a year earlier, with about two-thirds of the increase coming at

1/6/59 -25
country banks. Both Government and other security holdings were
substantially higher, this being in keeping with national performance.
Despite the loan growth, both city and country bank loan-deposit
ratios on December 10, 1958, were almost exactly the same as a year
earlier, with city bank ratios fractionally higher and country bank
ratios fractionally lower.
As to policy, Mr. Deming said that an even keel seemed to be
indicated during the next three weeks. To him, that meant prompt
absorption of redundant reserves but continuation of about the same
level of restraint as had been maintained recently. He agreed with
Messrs. Leach and Allen that the Desk had maintained about the degree
of restraint appropriate in the light of Committee instructions, and
in his view this was about the degree of restraint appropriate at
this time.
Mr. Irons said it seemed to him that economic conditions were
clearly strong and strengthening, both nationally and in the Eleventh
District. Further growth had been experienced in the district in
virtually all areas. In the period since Thanksgiving the volume of
retail business had averaged very strong, and the petroleum industry
was now in a somewhat better situation than earlier. Cutbacks on
missile and related contracts had caused a large aircraft manufacturer
to release employees just before the holidays, but in relation to total
employment this was not damaging, and it may have been that the

1/6/59 -26
consequences were more emotional than real. District construction
activity was holding up well. As to the banking picture, the demand
for loans was up, according to latest statistics, and the year-end
call report showed substantial increases in virtually all items over
a year ago, not only for banks in the large cities but for banks in
all cities. It would not appear that banks were pressed for reserves,
for there had been virtually no borrowing at the discount window. In
his judgment, the recovery was now a thing of the past and the System
should be looking toward fostering sustainable growth rather than
promoting recovery.
As to policy, Mr. Irons said he felt that the System should
certainly avoid anything that would give the appearance of, or permit,
any introduction of ease into the reserve position. At the same time,
he was rather satisfied with open market operations over the past three
weeks. All of those around the table were of course interested in
maintaining restraint and the differences were only in judgment as to
degree. After allowance for year-end developments and the problem of
meeting end-of-year strains, the Desk had introduced some degree of
greater restraint and in his judgment the operations could be regarded
as successful. While the bill rate had moved down to some extent,
this was due to a more liquid position on the part of corporations
and the situation might reverse itself rather quickly. At this time
of year, natural forces tending toward ease would come into the market,

1/6/59 -27.
and he suggested that the System be alert to offset them in every
way possible. Fortunately, the System held a substantial amount
of bills which could be run off to absorb reserves as they came
into the market, and he felt that the Desk should certainly follow
that course. Any errors, he said, should be made on the side of
restraint and clearly so. On the other hand, he would not want
to be strongly or dramatically tighter than during the past three
or four weeks.
Continuing, Mr. Irons said that the discount rate did not
bother him from the standpoint of its being out of line, even though
it was currently under the Treasury bill rate. He hoped, however,
that some further restraint, as it became possible, would produce a
rate situation in the market such that adjustment of the discount
rate would be more or less automatic. In any event, discussion of a
discount rate change at this time seemed academic. With the Treasury
financing announcement scheduled for this Thursday, it seemed important
for the next couple of days to allow no evidence to appear that any
ease was creeping into the picture; in other words, the System should
try to maintain as firm a position as possible pending the Treasury
announcement.
In summary, Mr. Irons said he was happy about open market
operations during the past few weeks. They had achieved some
additional restraint, and he hoped that this could continue without

1/6/59 -28
being dramatic or sensational. He would leave it to the Manager
of the Account, through his contacts with the market, operational
estimates, and similar guides to try to press gradually toward more
restraint without any upsetting factors.
Mr. Erickson said that in the First District recovery was
continuing in some areas at a slower pace than nationally and in
other areas at a pace ahead of the national figures. In November,
nonagricultural employment was down slightly although manufacturing
employment was up due to improvement in durable goods industries.
The New England industrial production index was up from 108 to 110 in
November, while electric power output during the last six months of
1958 was 6 per cent ahead of 1957. For the first eleven months of
the year, construction contracts were 8 per cent ahead of the previous
year due to public works and utilities. Over the same period, resi
dential construction was down 4 per cent from 1957, and nonresidential
construction was down 9 per cent. Department store sales were excel
lent for the Christmas season, sales in the last four weeks of the
season having been 8 per cent higher than in the similar period of
the previous year. On the other hand, automobile registrations were
still running a good deal behind year-ago levels. A survey of savings
banks at the end of November showed for the first time during 1958 a
rate of deposit increase less than for the previous month, and the
same situation held true in a survey of Federal savings and loan
associations. Whether that development was of significance, he did
not know.

1/6/59 -29
As to policy, Mr. Erickson said that Mr. Irons had covered
his own position. He expressed satisfaction with the operations
of the Desk during the past three weeks and, in view of the Treasury
financing date, said that he would make no change in the directive
or in the discount rate at this time. He would favor continuing to
maintain the existing degree of restraint and would make sure that
no ease appeared.
Mr. Szymczak said that for the next three weeks System policy
quite obviously would have to stay put. While excess reserves coming
into the market should be absorbed through open market operations, the
System was stymied for the time being on the discount rate. He would
like to study at greater length the question of when it would be pos
sible to raise the discount rate with the Treasury due to come to the
market first for new money and then for refunding. This raised the
question whether a rate change would be feasible for a month or even
a month and a half. In this connection, he noted the System's responsi
bility as an arm of the Government to work in harmony with the Treasury
in obtaining the amount of money that the Treasury would have to raise.
Also, Mr. Szymczak said, he would like to study the cause of the present
volume of unemployment, for his readings indicated the possibility of
relatively large unemployment for some length of time. This seemed
to him to be important because continuation of unemployment to the
extent of around 4 million people over a long period of time meant
that the Congress might take actions for which the System must be

1/6/59 -30
prepared. The System, he suggested, should know what could be done
about unemployment other than to spend large sums of Government money.
Analysis of the causes of unemployment should be on an area basis and
should determine to the extent possible how long substantial unemploy
ment might be expected to continue.
Monetary policy should now become tighter, Mr. Szymczak said,
from the standpoint that all economic indicators were on the upward
side. As he had indicated, the System was stymied frequently by
Treasury financing operations, and it might be stymied by Congressional
action in the light of the unemployment statistics. He suggested, for
the next three weeks, absorbing redundant reserves coming into the
market, and in a concluding comment he expressed the view that the
Desk had done a good job over the last three weeks.
Mr. Balderston said that although he recognized that history
may be looked upon as a pageant and that one cannot count on history
repeating itself, he had been thinking a great deal about comparisons
between the current recovery and recovery from the preceding recession.
Accordingly, with the help of Messrs. Young, Eckert, and Trueblood
of the Board's staff, he had endeavored to answer three questions:
(1) how does the current recovery compare with its predecessor; (2)
how have the Federal Reserve responses to the two situations compared;
and (3) what lessons, if any, may be derived with respect to current
policy.

1/6/59 -31
As to the first question, Mr. Balderston said that he need
not comment because the subject had been dealt with admirably in
the visual-auditory presentation. Therefore, he would merely
remark that, aside from the lag in automobile and steel output, he
saw no significant difference between the two rates of recovery. On
the second question, it must be noted that the stimulation by monetary
policy this time was matched by that of a record-breaking peacetime
Government deficit. Last year, short-term rates declined more sharply
and from a higher level to approximately the same low points reached
in 1954, while long-term rates continued higher than at any time prior
to the fall of 1956. Interest rates had risen more rapidly and to
higher levels, both in absolute amounts and relative to free reserves
and the discount rate. In both recoveries, the shift of reserves
away from active ease occurred in the fourth month after the upturn.
In the subsequent five weeks last year, free reserves dropped from
$530 million to $86 million by early September, a tightening equivalent
to that which took four months in the preceding recovery. Moreover,
the current reserve position tightening started from a lower level,
say $500 million, as compared with $725 million in August 1954. Prior
to the April 1958 turnaround, free reserves had been permitted for
only three months, whereas prior to the August 1954 turnaround they
had prevailed for eleven consecutive months. In this recovery,
discount rates were increased from 1-3/4 per cent to 2-1/2 per cent
in two rounds, the first beginning in the fourth month and the second

1/6/59 -32
beginning in the sixth month, while in the preceding recovery the
rate was raised once from 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 per cent, principally in
the eighth month after the turnaround.
Mr. Balderston went on to point out that commercial banks
entered the current recovery in a more fully loaned position and
with less secondary reserves than they entered the previous recovery.
They might be expected, therefore, to be more responsive to central
bank restraint this time. During the first seven months of this
recovery, the loan-deposit ratio had changed but little, whereas
it had risen nearly three points in the 1954-55 recovery. Expansion
of total loans at commercial banks had been less than 3 per cent this
time, compared with 8 per cent in the previous recovery.
As to lessons for current policy, Mr. Balderston said that he
was far from sure as to the answers. However, he started with the
belief that in the 1954-55 recovery Federal Reserve restraint could
be described as having been "too little and too late." He attributed
that to two things, first, the fact that there was more water in the
brakes last time, which caused the commercial banks to be unresponsive
for a considerable period, perhaps six months, and second, a solicitude
on the part of some members of the Open Market Committee with respect
to the young and budding recovery; that is, disinclination to move
vigorously because of a fear that the infant recovery might be starved.
Here he was drawing solely on his memory. However, if he was correct
in his criticism of open market policy in 1954-55, it seemed to him

1/6/59 -33
that there were cogent reasons for making the restraint this time
more stiff than before. In the first place, price increases for
nonagricultural production had been pyramided on top of an already
high price level, and as a collateral point many industries had
lost some of their ability to compete, both at home and abroad.
Second, policy this time suffered from the fact of deficit spending;
monetary policy had lost an ally on the fiscal side. Furthermore,
expectations as to unwillingness to raise the revenues that the
Congress seemed inclined to spend contrived to make the outflow of
gold and the rise of stock prices danger signals of real moment.
Thus, the current situation was different from the previous situation
in these several respects.
Mr. Balderston said he had come to the conclusion, as to
policy, that nothing could be done in the next three weeks in the
nature of overt action. However, the System could make plans so
that, when the opportunity did come, it could get the short-term
rate above 3 per cent and take appropriate discount rate action.
In this respect, it should move as a system and not present to the
world at home and abroad the spectacle of indecisive, ill-timed
action. He hoped that by the middle of February the System would
be prepared to act in concert as a system.
Chairman Martin said that he had nothing to add to the
discussion of policy this morning and that the course of System

1/6/59 -34.
policy was clear for the moment. However, he would like to make a
general comment on the problem facing the Treasury, which in a sense
was the problem with which the System also was faced. In his thinking,
he said, inflation was a process going on over a period of years, and
the current problem was a heritage of the war. Whether inflation
could be contained, he did not know, and there were differences of
opinion on that. He suggested that diligent study of money and
credit tends to make one humble, for knowledge of how money and credit
acts in the economy is really fairly limited and there is a great deal
to learn. Of course, the total problem was bigger than money and
credit, but he felt that 1959 would perhaps be a crucial year in the
battle against inflation because the Government was now forced to
come to grips with the saving-investment process, and the Treasury
was faced with a very serious problem in attracting bona fide savings
into Government securities. After noting that the Treasury was limited
by law to a 4-1/4 per cent rate of interest on its issues, he said
that he could state unequivocally that within such limit the present
management of the Treasury, at least so far as his contacts indicated,
was willing to pay whatever rate might be required to obtain money.
The management of the Treasury was doing its best in approaching this
problem and he only wished that he had been able to give them more
help by way of ideas as to how the problem could be handled. All
those around the table, he said, should be concentrating on the

1/6/59 -35-.
problem of saving and investment. In this connection, he suggested
looking at what had happened to the man who bought United States
Savings Bonds as compared with the person who bought common stock.
One source had indicated to him recently that in the case of a large
trust company handling nothing but investment funds, the amount of
money put into fixed investments had declined something like 25 per
cent in the last six months. While this was not important in itself,
it afforded an indication of a trend.
Continuing, the Chairman pointed out that this problem was
one that could not be corrected by a single change in the discount
rate or by any one move, for it involved a continuous process, but
he suggested that in 1959 all should be seriously concerned with the
problem. Referring to the chart show presented earlier during this
meeting, he called attention to the disparity illustrated by the
charts between the rates of return on equities and fixed investments.
That situation would not last forever, but in the meantime the
Treasury had to live with the market and devise means of attracting
bona fide savings into Government securities. He did not pretend
to know the answer, but no one could afford to be complacent about
the problem the Treasury was facing. He did not think there was
anything the Federal Reserve could do directly, although this was
partially the System's problem. However, as mentioned by Governor
Balderston, whatever actions the System decided upon must be
decisive actions, for it complicated the Treasury's problem when

1/6/59 -36..
the System was split within itself on what it was going to do. The
System should endeavor to have a clear position which would make
things easier.
Summarizing the meeting, Chairman Martin said that with the
Treasury financing imminent, it seemed clear that all who had spoken
wanted to maintain an even keel. He agreed with Mr. Irons, however,
in feeling that any mistakes should be on the side of restraint
rather than on the side of ease under present conditions, recognizing
the burden that this placed upon the Management of the Open Market
Account. He then went on to say that an even keel policy, as
debated from time to time at Committee meetings, seemed to mean many
different things to different people. However, he was talking about
the feel of the market generally, and he felt there was a reasonable
meeting of the minds on what the Committee intended to do. There was
no sentiment for a change in the discount rate at this time, while
there would be a continuation of about the same degree of restraint
that had been maintained recently in order to give the Treasury as
free an operation as possible.
Chairman Martin said he was hopeful that the Treasury would
come out with a long-term security which would be complementary to
monetary policy.
In concluding comments, Chairman Martin repeated that he felt
the year 1959 was going to be a crucial one in the battle against

1/6/59 -37
inflation. He hoped that inflation would not get out of hand to
such an extent that a very serious price would have to be paid
for its correction, that instead it could be contained at least
within reasonable limits.
Mr. Szymczak again referred to his concern about the
possibility of Congressional actions in the light of the unemploy
ment problem and the extent to which the Government in such circum
stances would permit the Federal Reserve System to follow the monetary
policy it should be pursuing from the standpoint of the inflationary
problem and long-range needs of the economy.
Chairman Martin inquired whether there was any disagreement
with his summary of the meeting, and there were no indications to
such effect. He then asked Mr. Rouse whether he had any comments,
and the latter replied in the negative.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York until otherwise
directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges
(including replacement of maturing securities, and allow
ing maturities to run off without replacement) for the
System Open Market Account in the open market or, in the
case of maturing securities, by direct exchange with the
Treasury, as may be necessary in the light of current
and prospective economic conditions and the general
credit situation of the country, with a view (a) to
relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs

-38-
of commerce and business, (b) to fostering conditions in
the money market conducive to sustainable economic growth
and stability, and (c) to the practical administration of
the Account; provided that the aggregate amount of securi
ties held in the System Account (including commitments for
the purchase or sale of securities for the Account) at the
close of this date, other than special short-term certifi
cates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be
increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with
discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue
participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such
amounts of special short-term certificates of indebtedness
as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total
amount of such certificates held at any one time by the
Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate
$500 million.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Tuesday, January 27, 1959, at 10:00 a.m.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Assistant Secretary