A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, March 24, 1959, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Balderston, Chairman pro tem
Mr. A llen
Mr. Deming
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Shepardson
Mr.
Szymczak
Mr.
Mr. Bryan, Alternate for Mr. Johns
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Bopp, Fulton, and Leedy, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Leach, Irons, and Mangels, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Dallas,
and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Jones, Marget, Mitchell, Parsons, Roosa,
Willis, and Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Special Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Associate Adviser, Division of Re
search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Keir, Acting Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Freutel, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis

3/24/59 -2
Messrs. Daane, Hostetler, Tow, Walker, and
Wheeler, Vice Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Cleveland,
Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Anderson, Economic Adviser, Federal Re
serve Bank of Philadelphia
Mr. Brandt, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta
The members and alternate members of the Committee and the
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks not currently members of the
Committee met in executive session at ten o'clock with Messrs. Riefler,
Sherman, and Rouse of the staff present. The Secretary stated that,
since neither the Chairman nor the Vice Chairman of the Committee was
able to be present at this meeting, it would be necessary to elect a
chairman pro tem.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, Mr. Balderston was
elected to act as Chairman at this meeting
in the absence of the Chairman and Vice
Chairman of the Committee.
There followed a brief discussion of the procedure for invit
ing observers to be present at meetings of the Committee when a President
of a Federal Reserve Bank (including Committee members or their
alternates) could not be present. At its conclusion, it was understood
that further consideration would be given to this subject at a future
meeting when the questions of attendance discussed in the afternoon
session of the meeting held on March 3, 1959, were taken up again.

3/24/59 -3
It was noted that Mr. Freutel, First Vice President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, was in the Board's building today
in connection with his attendance at the meeting of the Conference of
Presidents, and he was invited to attend this meeting in Mr. Johns'
absence.
Mr. Freutel and the remainder of the staff then entered the
room.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report of open market operations covering the period
March 3 through March 18 and a supplementary report covering the period
March 19 through March 23, 1959. Copies of both reports have been
placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee,
Mr. Rouse reported that the money market had been tight almost
steadily in the past three weeks, with the brief exception of the last
three days in the March 11 statement week. At that time, a large re
serve excess carried over the week end by the New York banks and heavy
borrowing before the week end by reserve city banks in districts that
were still at the 2-1/2 per cent discount rate created, temporarily,
an easier tone in the money market. Generally, however, net borrowed
reserves had held in the neighborhood of $150 to $200 million and the
rate on Federal funds had remained close to the discount rate. The
Treasury bill market had put on a remarkable performance in the face
of a tight reserve situation, the discount rate increase, and an

3/24/59 -4
offering by the Treasury of $2 billion of special bills. While rates
on three-month and six-month bills climbed from 2-3/4 and 3 per cent,
respectively, to 3 and 3-3/8 per cent immediately after the discount
rate action, they immediately turned down again and currently were
close to the levels prevailing before the discount rate increase.
The strength in the bill market was attributable to continuing demand
from nonbank corporations and, in part, to buying by Chicago banks in
preparation for the April 1 assessment date on the Cook County personal
property tax.
Mr. Rouse reported that the Treasury's cash offering of an
additional $500 million of the 4 per cent bonds of 1969, $1-1/2 bil
lion of 4 per cent notes due May 15, 1963, and $2 billion of special
bills to mature January 15, 1960, had been well received. The bonds
were likely to be heavily oversubscribed, while the notes, which the
market considered rather thinly priced, were expected to be adequately
but not heavily oversubscribed. Guessing on allotments for the notes
started at 35 per cent early on Monday, but by the end of the day
some dealers were guessing 65 to 70 per cent; Mr. Rouse thought the
allotment ratio might be in the neighborhood of 50-60 per cent. One
reason for the relatively small subscription for the notes was that
on Thursday banks would have an opportunity to subscribe for the new
"special" bills for tax and loan account credit, and in this auction
they would be better able to control the amount they would receive.

3/24/59 -5
The Treasury had established this timing in order to let investors
know their allotments on the notes and bonds before they bid for
the bills, but the effect on subscriptions for the notes suggested
that the Treasury might wish to rearrange the order of the offerings
if it made a similar offer in the future.
Mr. Rouse went on to say that except for the outstanding 4s
of 1969, which were marked down by more than a point when the issue
was reopened, the market had been generally steady to only slightly
lower. Market reaction had been good to the Treasury's announcement
that it was taking another step toward regularizing its short-term
debt through quarterly issues of one-year obligations, to mature in
January, April, July, and October, which were to be regularly refunded
at auction into new one-year issues. Mr. Rouse noted that the nucleus
of this idea for regularizing the short-term debt originated with
memoranda by Mr. Riefler and Mr. Gaines which the Federal Open Market
Committee had supplied to the Treasury.
At Mr. Balderston's request, Mr. Rouse also commented on the
problem created by the 4 per cent notes of August 1, 1961. The holders
of these notes would have until May 1 of this year to decide whether
to redeem them this August 1 or hold them to maturity. Therefore,
the Treasury wished to avoid the 1961 area in its current financing
so as not to drive rates higher and encourage redemptions. The option
available to the holders of the notes was also a factor to be taken

3/24/59 -6
into account in considering Federal Reserve policy during the next
month.
With respect to the period ahead, Mr. Rouse noted that the
1-1/2 per cent tax certificates would mature today and that the nearly
$2 billion of this issue to be presented for cash should create some
additional demand for short-term investments during the next week.
After April 1, however, when payment was made for the new Treasury
issues and the Chicago situation unwound, pressures should build up
as the market absorbed a sizable volume of short-term investments.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period March 3
through March 23, 1959, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Young made a statement on the economic situation supple
mentary to the staff memorandum distributed under date of March 20,
1959, his comments being substantially as follows:
From the perspective of national statistics, domestic
economic activity is extending its upward swing.
Late figures for January industrial production obliged
some downward adjustment in the index figure, though the
index still rounded at 143 of 1947-9 average. Further ad
vance through February was about 1-1/2 points, which rounded
off at 144. The additional rise reflected gains in most
durable and nondurable lines as well as in mining. With
steel output in March at new high levels, with durable goods
output advancing further, and with demands for industrial
materials generally continuing strong, industrial output
this month is expected to rise one to two more points.
March auto output is again back to the January level,
and dealer deliveries of domestic cars continue at about a

3/24/59
5.1 million annual rate. Stocks at dealers are still rising,
but are 8 per cent under the exceptional high of last year,
which the industry hopes to avoid repeating. Used car markets
appear strong, with sales and prices about a tenth higher than
last year.
Since December, and after several months of irregular and
modest increase, new orders at durable goods manufacturers have
shown marked rise. From April 1958, however, the total rise
has been about comparable with that for the corresponding period
following the recession low in 1954. Nondurable goods lines
have reported successive gains in orders and sales during each
month of this ten-month period.
In January, book value of manufacturers' inventories rose
for the first time since August 1957. The increase was con
centrated in metals and metal fabricating lines. The GNP ex
perts are estimating a $3 to $3-1/2 billion annual rate of
inventory accumulation this quarter.
In February, construction activity remained at about the
very high levels reached in January. Housing starts edged down
further, but at 1.3 million plus units were at the highest
February level in four years. Continuing high levels of FHA
applications and VA appraisal requests are believed by the
industry to portend continuing high levels of starts. Non
industrial work on architects' drafting boards, which had
declined sharply in the first three quarters of last year, has
recently been rising strongly, though the total remains quite
far below the peak reached in late 1957.
Both employment and unemployment were little changed in
February. Average hours worked per week, although 1-1/2 hours
greater than a year ago, were off slightly from January; since
September, weekly hours worked have fluctuated close to 40.
For the third successive month, hourly earnings in manufactur
ing during February remained at $2.19; weekly earnings declined
slightly.
Personal income in February reached a new high of $365
billion, up $1.5 billion from January and $17 billion, or 5 per
cent, above the recession low. In dollars of constant purchasing
power, income was up 4 per cent from the low point of the reces
sion and 1 per cent from the prerecession high. The recent
advance reflected mainly a further rise in wage and salary
payments, but higher old-age and survivors' benefit payments
were also of importance in causing the rise.
With personal income advancing further, retail sales in
February were strong and close to the record December level.
As to durable goods, sales were off at furniture and appliance

3/24/59
stores but up at automotive outlets and at lumber dealers.
Sales at nondurable goods outlets were also higher. At
department stores, sales in the first half of March remained
close to January-February levels despite bad shopping weather
in the midwest and northeast.
In wholesale markets, the average of industrial prices
rose further in February, with higher prices posted in textiles,
hides, fuels, lumber, copper and brass mill products, non
metallic minerals, and machinery. Prices of industrial materials
have risen further in March. February increases in industrial
prices were offset by declines in prices of agricultural com
modities, so that the average of all prices at wholesale remained
about unchanged. In recent weeks, prices of grains and of
livestock have strengthened somewhat. However, with supply
conditions as they are in agriculture, this is expected to prove
temporary.
Concerning prices, a further note may be added regarding
industrial material prices. It is useful to divide these be
tween price-sensitive materials and others. Average prices
for sensitive materials (including textiles, lumber, plywood,
wastepaper, and some feeds) have now risen 7 per cent since
the low last spring; since late fall, the rise has been about
1 per cent a month. On the other hand, average prices of other
materials (steel mill products, paper, chemicals, and building
materials other than lumber) have shown little change since the
summer of 1957. This latter group of prices changed little
over the 1953-55 recession-recovery period, and then rose
sharply by 12 per cent over the next two years when output was
generally straining the limits of capacity.
Concerning future domestic activity, the most important
item of news is the release of the Commerce-SEC survey of busi
ness plans for plant and equipment spending. The new data
confirm that a rise in such spending set in last quarter and
project a 4 per cent rise over the year. The pickup in spending
plans was sharpest for durable goods producers and transportation
but was also marked in nondurable goods lines. Past patterns
of these surveys show that, once business capital spending
begins to advance, each successive survey for a period reports
actual expenditures in excess of earlier projections.
No pickup in exports is yet indicated by trade data. While
exports in January were up slightly from December, the average
of the two months was below the level of last spring and summer.
Total nonagricultural exports averaged only 2 per cent above
last summer's low. Imports, on the other hand, continued at
close to record levels.

3/24/59 -9-
In Europe, industrial production appears to have leveled
out in December and January, though in Canada advance was re
sumed and in Japan it was continued. European steel prices
have strengthened recently, partly reflecting U. S. demands,
and steel output has increased a little. European textile
output, in contrast, shows no recovery impulse, although
recently demands in the wool sector appear to have improved.
One concluding comment is in order. A Washington Post
story on Sunday carried charts of industrial production and
GNP purporting to show that recovery this time has lagged
the performance of two preceding postwar cyclical recoveries.
This result is a matter of the dating of cyclical troughs.
The article's dating of the 1949-50 cyclical trough, for
example, hits a quarter of steel strike and also permits
inclusion of the first post-Korean quarter in the comparison
with later cycles. The more our staff restudies the dating
of business cycle turning points, the more dissatisfied we
are with those commonly accepted. One of our important
current projects is a reassessment of this whole body of
"established" historical fact.
Mr. Thomas made a statement substantially as follows with
reference to credit developments:
Since the last meeting of the Committee, financial
markets have absorbed with remarkably little disturbance
the effects of the discount rate increase, some tightening
of bank reserve positions, the demands of the corporate tax
and dividend payment period, and the announcement of a
Treasury cash financing operation. Interest rates and bond
yields generally have been fairly steady around or slightly
below high levels that had been reached earlier.
Explanation of this relative calmness in money markets
during a period of special pressures would seem to rest
partly in the moderateness of current credit demands, but
more largely in the general state of liquidity of the economy.
The Federal Government has continued and will continue for
several months to be a heavy borrower, but no further
acceleration in borrowing lies ahead, and the debt manage
ment program seems to be taking an orderly shape with less
uncertainty as to the volume and nature of financing
operations. State and local governments also are persistent
borrowers on a relatively substantial scale, but no higher
than a year ago. Consumer instalment credit has expanded
somewhat in recent months, on a seasonally adjusted basis.

3/24/59 -10-
Home mortgage financing no doubt continues large but
pressures in this market are not increasing. Forward
commitments of life insurance companies for residential
mortgages declined somewhat in December and January,
along with decreases in commitments for business financing.
To what extent this may reflect a falling off in demands
or to what extent a lessening in the funds available for
investment is not yet clear.
The moderating of credit demands has been most evident
in the business sector, where there has also been an increase
in liquidity. New corporate capital issues have been much
smaller than at this time of other recent years, and, as
stated, insurance company commitments for business financing
have declined. Even though business capital expenditures in
the future should turn out to be larger than present ex
pressed intentions indicate, currently demands are relatively
light.
Business borrowing at banks, though larger than last year,
has generally been somewhat less than in other years. Follow
ing a greater than seasonal decline in the first two months in
business loans at all commercial banks, such loans at city
banks during the first three weeks of March showed a larger
increase than in 1958 but a smaller one than in 1957 and
1956. Loans on securities increased much less than last year.
Not only has bank loan expansion been moderate, but
investments by banks have decreased somewhat in recent weeks.
The decline in holdings of securities contrasts with a sub
stantial increase usual in the first three weeks of March.
On balance, bank deposits have shown no striking departure
from usual seasonal patterns. The turnover of demand deposits
has increased to around the level reached at the peak of
economic activity in the summer of 1957.
To some extent, the moderation of credit demands might be
attributed to System policies of mild restraint and to the
restraining effects of higher levels reached by interest rates-
above levels that might be considered appropriate for the
current posture of Federal Reserve policy. Most likely some of
it is due to the liquidity that has been built up in the
economy and is still being accumulated by business corporations.
Financing has been available either from internal funds or from
other nonbank sources.
With the continuation of recovery and the end of the
seasonal decline in credit demands, question may be raised as
to what lies ahead with respect to credit needs. Projections
based on reasonable assumptions indicate the feasibility of
a 6 per cent increase in real output this year to a gross
national product of about $485 billion by the final quarter of

3/24/59 -11-
the year. This rise envisages moderate accumulation of
inventories, a larger increase in business spending for
plant and equipment than is shown by the latest survey,
and a continued high level of housing starts at least
until midyear, as well as large governmental expenditures.
Exploring the consequences for financial markets of
such a pattern of economic expansion, a continued high level
of demands for credit is implied, and--even more striking--a
further substantial increase in availability of nonbank
funds to meet the economy's financing needs seems to be
possible. Principally, these funds would be made available
by corporate business. If profits are as high as they could
be under the projected pattern and over-all investment
programs do not pick up steam until late in the year,
corporations should be in position to add substantially to
their already much improved liquidity positions. While their
borrowings from banks are likely to increase, in contrast to
net repayments in 1958, the rise should be quite moderate,
and security financing would likely be down,
Consumer borrowing through both mortgages and through
short- and intermediate-term credit would likely expand sharply.
Under the assumed growth conditions, external financing by
State and local governments is likely to continue at close to
the peak rates of 1958. If Federal Government expenditures
are kept at or close to budget estimates and incomes reach
the levels indicated earlier, Federal needs for cash financing
would be about as large in calendar 1959 as they were in
calendar 1958--about $7-1/2 billion.
If corporations prove able and willing to meet the major
share of the Treasury's needs for external funds, the banking
system and other financial institutions would be able to
accommodate consumer and other sector financing requirements
with only a moderate expansion in bank credit. On this
assumption, expansion of the active money supply might be
only about half of what it was last year-or less than 2 per
cent.
This assumes, however, a concatenation of many favorable
events--and an avoidance of unfavorable events. If assumes no
extraordinary inventory accumulation, increases in capital
goods spending but not of boom proportions, Federal expenditures
within the limits prescribed by the budget, some drop-off in
housing activity after midyear, no repetition of the 1955 boom
in auto sales, stock price movements that neither unduly depress
nor exhilarate spending attitudes. In particular it depends

3/24/59 -12-
upon the ability of corporations to maintain a high level of
profits in the face of wage pressures and price competition
and also their willingness to invest their surplus funds in
Treasury offerings. In addition it assumes the adequacy of
an increase of less than 2 per cent in the money supply while
the gross national product increases by 6 per cent, This
assumption is not unreasonable in view of liquidity already
outstanding.
To the extent that these conditions are not met, Treasury
debt management problems--and those of the monetary authori
ties--would be made more difficult. At some time in the next
year or so, as profits level off, corporations might well
become net sellers rather than net accumulators of liquid
assets. Moreover, sustained high levels of consumer spending
would suggest that the flow of personal savings may not be
adequate to provide much of a market for Government securities.
The public may want to hold larger cash balances than are
indicated. At some stage pressure on the commercial banking
system will begin to mount. Perhaps some expansion in bank
credit should be permitted, but the pressures are likely to
be strong enough to require restraints to avoid undue expansion.
For the immediate future, to cover seasonal credit de
mands, some additional Federal Reserve credit will evidently
be needed. In the absence of System open market purchases,
net borrowed reserves may increase to as much as $300 million
next week and to around $500 million in the first week of
April, when payment for the new Treasury offerings will cause
an increase in required reserves. This would call for System
purchases of some $300 million in order to avoid an increase
in restraint. After that, assuming a continued gold outflow
of about $100 million a month (which might not occur), the
usual variations in reserve needs will result in no marked
change until late May.
Mr. Balderston inquired of Mr. Thomas whether, in the light of
the additional tax burden that insurance companies would have to carry,
they might be less desirous of placing funds in mortgages and would be
tempted to place more money in tax-exempt securities.
Mr. Thomas replied to the effect that this trend was already
evident in some cases. However, he did not think the additional burden

3/24/59 -13-
would be enough to make a great deal of difference. A spokesman for
the insurance industry had indicated that the companies would have
less funds available for investment next year, but the spokesman
also foresaw a declining demand pressure.
Mr. Treiber then made the following statement of his views
on the business outlook and credit policy:
Business activity continues on a moderate upward slope.
There is no indication of an abrupt turn, either up or down.
Consumer demand, which has been the mainstay of the recovery,
continues strong, assisted by a rising volume of consumer
credit. Employment and unemployment data show little change.
Although inventories have begun to increase, much of the
increase seems to be a precautionary accumulation in expecta
tion of strikes in the metal industry. Any sustaining further
force from inventory accumulation will probably be deferred
until the latter part of the year. Prices remain fairly
stable. Fortunately, public opinion is expressing increasing
concern regarding the forces making for higher prices. The
general situation of supply and demand in the private sector
of the economy does not yet suggest the prospect of a re
surgence of inflationary forces. Any renewed inflationary
pressures are likely to be initiated by the large Treasury
deficit.
U. S. Government security holdings of all commercial
banks declined in February by $2 billion, reducing total
loans and investments by almost that amount. Thus, the
reduction much more than offset the purchase by the banks
of almost $1 billion of new Treasury notes in January.
Commercial bank holdings of Government securities are now
lower than at any time since last September.
Our projection of the cash deficit of the Treasury for
the calendar year continues virtually unchanged at nearly
$12 billion. New money borrowing during the remainder of
the calendar year will be very large. The placement of
Treasury issues without a substantial rise in bank credit
is a major challenge in the months ahead.
Current business and credit conditions do not call for
any change in credit policy. The Treasury has just offered
for cash subscription three issues totaling $4 billion, to
be paid for next week. The Treasury's financial operations

3/24/59 -14-
call for market stability, not only through the payment
date but for a reasonable period thereafter. Thus,
business and credit conditions and Treasury operations
call for the continuation of an "even keel" policy. As
pointed out by Mr. Rouse, we must bear in mind that by
giving notice to the Treasury before May first, holders
of the $2-1/2 billion of 4 per cent Treasury notes due
in August 1961 may obtain payment of their holdings on
August 1, 1959.
In continuing the same credit policy, we should give
primary attention to the behavior of the money market and
the rates of interest in the market. High corporate
liquidity and the resulting availability of nonbank funds
in the market resulted in less pressure over the tax date
than had been expected. This factor in combination with
the concentration of borrowed reserves in Chicago and the
demand for short-term Government securities, in preparation
for the April 1 Cook County tax, have reduced somewhat the
need for bank credit and have justified a higher level of
net borrowed reserves.
The combination of factors leading to the absorption
of Treasury issues may lose its strength just at the time
the supply of Treasury issues increases, perhaps causing
interest rates to rise. Too great a rise could lead to
expectations of a further increase in the discount rate
and other restrictive Federal Reserve measures; such
expectations could stimulate a rapid further rise in
rates, a result we would consider unfortunate. We would
hope to see short-term interest rates fluctuating around
the discount rate, without being a great amount above
or a great amount below the discount rate for any prolonged
period. With short-term rates behaving in this fashion,
the exact amount of net borrowed reserves is not of great
significance.
In summary, we would favor (a) no change in the formal
directive; (b) no change in the discount rate; and (c) the
conduct of open market operations so as to continue to
maintain about the present degree of restraint without
placing too much emphasis on the amount of net borrowed
reserves.
Mr. Freutel said that the settlement of several long strikes
in the St. Louis area, Louisville, and Memphis was the major develop
ment of interest in the Eighth Federal Reserve District in February

3/24/59 -15
and March. A strike of glass workers near St. Louis had interrupted
auto production in Evansville, as well as in areas outside the district.
Most district cities reported moderate improvement in employment
conditions as manufacturing activity picked up, but unemployment re
mained at about 6 per cent. Construction activity was expected to grow
rapidly with better weather as there appeared to be a large backlog of
work already contracted for. Production of pine and hardwoods had
risen lately and producers expected an improving market. Aluminum
production had been increased, and production of coal and petroleum
was running well above year-earlier rates. Department store sales in
all the reporting centers of the district had been considerably higher
for the year to date than in the same period of 1958. Loans at district
weekly reporting member banks rose over one per cent in the five weeks
ended March 18, compared with little change at this time normally.
Real estate loans continued to rise and there was an increase in loans
to business firms. On the other hand, these banks reduced their
holdings of securities.
Mr. Bryan said that the employment situation in the Sixth
District seemed to be improving slowly and that there did not seem
to be any substantial differences between trends in that district
and national trends. He expressed himself as well satisfied with
open market policy and said that he would advocate no change in it.
Mr. Bopp said that he had little to report from the Third
District except continuation of a rather substantial level of

3/24/59 -16
unemployment. While new and continued claims for unemployment
benefits in Pennsylvania were lower than a year ago, they were
still above 1957, and complete data for January showed 9.5 per
cent of the district's labor force unemployed compared with 7 per
cent for the country as a whole. Business loan demand to meet
March 15 tax payments was light. Pressure on the reserve positions
of the large Philadelphia banks had moderated somewhat in recent
weeks, and those banks continued to rely primarily on the Federal
funds market to secure reserves not secured from the sale of securi
ties.
As to policy, Mr. Bopp said that he would favor no change
in the directive and no further change in the discount rate. In
his opinion, approximately the same degree of restraint that had
prevailed recently in open market operations should be continued.
Mr. Fulton reported that steel operations in the Fourth
District were continuing at a high rate. For the district as a
whole, operations were at about 93.5 per cent of capacity, and in
spite of this backlogs were building up at the mills. Inventory
accumulation was one of the principal stimulating factors. Depart
ment store sales in the district were now running at about the level
of two years ago, and construction activity had been strong. How
ever, one fairly large residential builder indicated that he
expected new housing starts in the last half of this year to be
at only about 50 per cent of the rate for the first part of the

3/24/59 -17
year. Unemployment was dropping slowly but there were still quite
a number of people who were running out of employment benefits and
had not yet found employment. In summary, it might be said that
activity in the Fourth District was at quite a high level.
Mr. Fulton expressed the view that the Desk had done a good
job recently in conducting open market operations. He would not
favor any change in the discount rate or in the policy directive,
and he would want to maintain about the same feel in the market as
during the past three weeks.
Mr. Shepardson said he had nothing to add to the views already
expressed other than to comment that the picture presented by Messrs.
Young and Thomas seemed to be a favorable one. He would advocate the
continuation of present open market policy for the next three weeks.
Mr. Robertson agreed, stating that because of the Treasury
financing program there was nothing to be done for the present except
to continue the current policy. As he understood it, however, the
consensus at the last Committee meeting was to maintain an even keel
with doubts resolved on the side of restraint, and it was his impres
sion that the tendency had not been on the side of restraint. For
the next three weeks he would maintain as even a keel as possible.
Mr. Mills said that in his judgment near-term System policy
should maintain a degree of pressure on reserves focused on the need
for effecting a redistribution of the Treasury's new security

3/24/59 -18
offerings into permanent hands. He believed that the time had come
for the Open Market Committee to take a new look at the problem
involved in a continuation of the type of policy followed over the
past three weeks. From the comments of Mr. Thomas, there appeared
to be cause to feel that there was not going to be an excessive
demand for bank credit, at least to an extent that would require
its being curbed through an unduly restraining monetary and credit
policy. Such being the case, he felt that the Committee should be
careful not to exaggerate the liquidity in corporations and else
where as a force that could release demands and work toward un
desirable price pressures. On the contrary, a good case could be
made to the effect that the degree of liquidity might work in
conjunction with a System policy seeking to contain an unwise
expansion of credit. The liquidity would in due course be used to
take care of corporate demands for reinventorying or to carry addi
tional investment in accounts receivable, and it would provide the
ability to do so without drawing on any marginal expansion of bank
credit. At such time as there was a divestment of the excessive
liquidity, the masses of Government securities that moved into the
market would of themselves exert a restraining influence by bear
ing down on the price level of such securities. Therefore, he
returned to the thesis he submitted at the last Committee meeting
that a policy which contemplated continuing a constant level of
negative free reserves would in reality compel a contraction of

3/24/59 -19
credit by imposing a vice-like pressure on the banks. Accordingly,
it was his feeling that while moderate pressure was required in
order to effect a redistribution of the Treasury offerings, the
System should be cautious. In open market operations, he felt that
doubt should very definitely be resolved on the side of ease.
Asked by Mr. Szymczak whether this meant that he would favor
letting the level of negative free reserves vary substantially, Mr.
Mills replied in the affirmative and said that he would favor per
mitting a variance up to the level of positive free reserves if
natural forces produced such a situation temporarily.
In reply to a question regarding the effect on the Treasury
bill rate, Mr. Mills said that the Committee was dealing essentially
with the availability of credit and, in dealing with that, could not
make itself responsible for fluctuations in the rates on Treasury
bills or other short-term securities.
Mr. Leach said it appeared from the latest information that,
with the exception of West Virginia, the economy of the Fifth District
was continuing to move forward. In the textile industry, production
of many cotton gray goods and synthetic fabrics had been heavily sold
through the second quarter and into the third. Demand for seamless
hosiery continued strong, with factory output in general sold out
until May. Orders for Southern pine lumber had held at high levels,
and production and shipments had increased substantially. Seasonally
adjusted sales by furniture stores rose 6 per cent in February from

3/24/59 -20
the preceding month and were up 26 per cent from a year ago.
Department store sales, on the other hand, had declined.
Mr. Leach went on to say that West Virginia continued to
lag the other States of the Fifth District. Nine of that State's
sixteen classified labor market areas were areas of "substantial
labor surplus" when the recession began, and all sixteen had been
so reported since May 1958. Employment in mining, seasonally
adjusted, declined 20.3 per cent from July 1957 to May 1958, and
had remained practically unchanged since that time. The decline
in bituminous coal production continued last month, with overseas
shipments down sharply. Average weekly hours in coal mining dropped
from 34.8 in January to 32.8 in February.
With respect to policy, Mr. Leach expressed the view that
the current Treasury financing clearly called for System actions
directed toward maintaining an "even keel." He was glad that the
System had entered the even keel period with a discount rate of 3
per cent and a record of substantial net borrowed reserves over a
period of several weeks. Recent experience had again shown that
no single statistical indicator could be relied upon in judging the
tightness of the market, and he knew of no better instruction that
could be given to the Manager of the System Open Market Account
than to go by the feel of the market in attempting to maintain
substantially the same degree of pressure.

3/24/59 -21
Mr. Leedy said that the national trends reported at this
meeting prevailed generally in the Tenth District. The value of
construction contracts awarded in the district in January was one
fourth greater than in the same month a year ago, and department
store sales were up sharply. While the difference could be accounted
for to some extent by the earlier Easter date this year, for the week
ended March 14 department store sales exceeded the year-ago level by
19 per cent. For the first two and one-half months of the year, such
sales were up 12 per cent. Nonfarm employment in mid-January sur
passed the year-earlier level by a small margin. This was the first
time since January 1958 that district employment figures showed an
increase over the same month of the preceding year. Unemployment
figures were down, but only slightly.
Turning to banking developments, Mr. Leedy said there had
been considerable strength during the past four weeks in most major
categories of borrowing, with demands particularly strong from
retailers, public utilities, sales finance companies, and manufacturers
of metals and metal products. Over this period repayments by seasonal
borrowers had been below last year. Nonguaranteed farm loans were
higher now than at any time since 1952 and stood at record levels.
The growth of loans and a seasonal contraction of deposits had led
to major adjustments in the investment portfolios of reporting banks.
Total investments during this period had been reduced by roughly

3/24/59 -22
$100 million, with about $60 million of the reduction occurring
in the past two weeks.
Mr. Leedy expressed the view that continuation of the policy
followed in recent weeks would be appropriate. From the figures
furnished, it seemed evident that it would be necessary to supply
some additional reserves. Until the payment date for the new Treasury
issues had passed, he felt the Desk must be careful that the reserve
positions of banks did not tighten too greatly, After that date,
however, it was his feeling that doubts should once more be resolved
on the side of restraint.
Mr. Allen reported that Seventh District department store
sales had been excellent, although some slight allowance must be
made because Easter was early this year. In the four-week period
ended March 14, district sales were up 13 per cent compared with
11 per cent for the nation. Within the district, all of the
principal cities showed large increases during this period, but
Detroit, with a plus 29 per cent, had by far the largest gain.
Employment was improving in a broad variety of business lines,
although certain special situations had produced layoffs. Buick
had furloughed a number of workers, other automobile plants were
expected to do the same now that inventories were approaching the
800,000 level, and layoffs in other industries had followed decisions
to move factories or to drop unprofitable lines. Protective buying

3/24/59 -23
of steel against a possible strike was now in full swing and order
books were closed for the second quarter. It was believed that a
four or five week strike would not affect total steel output for
the year as a whole because a slump in the third quarter was now
certain, strike or no strike. Of the Chicago purchasing agents
who buy steel, 44 per cent indicated that they were trying to build
up a 6-day supply by June 30, while 56 per cent were aiming for a
90-day supply.
With regard to the automobile situation, Mr. Allen said that
people in Detroit expected the daily sales rate for the month of
March to average 18,500, although it was only 16 ,645 for the first
eight selling days. On March 10, dealers' inventory of new cars
was 795,000 and, with the industry reluctant to let the figure go
much beyond 800,000, production cutbacks appear imminent. The
manufacturers' current aims were production of 590,000 cars in
March, 580,000 in April, 520,000 in May, and 535,000 in June.
Business loans of Seventh District banks had been rising over
the March tax payment date, which Mr. Allen felt could be attributed
as much to inventory building, principally in steel, as to tax
borrowing. Because of the increase in business loans, and because
the Chicago banks were currently accumulating Treasury bills and
temporarily losing deposits in anticipation of their April 1 tax
date, the larger Chicago banks were showing a substantial basic

3/24/59 -24
reserve dificit[sicT]h.i s was expected to be eliminated soon after
the first of April.
As to policy, Mr. Allen commented that what Mr. Leach had
said was precisely what he himself had in mind.
Mr. Deming reported that nonfarm employment in the Ninth
District apparently reached its usual seasonal low point in February
and that a moderately strong improvement in the employment picture
was currently under way. For several months, construction contract
awards and the valuation of new building permits had been running
substantially ahead of year-ago figures, so an unusual amount of
construction activity was in prospect. New car sales had been
particularly good in recent weeks, along with farm machinery sales.
Dealers in farm equipment and machinery expected sales over the next
few months to continue good in view of the farmer's relatively strong
financial position and the fact that livestock and grain inventories
were high. After about midyear, however, 1959 crop prospects would
be a determining factor in farm spending. Bank debits, running 7 to
10 per cent above a year ago, were another indication of rather strong
current business activity, and there had been a fairly strong improve
ment recently in the demand for bank loans. This increase was general
and did not seem to reflect anything special like inventory build-up
or tax borrowing. Activity in district mining industries was being
expanded, which was of particular significance in the important iron
ore producing areas of northeastern Minnesota and upper Michigan,

3/24/59 -25
hard hit by the unemployment because of the 1957-58 recession.
Current estimates were that 75 million tons of ore would go down
the Lakes this season as against 53 million tons in 1958. In 1957,
however, 85 million tons were shipped. Montana copper production
was strong and Anaconda's smelters at Anaconda and Great Falls were
operating almost at capacity in so far as copper was concerned.
Total Anaconda employment in Montana, however, was 9,000 as against
13,000 two years ago, indicating very strong productivity gains.
Offsetting somewhat the improvement in mining and manufacturing
was the current unfavorable trend and outlook for prices of most
farm products. A much smaller winter wheat crop was now definitely
in prospect for 1959 in South Dakota and Montana.
Mr. Deming summarized by saying that as the first quarter
neared its close, over-all economic advance was continuing in the
Ninth District and businessmen were fairly optimistic about the
immediate future.
Mr. Deming expressed himself as satisfied with the current
course of credit policy and said that he would favor no change in
the next three weeks.
Mr. Mangels said that there had been no major change in
Twelfth District conditions, which continued to be good and to
expand. However, it had been noticed that the spurt in construc
tion activity experienced for a number of months seemed to be

3/24/59 -26
moderating. In California, construction industry employment was
down somewhat in February, while other areas of activity showed
substantial increases in employment, particularly organizations
having to do with defense contracts. In the southern California
area, aircraft firms had increased employment to a moderate degree,
which more than offset a decline in the aircraft industry in the
northwest. Unemployment in California had dropped to 4.5 per cent,
but in the State of Washington stood at 5.7 per cent. The demand
for lumber continued strong, orders were in excess of production,
and prices were better, with the result that rather substantial
profits were anticipated. Steel production in the district was
running at 87 per cent of capacity, and capacity was about 25 per
cent higher than a year ago. Department store trade and automobile
sales continued to show improvement.
On the financial side, Mr. Mangels said that in the three
weeks ended March 12 bank loans increased, with the bulk of the
increase in business loans and some increase also noted in real
estate and consumer credit loans. Demand deposits were up about
$100 million, but time deposits declined $3 million compared with
an increase of $130 million in the corresponding period a year ago,
thus indicating a major change in the savings habits of people on
the West Coast. Borrowings at the Federal Reserve Bank continued
to be scattered and nominal in amount. Twelfth District banks

3/24/59 -27
were net sellers of Federal funds last week, and it was predicted
that in the coming week they would again be net sellers. Bank debits
for the first two months of this year showed an increase of 11 per
cent over the first two months of 1958, and for February were 15 per
cent higher than in the same month of 1958.
Mr. Mangels expressed agreement with those who had felt that
no change in policy was necessary. He believed that the Desk should
have leeway to consider the feel of the market and he would want to
maintain an even keel in the light of the Treasury situation. Mr.
Mangels concluded with the observation that the San Francisco di
rectors had been unanimous in following the lead of the other Federal
Reserve Banks in increasing the discount rate, although earlier there
had been indications that some of them might not favor a change.
Mr. Irons said that there were no developments of significance
to report from the Eleventh District. During the past three weeks,
conditions had been satisfactory, with activity at a high level.
Mr. Irons also said that he was satisfied with open market
policy over the past three weeks and that a status quo position
seemed quite obviously indicated with the Treasury in the market.
He agreed with Mr. Treiber that there was no need for change in the
directive, the discount rate, or the degree of restraint. He would
avoid any tendency toward ease and would maintain approximately the
same degree of restraint that had existed in the past three weeks.

3/24/59 -28
Mr. Erickson reported that business continued to improve
in the First District, although not spectacularly. In some items
the district was running slightly above the national figures, while
in others it was below them.
Mr. Erickson said he had nothing to add to what others had
stated with regard to policy for the next three weeks. He would
favor no change in the directive or in the discount rate, and he
felt that the degree of restraint that had existed recently should
be continued. He would leave it to the Management of the Account
to judge the feel of the market.
Mr. Szymczak observed that normally the second three months
might be expected to show more of a seasonal improvement than the
first three months of the year. With the Treasury in the market,
he would not want to disturb the market during the forthcoming
period and therefore would leave things about as they were. However,
he was impressed by what Mr. Mills had said in connection with the
redistribution of Government securities and allowing the reserve
position to change in order to make such securities more attractive.
While he did not know how this could be done without affecting the
bill rate and its relationship to the discount rate, anything that
would aid in redistributing Government securities at this time would
be helpful to the over-all situation.
Mr. Szymczak then referred to the proposed amendments to
Regulations T and U, recently published by the Board in the Federal

3/24/59 -29
Register for comment, and said that anything the Presidents could
contribute would be helpful, not only from the standpoint of re
straining credit in the stock market sector but also from the
standpoint of making the regulations more workable. The Board's
objective, he noted, was to obtain as many suggestions as possible
with a view to making the regulations work well over a period of
time.
Summarizing, Mr. Szymczak said he subscribed to the sugges
tions made by Mr. Mills in that he felt the System ought to try to
do whatever it could through adjustment of the reserve position and
through open market operations that would be helpful in redistributing
Government securities. He felt that it would be desirable to pursue
Mr. Mills' point to the extent possible, to obtain suggestions on
Regulations T and U from all parts of the country, and to make it
possible for the Treasury to go into its present financing and its
projected financing without undue disturbance.
Mr. Balderston asked Mr. Rouse whether the tightness in the
market during the past three weeks had been about the same as during
the preceding three weeks even though net borrowed reserves had
averaged higher, and Mr. Rouse replied that in his opinion it had
been substantially the same. Mr. Balderston then inquired whether,
if the present degree of restraint were continued this would probably
mean about the same level of net borrowed reserves. Mr. Rouse

3/24/59 -30
replied that he thought so, although a somewhat lower level of net
borrowed reserves might be required to do the job in the period
following April 1.
In a further question, Mr. Balderston asked Mr. Rouse whether
he felt as a practical matter that Mr. Mills' suggestion was appli
cable; in other words, whether there was likely to be enough variation
in reserves so that people would not get in the habit of reading policy
by looking at the figure of net borrowed reserves. Mr. Rouse replied
that he hesitated to attempt to answer the question.
Mr. Balderston then referred to the comments by Messrs. Treiber
and Rouse earlier in the meeting concerning the fact that holders of
the 4 per cent Treasury notes of August 1, 1961, would have until May
first to decide whether to redeem them on August first or hold them
until maturity. He was not sure as to what, if anything, the Com
mittee might do to help the Treasury in this regard. The Treasury
had the feeling that System policy between now and the first of May
might be determining, but it was his own feeling that the expectations
of holders of the notes as to the course of rates between now and
August 1961 would be determining. In any event, the amount involved
was great enough to give the Treasury concern and he felt certain
that the Treasury would be grateful if the System could do anything
that would be of help.

3/24/59 -31
Mr. Balderston then said he gathered it was the consensus
to leave the directive unchanged and to continue the same degree
of restraint during the next three weeks.
At this point Mr. Szymczak addressed certain further questions
to Mr. Mills regarding the suggestions on policy that the latter had
made, stating that he found them appealing.
In response, Mr. Mills commented that a policy calling for
maintenance of a constant level of negative free reserves meant that
banks under pressure would liquidate or refrain from making loans in
order to reestablish their reserve position and produce a margin of
excess reserves. If the System proceeded to extinguish these reserves,
there would be a constant downward pressure. If the Committee could
avoid that kind of development and reach a point where member banks
were no longer under as heavy pressure to liquidate securities, beyond
a modest amount to permit them to expand their loans, he could foresee
a stability in the market that would be reflected in a level of in
terest rates which, generally speaking, would be consistent with the
pattern that existed just before the Treasury announcement. Other
wise, he did not know just how those securities would meet the market
and what the reception would be. If the growing downward pressure
were removed and member banks were allowed to expand their credit
within reasonable limitations, he did not believe the market effect
would be extreme, even though the reserve position might move from a
negative point toward zero.

3/24/59 -32
Mr. Deming said that he also was sympathetic toward such
an approach. He inquired of Mr. Mills what guide he would use if
there seemed to be some upward pressure on bill rates. Would this,
he asked, be a kind of a signal?
Mr. Mills responded that possibly it would, or that one could
take the reserve projections placed before the Committee at this meet
ing. With the April 1 payment date for the new Treasury securities,
it might be necessary to support the reserve positions of the banks in
order to maintain their tax and loan accounts, and it was his feeling
that the Committee could afford to err on the side of ease as to the
amount of reserves supplied at that time. Having done so, he would
not hurry to withdraw those reserves. Instead, he would let them be
absorbed in the market for a period of time to see what reaction that
would have on interest rates. Then, if the expansion of bank credit
over the next few months should pace the improvement in economic
activity, such improvement of activity would exert a tightening in
fluence that would gradually absorb any excess of reserves supplied
to the market. Experience would show whether the amount supplied had
been more than necessary or desirable.
Mr. Balderston then asked Mr. Rouse whether he considered the
policy directive satisfactory, and Mr. Rouse replied in the affirmative.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal

3/24/59 -33-
Reserve Bank of New York until
otherwise directed by the Com
mittee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges
(including replacement of maturing securities, and
allowing maturities to run off without replacement) for
the System Open Market Account in the open market or, in
the case of maturing securities, by direct exchange with
the Treasury, as may be necessary in the light of current
and prospective economic conditions and the general credit
situation of the country, with a view (a) to relating the
supply of funds in the market to the needs of commerce
and business, (b) to fostering conditions in the money
market conducive to sustainable economic growth and
stability, and (c) to the practical administration of the
Account; provided that the aggregate amount of securities
held in the System Account (including commitments for the
purchase or sale of securities for the Account) at the
close of this date, other than special short-term certifi
cates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be
increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with
discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue
participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks)
such amounts of special short-term certificates of
indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time for
the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided
that the total amount of such certificates held at any
one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed
in the aggregate $500 million.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, April 14, 1959, at 10:00 a.m.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary.