A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Wednesday, November 4, 1959, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman, presiding
Mr. Allen
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Deming
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Johns
Mr. King
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Messrs. Bopp, Fulton, and Leedy, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Leach, Irons, and Mangels, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Dallas,
and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Jones, Marget, Mitchell, Parsons, Roosa,
and Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Koch, Associate Adviser, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Keir, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Ellis, Hostetler, and Daane, Vice Presi
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston,
Cleveland, and Richmond, respectively
Mr. Einzig, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco

11/4/59 -2
Mr. Coldwell, Director of Research, Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas
Mr. Anderson, Economic Adviser, Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Mr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
There had been distributed to the members of the Committee a
preliminary draft and a revised draft of minutes of the meeting of the
Committee held on October 13, 1959.
Mr. Hayes referred to that portion of the minutes covering dis
cussion of a memorandum prepared by a staff study group under date of
September 28, 1959, setting forth an inventory of areas for possible
administrative action growing out of the recent Treasury-Federal
Reserve study of the Government securities market. After noting that
he was not present at the October 13 meeting, Mr. Hayes said that upon
reading the minutes he felt there was some ambiguity as to what action
was intended by the Open Market Committee regarding the suggestion
relating to the formulation and initiation of a new program of
statistics collection from all Government securities dealers. From
the minutes, he said, he was not clear as to whether the Committee
really reached a decision to go ahead on an experimental basis with
the proposed collection of Government securities market statistics,
including data on the trading volume and position of dealers.
Mr. Hayes went on to say that when he discussed this matter
before the October 13 meeting with Chairman Martin and Under Secretary
of the Treasury Baird, he (Mr. Hayes) had the feeling that the desire

-3
11/4/59
was to map out the program before jumping to a decision as to who
was to collect these statistics. Personally, Mr. Hayes said, he
had some fairly strong views--and perhaps others did also--as to
what was needed by the Desk and as to whether the Desk should have
access to the figures collected from the dealers. Therefore, before
changing a procedure that had now been in effect for many years, he
felt that the Committee ought to be clear as to what it was doing.
His suggestion would be that the matter be discussed further at
another meeting of the Committee when the Chairman was present.
Also, before such a further discussion he would like to submit to
the Committee members the reasoning of the New York Reserve Bank
as to the merits of the proposal.
Mr. Hayes said that he would not suggest disapproval of the
October 13 minutes. In his judgment, however, the question to which
he referred had not been fully clarified and deserved additional
time and discussion.
Mr. Balderston said he had the feeling that it was important
not to delay this matter unduly because of the interest of the Congress
in the joint study of the Government securities market. However, in
view of the fact that Mr. Hayes was not present at the October 13
meeting, it seemed appropriate to Mr. Balderston that Mr. Hayes' views
on the matter be laid before the members of the Committee between now
and, say, the next Committee meeting, so that the matter might be put
on the agenda for further discussion at that time.

11/4/59
Mr. Shepardson said that he thought the matter was presented
quite fully by Mr. Young at the October 13 meeting. He also noted
that discussion of the suggestions presented in the staff memorandum
was reflected in several pages of minutes. The general tenor of the
discussion at that meeting seemed to him clearly to indicate a desire
on the part of the Committee that Mr. Young go ahead with an experi
mental approach. In order that the matter might not be left in an
uncertain status, he (Governor Shepardson) had made the comment
reflected on page 55 of the minutes, in which he stated his under
standing that the term "on an experimental basis" meant that Mr. Young
and his associates would go forward on an experimental basis and that
an indication of Committee assent to the program for collection of
statistics would constitute authorization for Mr. Young to proceed
on such basis. As recorded in the minutes, there was no indication
of disagreement with this understanding, and Mr. Young had added that
the experimental steps would be taken in cooperation with the Desk.
Mr. Shepardson said he had assumed, therefore, that the matter was
clear and that Mr. Young would begin taking experimental steps.
Mr. Hayes then commented that the New York Bank was proceeding,
in cooperation with Mr. Young, to produce a memorandum on what the Desk
wanted from the dealers and why the information was needed. It did not
seem feasible, Mr. Hayes said, to go ahead with the actual collection
of statistics until there was a decision as to what should be collected.

11/4/59 -5
Mr. Shepardson agreed, but he added that the question
related to where the initiative and responsibility should lie.
As he had understood it, the action of the Committee at the
October 13 meeting was to authorize Mr. Young to take the initiative
in proceeding with an experimental approach.
Mr. Hayes responded that to him the ambiguity arose out of
the fact that the New York Bank was now proceeding, in cooperation
with Mr. Young, on a study of what statistics were to be collected.
He did not see how it would be possible to proceed with the actual
collection until the aforementioned information had been entirely
analyzed.
Mr. Shepardson then suggested asking Mr. Young for his
understanding, and Mr. Young commented that there appeared to have
been some misunderstanding as to what came out of the discussion
at the October 13 meeting. The way the matter stood at present was
that the Desk was proceeding with the preparation of two memoranda.
One of these would deal with the general question of what statistics
would be desirable from the standpoint of the System and the Treasury,
and also the public. The other memorandum was to contain a detailed
schedule for the collection of statistics.
Mr. Young said he thought that the question of how to proceed
needed some clarification; that is, whether it should be left that
the New York Bank would proceed with its studies and then see what
the two memoranda would show, or whether the planning program should

11/4/59 -6
be placed in the hands of a committee of Reserve Bank, Board, and
perhaps Treasury representatives. The program would be a complicated
one in various respects, including the problem of relationships with
the dealers and the problem of launching the program of statistics
in an appropriate public relations setting. There would also be the
problem of obtaining the sanction of the Budget Bureau because the
proposed statistics would take on a different aura from the standpoint
of the Federal statistics program and would have to be collected under
the provisions of the Federal Reports Act. Mr. Young concluded by
saying that the staff would do its best to implement whatever procedure
the Committee might decide upon.
Mr. Hayes inquired of the Committee members as to their feeling
regarding his suggestion for a full review of the matter at the next
meeting. Such a procedure, he noted, would give the Committee members
an opportunity to see the memoranda being prepared at the New York
Reserve Bank.
In this connection, Mr. Rouse stated that the first memorandum
was the more important of the two and that it was almost ready. The
second memorardum also was in course of preparation and might be ready
within about a week.
Mr. Balderston asked Mr. Young for his opinion as to whether
further consideration of the matter in the manner proposed by Mr.
Hayes would interfere unduly with the progress of the study and with
relationships between the System and the Congress.

11/4/59 -7
Mr. Young responded that the System was under some pressure
from the Congress to proceed as expeditiously as possible. At least
that was the commitment made to the Joint Economic Committee for
resolution of the whole problem. However, considering the work that
was now in process, to carry the matter over until the next Committee
meeting probably would not be a handicap to the general program, and
in any event it was necessary to know how the matter stood before
going ahead. He was not sure, however, whether the suggested procedure
would permit an adequate technical review of the New York Bank's pro
posals before the matter was submitted to the Open Market Committee.
This was a highly technical subject and some confusion might develop
if the matter was submitted to the Committee prematurely. The
technical staff should first give the matter some thought in collabora
tion with the technical staff of the Treasury. Therefore, if the
memoranda were submitted directly to the Committee, it would seem
desirable that discussion of them at the next meeting be of a
preliminary character and subject to review.
Mr. Hayes commented that it was the intent of the New York
Bank to discuss the memoranda in detail with Mr. Young and his staff
and also with the Treasury.
Mr. Rouse said he had had in mind that the first memorandum
would be worked over with Mr. Young and with Mr. Mayo of the Treasury.
This was in accordance with his understanding that there would be a
working over at the technical level of the general ideas submitted
to the Committee.

11/4/59 -8
Mr. Young commented concerning the necessity of "feeling
our way along." Review at the technical level should make it
possible by the next Committee meeting to be a little clearer on
the issues; that is, to know what disturbed people, how such questions
could be resolved, and how to devise a mechanism that would make sense.
The program could then go forward in a cooperative way.
Mr. Rouse commented that the proposed procedure seemed clear
and satisfactory to him.
Mr. Robertson said he had thought that the whole matter was
settled at the last Committee meeting by authorizing Mr. Young to go
forward, which meant merely that Mr. Young was to get started. How
ever, any time that a Committee member wished to come forward with
suggestions he should feel free to do so, and the program no doubt
would have to be varied from time to time. It would not be desirable
to hold up the staff group but any Committee member should be free to
make comments from time to time. He would have no objection to the
proposed procedure.
Mr. Shepardson said that his remarks had been directed
particularly to the question referred to on page 51 of the minutes
of the October 13 meeting; namely, the question of an appropriate
assignment of responsibility for the collection and analysis of
the statistics proposed to be collected. Considerable discussion
followed the presentation of that question at the October 13 meeting,
and he had thought he sensed from the trend of the discussion that

11/4/59 -9
there was sentiment for assigning this responsibility to the
Research Division of the Board. Therefore, he had stated this
as his understanding, and as reflected in the minutes there was
no disagreement with that understanding or with Mr. Young's added
observation about proceeding in cooperation with the Desk. In
other words, he (Mr. Shepardson) had thought that there was a clear
cut assignment of responsibility.
Mr. Hayes replied that he thought the reference to proceeding
in cooperation with the Desk was not entirely clear; the addition of
those words left some ambiguity as to the assignment, at least in
his mind. Some of his associates who were present at the October 13
meeting felt there was some question whether the minutes reflected
the full discussion, and they suggested that the nature of the discus
sion may have made it difficult for all of the comments to be recorded.
If the Committee felt definitely that the action suggested by Mr.
Shepardson was the action taken, it would be easy to confirm that
action at the next Committee meeting. It was desirable, Mr. Hayes
suggested, for the Committee to be sure it had all the background
and facts and that it did not reach a conclusion prematurely.
Mr. Shepardson inquired whether Mr. Hayes referred to the
background and facts for determining what might be done or for
determining the assignment of responsibility for moving ahead, to
which Mr. Hayes replied that it seemed agreed that the study of
what statistics the Committee might want was moving ahead, in

11/4/59 -10
cooperation between the Board and the New York Bank and with the
thought of bringing in the Treasury as fast as possible. Mr. Hayes
felt that Mr. Young's comments supported his own view that it was
not possible to go out and collect statistics until it was clear
what statistics the Committee actually wanted to collect.
Mr. Shepardson then stated that, as he understood it, the
immediate question was whether the Committee intended to assign a
primary responsibility for moving ahead with this program. This
did not represent delineating what statistical program ought to be
developed, for that would come forward later. However, in a program
of this kind, it seemed to him--and he thought it was the intention
of the Committee--that primary responsibility for leadership in
initiating and pushing the matter along in a coordinated way was
desirable. While Mr. Young made no recommendation at the October 13
meeting other than to present the various alternatives as to where
the initiative and responsibility for leadership might lie, he (Mr.
Shepardson) understood, and had so stated, that it seemed to him to
be the opinion of the Committee that it wanted the Research Division
of the Board to assume the leadership of the program.
Mr. Hayes responded that this was where he found some
ambiguity; that is, between the question of leadership of the
program and the question of what was to be collected and who was
going to be collecting agent from the dealers. There was a distinction
in this respect that he thought worthy of consideration. As Mr. Young

11/4/59 -11
had pointed out, it was understood that the initial memorandum on
what statistics were needed was being done at the New York Bank.
That, Mr. Hayes said, was his understanding with Chairman Martin,
and the Chairman so indicated at the meeting with the Treasury.
It was also understood that there would be constant consultation
with the Board and the Treasury.
Mr. Hayes then said that the matter could be taken up again
at the next Committee meeting without prejudicing anyone's position.
He felt that the question should be clarified in order to go ahead
constructively.
Mr. Allen said that his understanding of the action taken at
the October 13 meeting was the same as Mr. Shepardson had stated. He
also agreed with Mr. Robertson that there was no reason why any Com
mittee member could not submit his thinking at any time and that such
views should be taken into consideration by the Committee. However,
it was quite clear to him that the situation at the October 13 meet
ing was as Mr. Shepardson had stated.
Mr. Hayes then suggested approval of the minutes of the
October 13 meeting, with the understanding that the discussion today
would be incorporated in the minutes of today's meeting. He asked
whether any member of the Committee would object, and Mr. Shepardson
said he would have no objection if the procedure would not involve
undue delay. Mr. Shepardson then turned to Mr. Young, who commented
that the New York Bank was proceeding with the two aforementioned

11/4/59 -12
memoranda and that until these memoranda were available as a basis for
exchange of ideas, it did not seem feasible to move ahead further.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the
minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on October 13,
1959, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report of open market operations covering the period
October 13 through October 28, 1959, and a supplementary report covering
the period October 29 through November 2, 1959. Copies of both reports
have been placed in the files of the Committee.
Mr. Rouse commented that open market operations had supplied
$82 million of reserves net to the market on a delivery basis during
the period since the last meeting of the Committee. However, this
relatively small figure obscured the fact that the volume of open
market operations was quite large and represented a substantial expan
sion of activity over the preceding period. During the past three
weeks, for example, the Account sold or redeemed $205 million Treasury
bills and purchased $195 million. In addition, $270 million new
repurchase agreements were made, while agreements totaling $175 mil
lion matured or were withdrawn. Of the $400 million gross purchases
and sales of Treasury bills outright over the past three weeks, $250
million, or over 60 per cent, represented transactions with foreign
accounts.

11/4/59 -13
The outcome of the heavy volume of open market operations
during the past three weeks was a generally steady degree of pressure
on bank reserve positions. As noted in the written reports to the
Committee, Federal funds were at 4 per cent on nearly every day of
the period, and dealer lending rates generally moved in a narrow
range of 4-1/3-4-3/4 per cent, although in the past few days most
New York banks had been quoting a rate of 5 per cent on new loans.
The latter was a surprising development at the onset of Treasury
financing and at a time when the basic reserve position was lighter
than it had been for some weeks. The explanation might be that the
liquidity positions of the New York banks were under particular
pressure.
The rising trend of prices for Treasury notes and bonds which
was evident at the time of the last meeting was reversed toward the
end of October. Through October 23, prices had risen by as much as
1-3/4 points, but losses ranging to 1-6/32 were subsequently sustained.
The reversal of the rising trend of prices apparently reflected
two major factors. The first, and perhaps most important, was the
steel situation. The settlement of the strike with Kaiser and other
small producers generated optimism concerning the possibility of an
early general settlement; on the other hand, the statements by the
major steel companies of their determination not to settle on the
formula used in the Kaiser agreement, and also the questions raised
by the union's challenge of the constitutionality of the Taft-Hartley

11/4/59 -14
Act, gave rise to pessimism concerning an early settlement. Further
more, the approach of the Treasury's refunding operation--the second
of the major factors noted above--created the usual uncertainties as
to what would be offered and how the market would react to the new
issues. In this atmosphere, trading activity was noticeably reduced
as both buyers and sellers tended to move to the sidelines and await
development s
The Treasury's announcement of the terms of the refunding
was well received, and the market regarded the 4-3/4 per cent rate
for one year and 4-7/8 per cent for four years as adequate. Both
the rights and the when-issued securities traded at a premium on
Friday and Monday, and a successful outcome of the refunding was
anticipated.
Mr. Rouse then stated that he would like to mention to the
Committee a technical problem that arose in connection with the
repurchase agreements made last Monday and how the Desk had handled
it. This technical problem involved rights that came into the market,
which dealers had positioned, and which they placed in repurchase
agreements with the New York Bank. Since today was the final day for
the exchange, the dealers must make up their minds by tonight as to
how they would split their holdings of rights between the new one-year
issue and the new four-year issue. To the extent that the rights were
exchanged for the longer security, the New York Bank would be holding
a four-year issue under repurchase agreement tomorrow. Accordingly,

11/4/59 -15
the Bank informed the dealers when the repurchase agreements were
made that on Thursday they would in effect have to substitute new
collateral for the rights which they had exchanged into the four
year note. Mr. Rouse inquired whether anyone wished to comment on
this technical problem.
Mr. Allen inquired as to the total amount in which rights
were held under repurchase agreements, and Mr. Rouse replied that
he did not have the exact amount; however, the New York Bank made
$9 million of repurchase agreements on Monday, mostly against rights.
Mr. Mills commented that this was a problem with which the
dealers were thoroughly familiar by virtue of earlier experience. On
this particular occasion, he believed it would be a mistake to change
the precedent already established and to afford a temporary relief
against rights to the four-year notes in the form of repurchase
accounts. If that were done, the dealers would unquestionably, in
his opinion, expect the same sort of treatment on future occasions
and the Open Market Committee would have destroyed the precedent
that was now well established.
Mr. Thomas remarked that if the Open Market Account made a
reasonable amount of funds available in the market the dealers should
be able to obtain financing outside the Federal Reserve. Mr. Rouse
indicated that this was correct.
Mr. Rouse then turned to another problem. He said that he
was at the Treasury last week for meetings in connection with
arriving at a decision as to the terms of the refunding. At a time

11/4/59 -16
when he and Mr. Balderston were in Under Secretary Baird's office a
phone call was received from the Secretary of the Treasury, who raised
a question with respect to.how the System would exchange the $5 bil
lion of securities maturing November 15 that were held in the Open
Market Account portfolio.
Mr. Balderston commented that the Secretary, who was calling
from Texas, said it was immaterial to him, as Secretary of the Treasury,
what the decision might be. Mr. Balderston felt that the Secretary
was completely sincere in that statement, although he (Mr. Balderston)
could see some impact upon future Treasury financings. The Secretary
went on to say, however, that in discussions on the Hill last summer
and in the early fall it was pressed home to him by many Congressmen
of the so-called "liberal" school that the Federal Reserve was
doctrinaire and inflexible. The Secretary said it had occurred to
him that the System might wish to use such occasions as were presented
to make the record clear that it was not doctrinaire, provided those
decisions did not involve any sacrifice of principle. Mr. Balderston
said his reply to the Secretary was to the effect that this was a
matter that should come before the Open Market Committee as a whole.
The Committee, he had added, was meeting this morning in time to
make a decision on the exchange.
Mr. Balderston went on to say that his own feelings were some
what mixed. On the one hand, he appreciated the thought that the
Secretary had expressed. The Secretary, he felt, was deeply concerned

ll/4/59 -17
about the attacks on the System that might come when Congress
reconvened and seemed anxious that the System not overlook
opportunities to demonstrate that it was not dogmatic in the
positions it held. On the other hand, the last time such action
(to split an exchange between two issues) was taken the Committee
had a more valid reason than now seemed to be the case. At that
time the Committee acted in order to assist the Treasury's layout
of its program, and that would seem to be a complete enough explana
tion for anybody. If the Committee should instruct the Desk to
exchange the $5 billion of securities held in the Open Market Account
portfolio for $4 billion of one-year certificates and $1 billion of
four-year notes, he felt that the Committee should have in mind a
good monetary policy explanation. The Secretary apparently had
raised the question because of his interest in the System and had
done so with an accompanying statement that the decision was
immaterial to him from the Treasury's point of view. Mr. Balderston
suggested that there might be individual comments on the point raised
by the Secretary during the go-around at this meeting.
Mr. Hayes agreed that it would be desirable to have comments
on this point during the go-around. He then inquired whether members
of the Committee's staff had comments at this time.
Mr. Riefler asked what it would mean if the System should
take some of the four-year notes simply for the sake of indicating
to the Congress that it was not doctrinaire. Such a move, the

11/4/59 -18
practical effect of which would be nothing more than to make the
Open Market Account portfolio somewhat less liquid, might cause
some people to think that the System had attempted to do something
for the long-term market when actually it had not. Persons abroad
would be likely to interpret the move as an attempt to bolster the
dollar.
Mr. Thomas suggested that an exchange of part of the maturing
securities into the four-year note would involve a sacrifice of prin
ciple. Such a move, however, would have little practical effect.
Aside from the maturing certificates, the Open Market Account port
folio contained about $2.5 billion of bills and over $11 billion of
other securities maturing in not more than one year. Consequently,
Mr. Thomas said, it was just a question of whether the Committee
wanted to give up a principle or not.
Mr. Robertson inquired whether the first problem on repurchase
agreements referred to by Mr. Rouse was considered settled, and Mr.
Hayes responded that he had been going to raise the same question.
Mr. Rouse had indicated what was said to the dealers and the matter
would rest that way unless the Committee felt that the position should
be changed.
Mr. Robertson then said that he agreed completely with Mr.
Mills. If an established principle were to be changed, he would not
change it in the middle of the stream.

11/4/59 -19
Mr. Hayes asked if there were further comments on this point,
and it developed that there was unanimous agreement with the position
expressed by Mr. Mills.
Mr. Rouse inquired whether it would be appropriate to raise
this question at the annual organization meeting of the Open Market
Committee next March, and Mr. Robertson expressed the view that this
would be proper, although he doubted whether any decision at that
time to change the current policy would be appropriate if the Account
was again in the middle of a situation similar to that described
today by Mr. Rouse.
Mr. Hayes agreed with the thought that the general question
could properly come up for discussion by the Committee at an appro
priate time.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the open market transactions during
the period October 13 through Novem
ber 2, 1959, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
Under date of October 14, 1959, there had been sent to each
member and alternate member of the Federal Open Market Committee,
and to each President not currently a member of the Committee, a copy
of the report of audit of the System Open Market Account, made by
the Division of Examinations of the Board of Governors as at the
close of business August 21, 1959. The report, which has been placed
in the Committee's files, was submitted to the Secretary of the

-20-
Committee under date of September 30, 1959, in accordance with the
action of the Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting on June
21, 1939, as reaffirmed at the meeting on March 3, 1959.
Vice Chairman Hayes inquired whether any of the members of
the Committee wished to comment on the report, and there was no
indication to such effect.
Accordingly, the audit report was
noted and accepted without objection.
Supplementing the staff memorandum distributed under date of
October 30, 1959, Mr. Young made the following statement with respect
to economic developments:
In introductory comment to last meeting's report, the
point was made that prospects ahead appeared less weighted
than earlier towards inflationary boom and more weighted to
a poststrike period of high-level expansion, featuring more
active competitive play of demand and supply and a tolerable
stability of wholesale and consumer price levels. Indica
tions pointing to this prospect are to be found in underlying
cyclical and financial forces shaping developments; that is
to say, they represent indications discernible despite the
steel strike.
It needs to be recognized, of course, that settlement
of the strike, after so long and so sharp a curtailment of
output, could release demand forces strong enough, given a
disrupted metals supply situation, to produce a quick run-up
in activity and prices, a run-up having characteristics
superficially inflationary. We are inclined to interpret
most recent data reflective of basic trends, however, as
supporting further our last meeting's interpretation. In
other words, a poststrike run-up in activity, accompanied by
inflationary symptoms, seems likely in the present perspective
to be a self-limiting danger, in the nature of a temporary
bulge.
As to the most recent news from the economic statistics
front, there are various fresh items--estimates and facts--to
be reported. As regards the estimates:

-21-
(1) At the beginning of this week, the number of
industrial workers idled by the steel strike is estimated
to have exceeded 900 thousand and by the week end is
expected to exceed 1 million.
(2) Latest available information continues to confirm
our earlier estimate of a further decline of industrial pro
duction in October of 2 index points. Strike settlement
could permit some rebound in November, but with steel pipe
lines emptied the total index recovery would probably be
modest.
(3) Even with early strike settlement, fourth quarter
revival in GNP will probably be moderate, with the second
quarter level of $485b illion little more than regained.
(4) The projected fourth quarter increase in business
plant and equipment expenditures is now placed below earlier
estimates by a significant margin. The forthcoming projec
tions of increase in plant and equipment expenditures for
1960 over 1959 are also expected to fall below earlier guesses
and well below the actual increase from 1955 to 1956.
(5) Reflecting the impact of the steel strike and the
automobile industry change-over in the third quarter, pre
liminary estimates of third quarter corporate profits yield
figures somewhat below $46 billion, down about a seventh
from the second quarter level. With present partial output
of steel metal and steel fabrication and even with full
recovery of such output by the year end, fourth quarter
corporate profits can hardly be estimated now at much higher
than third quarter profits.
(6) Third quarter seasonally adjusted income of farm
operators has been estimated at a $9.5 billion rate, down
over a fourth from the high third quarter level of a year
ago. Reduced cash sales and lower Government payments
resulting from termination of the acreage reserve of the
soil bank plus higher cash expenses account for the decline.
Fourth quarter realized income of farmers is estimated to be
at a higher rate but estimates for the year 1959 as a whole
indicate that farm realized income will fall about $2 billion
below last year's $13 billion.
With regard to recently reported facts:
(1) Consumer demands for autos in early October were
very strong, suggesting for the month a seasonally adjusted
annual sales rate of 6.9 million units. Sales of other
consumer durable goods--furniture, television, and household
appliances--were apparently maintained at advanced rates
reached earlier. Moderate gains in department store sales
from September to October suggest continuing strength in
consumer demands for nondurables as well as durables.

11/4/59
-22-
(2) Reflecting consumers' willingness to finance
purchases with credit, consumer instalment credit in
September rose a further $485 million on a seasonally
adjusted basis, thus about sustaining the $6 billion
annual rate of expansion reached in July and August.
(3) Manufacturers' sales of durable goods in September,
seasonally adjusted, showed little change from the reduced
August level which was a tenth below June sales, but sales
of nondurable manufacturers were close to the early summer
record.
(4) Manufacturers' inventories again declined in
September, with inventory reduction in the durable goods
sector only partly offset by rise in inventories at non
durable manufacturers. Partial data point to little
September change in distributors' inventories.
(5) Construction activity in September, seasonally
adjusted, fell again to an annual rate of $53 billion. This
level was about 5 per cent lower than the record attained
earlier this year, but better than 7 per cent higher than a
year earlier. Housing starts at 1.3 million plus units,
annual rate, while below the spring peak, were in largest
number for any September on record. Early October residential
construction plans of builders, as reported by FHA field
offices, were only moderately less optimistic than a year ago.
Average interest rates on conventional mortgages early in
October were reported by FHA to have reached a postwar high
of 6.10 per cent; in the West, the average rate was reported
at 6.5 per cent, with placement fees in individual cases
bringing the effective rate to borrowers even higher.
(6) U. S. exports in September showed further marked
pickup, but the reported figures may be swollen by the
anticipation effects of the longshoremens' strike. September
import data are not yet reported.
(7) Strong expansion in economic activity continues to
characterize foreign industrial nations, especially in Western
Europe and in Japan.
(8) Strengthening of activity abroad, as well as con
tinued underlying strength of demands in domestic markets,
have been making for firm-to-rising prices for most basic
industrial materials. On the other hand, there continue to
be few reports of price increases for fabricated materials
and finished industrial products. Average prices of all
industrial commodities at wholesale have now been about stable
for five months. In the autumn of 1955--a roughly comparable
phase of the last economic cycle--average industrial prices
were rising at a rate of .5 per cent per month.

11/4/59 -23-
Mr. Thomas presented the following statement with regard to
the current financial situation:
Financial markets are still in a transition stage.
Following heavy pressures of over-all demands for funds
during the preceding year, moderating of pressures began
in late September and continued to characterize these
markets until the past week. At this stage, it is not
possible to judge whether this easing reflects a change
in trend or a passing phase.
Yields on U. S. Government securities maturing from
about 6 months on out to many years have declined further
in the past three weeks, although during the past week
there have been some upward adjustments. In some medium
and long-term issues declines in yields offset all or
most of the increases that occurred in August and
September. Although the longer Treasury bills have shown
marked declines in yields from the September peaks,
90-day bills have continued to fluctuate around 4 per
cent or higher, and all bill yields are three-fourths of
a percentage point higher than they were in late July
and early August. Other short-term issues are also
well above levels of that period.
Yields on State and local government issues have
also declined in recent weeks, but relatively not as
much as U. S. Treasury bonds. Corporate bond yields
have shown little or no decline from peaks reached at
the end of September. Common stock prices, after
declining in the latter half of September, have been
steadier in October, with some increase in trading
activity. There are some indications of increased in
terest in bonds on the part of investors, because of the
higher yields on bonds than on stocks, as well as because
of uncertainty as to current and future corporate profits.
Current estimates indicate that profits before taxes, which
reached a high level of $$2.6 billion annual rate in the
second quarter, may have been below $46 billion in the third
quarter, with the possibility of little recovery in the
fourth quarter. Next year's outlook is dimmed by the
possibility of labor disturbances and settlements that will
lead either to rising prices or lower profits-or both.
However, no pronounced tendency toward a shifting of
investments is as yet apparent.
New capital issues continue in moderate volume and
have moved rather well at rates of over 5 per cent.

11/4/59 -24-
Short-term issues by Federal agencies have been fairly
large, but also have been well absorbed at rates of
5-1/8 per cent or higher. The mortgage market continued
tight. Although the volume of mortgage transactions is
large, commitments for future mortgages are becoming more
difficult to obtain. Discounts on mortgages have continued
to increase.
In October the Treasury successfully floated two cash
offerings of about $2 billion each, including a 5 per cent
note of nearly 5-year maturity and a June tax anticipation
bill at an average yield of 4.78 per cent. The bill
promptly sold in the market at a lower rate, contrary to
the usual experience with such issues subscribed for by
banks to obtain tax and loan accounts. The current refund
ing operation, which may effect an exchange of over $5
billion of issues held outside the Federal Reserve-a larger
amount than had been anticipated--for 1-year certificates
and 4-year notes, appears to be promising a successful
conclusion. The Treasury will apparently need another $2
billion of cash in late November and a similar amount in
January, but the exact amounts will depend on attrition in
the exchange offering and the extent to which tax returns
may be affected by the steel strike.
Payment for the two new cash issues within one week
was effected with little evidence of strain in the market.
Moderate amounts of the issues were taken by banks
particularly those outside of New York-but for the month
as a whole these takings-at least at city banks--were
largely offset by earlier and subsequent sales of
securities. Nonbank investors, therefore, continue to be
the principal source of funds for the Treasury borrowing.
At banks in leading cities--according to partial
figures for October 28--total holdings of Government
securities increased slightly in October, while loans
and other securities declined moderately, giving a net
decline in total loans and investments. Usually loans
increase in October. Commercial loans showed little change,
while loans to finance companies declined by a substantial
amount--perhaps more than seasonally. Loans to brokers and
dealers in securities, real estate loans, and other loans
showed small increases. These figures would seem to indi
cate some slackening--at least partly seasonal--during
October in consumer credit expansion, which has been very
large in recent months. The maintenance of business loans
in the face of a probable further decline in inventories
may indicate that borrowers are holding on to credits

11/4/59
previously obtained. The continued increase in nonbank
holdings of Government securities supports this supposition.
Demand deposits at city banks increased on balance
during October, while United States Government deposits
declined after fluctuating considerably during the month.
Time deposits declined by over $250 million during the
month, reflecting decreases in interbank deposits as well
as in those of others. These withdrawals may be associated
with purchases of the new Treasury issues. Currency in
circulation has shown somewhat less than the usual seasonal
increase in recent weeks. The growth in private demand
deposits at city banks was close to the seasonal pattern,
but it is not yet possible to obtain a good measure of
money supply changes for October because of the absence of
data for country banks, which usually show a rather large
increase in that month.
Reserves needed to support Treasury financing operations,
which were somewhat smaller than had been expected, were more
than amply supplied by an unusually large and prolonged mid
month increase in float. System holdings of Government
securities were actually reduced and in addition member bank
borrowings declined. Net borrowed reserves were little over
$300 million in that week, but subsequently rose to nearly
$500 million. Currency and required reserves increased less
than had been projected in October, but the figure for
required reserves for the latter part of the month is still
uncertain.
In the current statement week, the System has again
been purchasing securities to supply seasonal reserve needs.
Operations have exceeded $350 million, including repurchase
contracts, some of which mature during the week. These
operations should be sufficient to meet needs for the next
two weeks. In the four weeks from mid-November to mid
December, about $800 million of reserves may need to be
supplied. In January approximately $1 billion should be
absorbed.
In view of the leveling out--and perhaps easing-of
demand pressures on money and credit markets, and prevailing
uncertainties as to the future turn of events and effects of
the steel strike, there is no need for any tightening of
restraints on credit expansion at this time. Nevertheless,
since basic forces are still strong and the longer-run
outlook is for a resumption of expansion--probably at an
accelerated pace--there is little occasion for positive
action toward easing the money market by increasing the
availability of reserves in excess of usual seasonal needs.

11/4/59 -26
Should credit and monetary demands fall below the
seasonal pattern, as appears to have been the case
in the past month, some moderate easing might safely
be permitted to develop.
In further comments, Mr. Thomas summarized views on the
longer-run business outlook, particularly as it might affect the
demand for credit, that were expressed at a meeting of the Conference
of Business Economists held last week in New York City.
Mr. Johns then inquired of Messrs. Young and Thomas whether
there was any substantial difference in their views on the state of
the economy and the economic outlook.
Mr. Young replied that there were probably shades of dif
ference. He had used the word "boom," but not "strong inflationary
boom, whereas Mr. Thomas referred to "expansion," which could mean
a strong expansion. He (Mr. Young) did not want to be committed to
the position that the forthcoming period would not be expansionary,
but he did feel that the current developments pointed less in the
direction of an inflationary boom than was earlier considered likely.
In his comments at the October 13 Committee meeting he had enumerated
a number of factors that seemed to suggest a revised outlook, and
those factors had been reinforced by other information that had come
to light since then. These data included the McGraw-Hill survey,
which seemed to point to somewhat smaller plant and equipment
expenditures than previously envisaged. In substance, he did not
feel that he and Mr. Thomas were very far apart.

11/4/59 -27
Mr. Thomas said he was apprehensive concerning the develop
ment of unsustainable elements in the economy that might lead to a
recession. Whether these were called inflationary or not depended
on one's definition. He would prefer to use "unsustainable" rather
than "inflationary."
Mr. Johns then stated that the ultimate question for decision
was whether a change in policy was indicated.
Mr. Thomas replied that he thought neither he nor Mr. Young
would so conclude, to which Mr. Young added that the implication of
his statement, on the basis of the things covered in it, was that
certainly no tightening was indicated for the time being. He saw a
need to watch developments unfold a little longer before making a
change in policy and felt that the position taken by the Committee
at the last meeting was about right.
Mr. Marget then presented the following comments on the United
States balance-of-payments situation:
At the last meeting of the Committee, I reported that our
figures for the outflow of gold and dollars--which we take
as the measure of the over-all deficit in our balance of
payments--showed an outflow during the third quarter of
around $4 billion, seasonally adjusted annual rate; and I
suggested that this was better than what had been implied
by the projection, produced some months ago under the
auspices of the National Foreign Trade Council, of an
over-all deficit for the calendar year 1959 of $4.5
billion.
But, even apart from the fact that a deficit of $4
billion is still a very sizeable deficit, there was a
special reason for being concerned about that figure of

11/4/59 -28-
a $4 billion deficit annual rate for the third quarter.
The reason was this: that the gold and dollar outflow
for the second quarter of this year had also been at
an annual rate of $4 billion-so that there was no net
improvement in the over-all deficit as between the two
quarters-despite the fact that our trade figures,
particularly in the crucial field of exports, had been
showing an improvement since June. Without the trade
figures for September, which were not available when I
last reported to this Committee, one had to speculate as
to which of two possibilities was the more probable:
(1) Had there been a change in the non-trade items
(such as capital movements and aid transactions) which
offset the improvement in the trade figures since June?
Or (2) had there been a serious deterioration in the
trade picture in September, sufficient to offset the
trade gains of the earlier months since June? From
many points of view, this second possibility was the
more disturbing; because, even though one was prepared
to make some allowance for the distorting effects of the
steel strike, such a deterioration in the trade picture
would have cast doubt on whether the movement toward
balance in our international accounts, which we hoped had
begun, in the critical field of exports, in June of this
year, was really under way at last.
We now have the trade figures for September. It is
comforting to report that they continue to give evidence
of the pickup in foreign demand for our exports which has
been evident since June of this year. Indeed, the export
figures for September are so good that the Department of
Commerce has suggested that they may have stolen some
exports from the following month.because of the speeding
up of ship departures in September in anticipation of the
shipping strike that was then threatening.
Next month's figures will tell us something about this.
In the meantime, it remains true that we have to guard
against two types of error with respect to developments in
our balance of payments that are more widespread than they
ought to be. One is the error of supposing that no adjust
ment is taking place in our balance of payments, particularly
in the vital field of exports; the other is the error of
supposing that the adjustment is taking place so rapidly
and so certainly that we no longer have a balance-of-payments
problem, and that we therefore have no need to frame our
policies with reference to what is happening in that area.

-29-
An over-all balance-of-payments deficit at an annual rate
of $4 billion is still a very sizeable deficit indeed; the
deficit will still be a sizeable one if it is reduced to
the level at which it was last year-$3.4 billion-which,
after all, was more than twice the average level of the
deficits in the years 1950 to 1956, when the competitive
situation in world trade was much less intense than it is
now.
It cannot be reiterated too often: our trade position
does seem to be improving; but it still has a long way to
go.
Mr. Hayes presented the following statement of his views on the
business outlook and credit policy:
Analysis of the business situation for the purpose of
determining credit policy presents unusual difficulties at
this time because of all the uncertainties of the steel
strike. The strike has begun to exert a seriously dis
ruptive and cumulative impact on over-all production, employ
ment, and income; and these effects seem likely to spread
further in the next three weeks regardless of strike develop
ments. There seems, at least in our District, to have been a
perceptible change in business sentiment since our last meeting.
Resumption of the business expansion after the end of the strike
is still generally expected, but there are growing doubts as to
the vigor and duration of the expansion.
On the whole, the declines in over-all business indices
such as those for orders, sales, production, and employment
reported to date, do not appear too large to be attributed
entirely to the strike. The decline in gross national product
in the third quarter was more than accounted for by a $9.5
billion drop in the annual rate of inventory accumulation.
Although construction activity is leveling off for reasons
independent of the strike and there have been declines in some
time series which usually lead turning points in business,
the over-all picture suggests that the underlying forces of
expansion are still strong. An area of some uncertainty is
the outlook for plant and equipment expenditures, but the
direction of such outlays still seems to be clearly upward.
Because current business statistics will, for some time to
come, be largely dominated by factors related to the strike,
it will probably be hard to assess the underlying general
business trend in the coming weeks.

11/4/59 -30
Consumer expenditures have been better sustained than
personal income, while the ratio of savings to disposable
income has dropped to the lowest level since mid-1955.
Moreover, consumer credit has continued to expand at a rate
which can hardly go on indefinitely. Thus the expansionary
effect of such credit is likely to diminish in the period
ahead; and strikers and other workers laid off because of
the strike have been given an opportunity to defer various
payments of debt and have thus been anticipating future
buying power to a considerable extent.
Recent price developments have not been encouraging.
Farm prices were responsible for a higher wholesale index
in September, and the daily index was rising through October;
while food and services were responsible for a higher consumer
price index in September. On the more hopeful side, we can
find some positive elements in the Kaiser settlement in that
the wage increase seems to be more moderate than those of
recent years and the contract establishes machinery for
company-level consideration of the broader problem of sharing
the benefits of further productivity gains, with the consumer
apparently included among the beneficiaries. Earlier hopes
of a radical turning point in the pattern of inflationary
wage settlements no longer seem justified, but there is still
a chance that the industry's wage settlement will not be high
enough to justify a general increase in steel prices in the
next few months.
Pressure on the capital markets has abated considerably
in the last few weeks, and an improving bond market psychology
has been helped both by strike considerations and by the
Treasury's recent financing success.
Bank loans of all commercial banks continued to grow
rapidly through September, with a strong showing especially
for business loans, consumer loans, and real estate loans.
Fragmentary data for October are more mixed and point to a
loan increase considerably smaller than in October 1955.
With continued liquidation of Government securities by the
banks, total loans and investments were pretty stable through
September and October. The money supply shows an annual rate
of increase of only about 1/2 per cent for the year 1959 to
date--sharply below the 1955 gain--although some allowance
should be made for the fact that Government deposits are now
at a relatively high level.
There will be few weeks between now and the year-end when
our policies will not have to take account of Treasury financ
ing operations either in prospect or recently completed. Cash
offerings are now expected late this month and in January.
The System faces the difficult task of devising a credit
policy which is appropriate to the unusual economic pattern

-31-
indicated for the next three weeks but which will not give
rise to harmful results over the longer run. Unquestionably
we should take no action that might add to the existing
strain on business firms and complicate the process of
adaptation to the effects of the strike. Were it not for
the danger of creating false expectations which might be
abruptly reversed if a firmly restrictive policy became
necessary after the strike is over, I would lean toward a
measurable easing of restraint for the next few weeks.
However, recognizing the danger of being "whipsawed," I
think the aim of policy should be to preserve a feeling of
stability in monetary and credit conditions and to assure
that there will be ample availability of funds for seasonal
credit needs. Such a policy is indicated on general economic
grounds as well as to preserve an "even keel" for some period
following this week's Treasury refunding operation. I would
hope the Manager would be given ample leeway to focus more
on interest rates and the feel of the market than on any
specific level of net borrowed reserves. I would not be
disturbed if net borrowed reserves should swing fairly widely
in the attainment of these aims, but I would not like to see
the weekly average rise above $500 million.
The present directive is not ideally adapted to conditions
faced in the next three weeks--but since any change now might
be subject to misinterpretation, I would prefer to leave it as
it is. Certainly the discount rate should be left alone in
this very fluid situation. It is quite possible that as events
unfold we may find it necessary to meet in advance of the
regular three-week interval to consider a changed business
outlook.
Reverting to our informal discussion here some weeks ago
as to the desirability of implementing the new vault-cash
legislation during this period of seasonal credit needs, I
should like to point out that projections suggest a need for
about $400 million additional reserves in the week ending
December 2, and for another $200 million in the ensuing week
ending December 9. I recognize, however, that there are
important complications that must be taken into account.
One other matter which I should merely like to note in
passing is the absence of any stand-by powers whereby the
System could reimpose selective controls on consumer credit,
if this should be deemed necessary. While the expansion to
date of consumer credit does not necessarily give cause for
alarm, I feel that as a System we should at least be studying
this area in view of the time that would be required for any
enabling legislation.

11/4/59 -32
With regard to Mr. Rouse's question about the
exchange of securities, I do not feel that it is vital
but I would be inclined to think that if the System
took, say, $1 billion of the 4-year notes and $4 billion
of the one-year certificates, that would be helpful to
monetary policy in the long run.
Mr. Erickson reported that economic activity in the First
District was continuing to hold up quite well considering the back
ground of the steel strike and the seasonal lull in some industries.
The impact of the steel strike, direct and indirect, was still rela
tively slight in the district. The New England index of production
for October was down only one point from June. The October survey of
New England purchasing agents showed that 3 per cent expected an
upward trend of production, which compared with 49 per cent in the
September survey and 51 per cent in August, which was the peak figure.
In September, construction contracts were down 16 per cent, this
being the third consecutive month in which construction contracts
were down. However, for the first nine months of this year construc
tion contracts were up 2 per cent, with residential construction
still 25 per cent ahead of the first nine months last year. There
was a seasonal gain in nonagricultural employment in mid-August to
mid-September, although somewhat less than a year ago. Department
store sales fluctuated widely during the four weeks ended October 24,
due probably to weather conditions more than anything else, but they
still followed pretty much the same four weeks last year. On
October 24, commercial and industrial loans of reporting member banks

11/4/59 -33
were $24 million lower than the peak reached on September 30.
The Reserve Bank discount window had been used less during the
last three weeks than for some period of time. The September
survey of mutual savings banks revealed an increase in deposits
of 5.8 per cent over September of last year, which was less than
the year-to-year increases had been running earlier. Real estate
loans were up 10 per cent, and there had been further shifts at
mutual savings banks toward paying higher rates of interest on
deposits.
Mr. Erickson went on to say that investors in the First
District took $62 million of the so-called "magic fives" in the
recent Treasury financing. Comments had appeared in the press
regarding the effect on mutual savings banks in the New York area,
and the Boston Bank made a check of the effect in the mutual savings
banks in its district. In the smaller communities and cities there
apparently had been little effect, and in Hartford and Providence
only a slight effect. The two largest mutual savings banks in
Boston have interest payment dates falling on October 5 and October
15, so it might have been expected that they would be affected more
than otherwise. However, the information obtained indicated that
these banks probably had withdrawals of somewhere between $1 million
and $1-1/2 million.
Since the latest Committee meeting the Boston Bank had held
its fall business roundup, and at that time most of the participants

11/4/59 -34
expected the steel mills to be back in operation by the end of
October. On that assumption, they were reasonably optimistic
about the business outlook. Estimates of gross national product
at the end of next June averaged $503.5 billion, while guesses
on the index of industrial production averaged 160. It was
expected that 4.8 per cent of the labor force would be unemployed,
that the wholesale price index would stand at 120.1, and that the
consumer price index would stand at 126. Over the years, Mr.
Erickson noted, the estimates of this group had been on the con
servative side.
Turning to policy, Mr. Erickson expressed the view that the
Committee should continue to mark time, with no change in the discount
rate or the directive. As to open market operations, he agreed with
Mr. Hayes that the Account Manager should be given latitude. He
would not increase the existing degree of restraint, and he would
try to let any errors fall on the side of ease. He would not be
disturbed if net borrowed reserves fluctuated more than they had
recently. His views on policy were expressed on the assumption that
the steel mills would resume operations shortly as the result of
negotiations or under the provisions of the Taft-Hartly Act. If,
however, the mills were not opened in the next week or two, he felt
that the Committee might want to meet earlier than the next scheduled
meeting, that is, to hold a meeting in two weeks instead of three.

11/4/59 -35
With regard to the exchange of System Account securities in
the Treasury refunding, Mr. Erickson said that he had no fixed
opinion but would not object to putting up to $1 billion into the
four-year notes. He thought it might be well to do that in order
to show some flexibility, and such a move would not interfere with
over-all monetary policy. In recent years the Open Market portfolio
had sometimes contained less than the present quantity of obligations
maturing in one year or less, and additional holdings were due to
move into that area shortly.
Mr. Irons reported that conditions in the Eleventh District
were moving along on a sort of plateau at the high level reached
some two or three months ago. Speaking in the over-all sense, there
had been little change during the past three-week period. Most
indices were at high levels and a few had moved up slightly. Un
employment was running about 4.1 per cent of the labor force, compared
with a higher national figure, and some cities were substantially
under 4.1 per cent. Crude oil production was running quite steadily
at recent levels, while department store sales showed little change,
being up a little in October but not substantially. The agricultural
situation was favorable; a very large cotton output was expected.
Range conditions were expected to be good and cattle were doing all
right. As elsewhere, there was some hesitancy due to the steel
strike and its consequences, but inquiries continued to produce the
comment that the strike had not had too much effect upon manufacturing

11/4/59 -36
industries or upon economic activity in the district. A check of
thirteen major steel-using manufacturers revealed few curtailments
or labor layoffs attributable to the strike. Instead, layoffs were
due principally to local conditions, such as a strike in the con
struction industry in a particular city, or to institutional industry
problems. General Motors had pretty well closed up its plant outside
Dallas and Ford was beginning to cut back. Also, a number of manu
facturing firms reported that they would have to close down if the
strike continued as long as the end of November or December. The
strike appeared to have caused no change in capital investment
programs and no great surge of demand for bank credit was expected
when the strike was over.
Continuing his comments on district developments, Mr. Irons
said that credit demand may have been down a little recently, but
not significantly. Similarly, it might be up somewhat during the
next three weeks but not enough to mean anything. The picture had
been moving along on that basis since the middle of June or July.
The seasonal movement this year appeared to be a little slower than
usual and demand was probably a little less marked. While borrowing
from the Reserve Bank was not heavy, those district banks engaging
in Federal funds transactions were now net borrowers.
Mr. Irons sensed from discussions in the district a little
less conversation at the moment about tight money. In financial
circles there appeared to be an attitude of watchful waiting to

11/4/59 -37
see what might happen. The insurance companies were doing pro
motional work in the form of an anti-inflation campaign that had
been drawing some public interest and publicity.
In view of the economic picture in the Eleventh District,
which he felt was not too different from that in the nation as a
whole, Mr. Irons said that he would recommend no change in basic
policy. He would not try to bring about any less restraint, but
rather to maintain about the degree of restraint that had prevailed
in the past few weeks. If there should be any deviations, he would
prefer that they be on the side of ease, looking on any such
deviation, however, as an inadvertent heppenstance rather than a
deliberate attempt to ease. He would not be too disturbed if a
little ease should remain in the market, but he would not allow it
to accumulate to any great extent. He agreed that the Account
Manager should have leeway to maintain about the same degree of
pressure on reserve positions. He was not particularly concerned
about the level of net borrowed reserves, particularly at the
present time; he was concerned much more about the level of interest
rates and other conditions in the market that the Account Manager
might sense. He did not expect much of significance to happen in
the next three weeks even if the steel strike should be settled.
If it were settled, it might be possible to see better the shape
of things to come, but he would not expect any significant change
in the near future. He would favor no change in the discount rate
or the directive.

11/4/59 -38
On the question raised regarding the refunding, Mr. Irons
said he did not feel strongly about the exchange of System Account
holdings. However, he would prefer to take the one-year certifi
cates and not allocate $1 billion to the four-year notes. He saw
no good reason to do otherwise. To take some of the four-year
securities would not mean being less doctrinaire; it would not make
much difference from the standpoint of monetary and credit policy
and would seem like an attempt to fool somebody. While he would be
willing to deviate from a policy of rigidity, he would like to have
a good reason that could be explained, and a decision to take some
of the four-year notes could not be explained on grounds that it
connoted a flexible policy. Accordingly, although he would not feel
too strongly on the matter, he would prefer not to split the exchange.
Mr. Mangels reported that a recent meeting of the California
State Governor's Business Advisory Council had produced several items
of interest that might be regarded as straws in the wind. A repre
sentative of insurance companies reported that at a recent Chicago
meeting the insurance industry had agreed to spend a substantial
amount for advertisements in 400 United States newspapers against
inflation, while a representative of the automobile industry reported
that General Motors Acceptance Corporation was planning to gear its
1960 operations to estimated sales of between 6.2 and 6.5 million
cars. The Food Machinery and Chemical Corporation reported that
it had sufficient steel to last for the remainder of this year; it

11/4/59 -39
also indicated that for the past year it had been establishing
plants in foreign countries to meet competition in markets outside
the United States. This company's recent domestic expansion had
been in areas outside California because of considerably higher
labor costs in that State than in other areas, with the result
that San Jose, where a large part of the company's production
facilities were located, would more and more become a research
and development center. A representative of the aircraft industry
forecast that total aircraft employment in California would continue
to decline for the next two years. One factor was an increase in the
complexity of defense items and their cost, thus reducing the physical
volume of production; there was also a reduction in airframe construc
tion resulting in increased manufacturing of defense hardware outside
the State. Further, most of the aircraft companies had reached the
peak of production of commercial airliners and all would reach that
peak early in 1960. Nevertheless, this participant in the conference
was optimistic because of engineering, scientific, and technical skills
found in the aircraft industry in California. Of 240,000 aircraft
employees in California, it was said that 18 per cent had college
degrees in engineering or science and that another 18 per cent were
technicians.
Regarding the Kaiser steel settlement, Mr. Mangels said it
was at first hoped that the start-up period might take only about

11/4/59 -40
ten days. Then it was found that there had been extensive damage
to open-hearth furnaces and it now appeared that it would be at
least a month before sizable shipments could be made. For three
weeks, it appeared that operations probably would only average
about one-third of capacity. Mr. Mangels also reported that
residential construction in August was up 9 per cent over July.
He felt, however, that this was a temporary bulge and did not
represent a change in trend. Lumber output in September and
October was at a rather high level despite lower prices and reduced
demand. In agriculture, heavy crop marketings brought returns 5 per
cent above a year ago in spite of lower prices. The response to the
new-model automobiles had been favorable but dealers were limited in
their stocks of both 1959 and 1960 cars. Department store sales
continued to be somewhat above the figures of a year ago, both on a
month-to-month and on a cumulative basis, but the rate of improve
ment had declined somewhat. In September, unemployment in the
district increased to 5 per cent.
On the financial side, Mr. Mangels said that during the
three-week period ended October 21, bank loans were up $43 million,
with $26 million of this increase in loans to retail traders. Of
this increase, $17 million occurred in the week of October 21,
principally because of a loan to one large retail firm for accounts
receivable financing. Security holdings of reporting banks were up
$47 million, demand deposits were up $91 million, but time deposits

11/4/59 -41
were off $38 million although savings accounts increased $50 million.
For the first time in ten weeks, district reporting banks last week
were net purchasers of Federal funds. Borrowings at the Reserve Bank
continued quite nominal. The average ratio of borrowings to reserve
requirements in September was .4 per cent.
With respect to policy, Mr. Mangels said that he agreed with
the views expressed by Mr. Hayes and that he would not favor changing
the directive or the discount rate at this time. As to the exchange
of System Account securities, Mr. Mangels said he agreed with Mr.
Irons. In the absence of a factor such as existed when the earlier
partial exchange into longer-term securities was made, he felt the
Committee would be well advised to stay in short-term securities.
However, he would have no strong objection to taking $1 billion of
the four-year notes.
Mr. Deming said that Ninth District economic indicators
continued to lag those for the nation. This reflected the lack of
iron and copper mining activity and a weak agricultural situation.
He recalled having said at the preceding Committee meeting that if
the steel strike ended promptly there would be 17 million tons of
potential iron ore production for the balance of this year. Now
the potential was down to 10 million tons. The Soo lock closing
had been announced for December 12; thus after that date no ore
boats would go down the lakes. Rail shipments of ore could not

11/4/59 -42
and would not be large. In western Montana the copper mining strike
was continuing, causing Anaconda to toy with the idea of closing its
mining operations for an indefinite period if there was no settlement
soon. As yet, however, this was not regarded as a serious proposal.
Mr. Deming said that the uncertainty in the national scene
plus the forthcoming Treasury financing seemed to argue for no change
in basic policy at this time, although he would go along with any
deviations being made on the side of ease. In his view it would be
inappropriate to change the discount rate or the directive at this
time. With respect to the exchange question, he agreed with Messrs.
Irons and Mangels since he did not see how the Committee could
demonstrate any more flexibility or a less doctrinaire approach to
open market operations by splitting the take-up of the exchange
issues. Therefore, although he did not feel strongly on the matter,
he would favor exchanging entirely into the one-year issue.
Mr. Allen made substantially the following comments with
respect to Seventh District developments and with respect to
monetary policy:
Despite the steel strike, and its impact on the
automobile industry, the employment situation in the
Seventh District cannot yet be termed bad. Our cities
as a group make a far more satisfactory picture than
that of the rest of the nation as a whole. Through the
first three weeks of October there was surprisingly
little rise in unemployment compensation claims in
Seventh District States. The number of new claims
for the five States combined was less than during the
same period last year. Of course we expect the situation
to worsen rapidly, but thus far it has not deteriorated
at the pace expected.

11/4/59
Farm income has declined in the District, with the
decline greatest in the Corn Belt States--understandable
with hog prices 25 - 30 per cent lower than last year.
However, the large crop of feed grains should boost farm
income in the last quarter, and our country banks which
have suffered a drop in demand deposits are hoping to see
that trend at least arrested.
Bank loan growth has slowed in the past month; in fact
total loans of weekly reporting District banks declined $30
million in the first three weeks of October. Security hold
ings, on the other hand, show that acquisition of the June tax
bills and, to a lesser extent, the 5 per cent notes, more than
offset the net reduction in holdings of Governments earlier
in the month. These recent acquisitions, in the eyes of
some of our banks whose basic reserve positions should not
encourage any increase in loans or investments, are justified
under the guise of helping the Treasury. And the improvement
in the bond market is not proving to be a discouraging factor;
rather, it makes continued help for the Treasury a more
necessary and a more pleasant so-called duty and administra
tion of the discount window more difficult.
We are impressed, or perhaps the right word would be
depressed, by the number of wage settlements coming to our
attention which call for substantial wage increases in the
neighborhood of 20 cents or more per hour--most of them to
be effective over a period of not more than two years. It is
still a question as to how effective monetary policy can be
in combating these inflationary influences but they strongly
suggest to us that the present is no time to contemplate an
easier policy. On the other hand, in the light of the lower
level of business activity, however temporary it may turn out
to be, I am not disposed to recommend a more stringent policy
at this time. Consequently, I would favor endeavoring to
continue the current degree of restraint for another three
weeks. As to the exchange, I would favor sticking to the
shorter securities.
Mr. Leedy stated that there had been no significant changes in
the Tenth District since mid-October. The secondary effects of the steel
strike on employment in the district had not yet been particularly great.
However, projections indicated that if the strike should continue beyond
the middle of November there would be a sharp increase in unemployment.

11/4/59 -44
With respect to policy, Mr. Leedy said he was in accord
with the views that had been expressed thus far. He was somewhat
surprised that the System had been able to get along as well as it
had over the past period in following the policy that had been set.
In the light of the forthcoming Treasury financing and economic
conditions generally, he saw no reason for an immediate change in
policy. Accordingly, he would favor continuing the present policy.
As to the exchange, he would find it difficult to assign a convincing
reason for splitting the System's subscription between the longer
and the shorter maturities. The Government securities market had
given a good account of itself recently and the reasons that existed
earlier for making a departure from the usual practice did not seem
to have weight at the present time. As he understood it, the
Secretary of the Treasury had indicated that the matter was immaterial
from the Treasury's standpoint and also had suggested that the System
should not be expected to sacrifice any principles. Therefore, Mr.
Leedy said, he would go along with others who had expressed the view
that it would be preferable to take the entire amount in the shorter
term issue.
Mr. Leach made substantially the following comments:
While the most noticeable effects of the steel strike
are still concentrated in certain industries in Maryland
and West Virginia, its impact on the District economy is
definitely spreading. Probably the most tangible evidence
of this is in the continuing decline in man-hours worked
in manufacturing industries. Despite the strike, however,

11/4/59
activity in leading industries, such as textiles, chemicals,
furniture, and cigarettes continues at a very high level.
Employment generally is only slightly below the peak 1959
levels established prior to the strike.
Rising cloth prices and lower cotton prices have further
strengthened the textile outlook, and profits are at their
highest level in many years. Producers report large order
backlogs with production of print cloths substantially sold
into the second quarter of 1960. Finished goods inventories
are abnormally small. The industrial chemical industry in
West Virginia is reportedly running at peak capacity.
Furniture production and shipments are increasing from their
near-record levels. Cigarette production is running 6 per
cent above 1958, which was a record year in this industry.
Pressures on District banks were eased somewhat during
most of October as evidenced by a less than seasonal loan
demand, a very low level of borrowings from the Federal
Reserve Bank, and sales of Federal funds. During the past
week, however, member banks borrowed more heavily from the
Reserve Bank and shifted from sales to purchases of Federal
funds. Contrary to the situation in the Dallas District,
as reported, I hear comments about tight money everywhere I
go.
The current refunding and prospective Treasury borrow
ing seem to preclude any real change in policy during the
next three weeks. The steel situation cannot be settled
through monetary measures, but the adverse effects of the
strike on the economy are increasing. It seems that this
development should be given some recognition under a
flexible monetary policy and be reflected in the policy
record. Perhaps we could agree that seasonal needs for
reserves should be met somewhat more readily. Certainly
all doubts should be resolved on the side of ease. I would
not favor a change in the directive or a change in the
discount rate at this time.
With respect to the exchange, I do not have a strong
opinion. I like to be flexible but know of no good reason
to take any of the four-year notes.
Mr. Mills said he would like to restate his position that the
System would be well advised to move cautiously toward a less re
strictive credit policy. He was increasingly clear in his own mind

11/4/59
that the economy was passing through a period of rather drastic
adjustment. While that adjustment was being made, the System was
tending to make its projections and to determine policy against a
momentum of past events reflected in statistics that were no longer
reliable. Accordingly, the recommendation that he would make first
would be to revise the policy directive by changing clause (b) to
read "to fostering sustainable economic growth and expanding employ
ment opportunities while guarding against inflationary credit expan
sion." To go further into the reasoning that brought him to this
position, Mr. Mills read the following statement:
There are strong advocates of the theory that an
effective monetary policy can only overcome the lag in
its impact on economic events if such events are antici
pated well in advance of their occurrence and appropriate
countermeasures then undertaken. The most active
proponents of this theory lay greatest emphasis on the
importance of formulating a monetary and credit policy
that will act as a backfire against an anticipated
outburst of inflationary pressures, and in practice are
apparently prepared to take the risk that the policy
actions which they support may miscalculate the future
and induce deflationary pressures.
Whether it is within the capacity of the human mind
to read the future accurately and to conduct a monetary
policy adapted to an assumed future course of events is
open to argument. In any event, however, forecasting,
when translated into the formulation of monetary and
credit policy, should give as much weight to possible
deflationary as to inflationary developments, and doubt
should at least be resolved on the side of a middle of
the road policy. At the present time, future uncertain
ties are strong enough to argue for a monetary and credit
policy that will lessen the degree of restraint over
credit expansion that is implicit in the level of
negative free reserves that is presently imposed on the
commercial banking system. The cumulative effects of

11/4/59 -47-
current policy actions may already have curtailed a
normal seasonal expansion of commercial bank credit
that may account for the easing that has occurred
in the demand for bank credit which, in turn, can be
put to policy advantage by permitting its moderating
effects to be reflected in an improvement in bank
liquidity.
A lessened demand for bank loans as transposed
into an increase in bank holdings of U. S. Treasury
bills should not be thwarted by the maintenance of a
severely restrictive monetary and credit policy.
Instead, the gradual modification of current policy
that has been made automatically possible in the
slackened demand for bank credit should be reinforced
further by lightening the pressure on bank reserves
to the extent that whatever divestment of recently
acquired U. S. Government securities banks may find
necessary in order to meet other legitimate credit
demands can proceed unhurriedly and without subjecting
the U. S. Government securities market to depressive
price influences. Implementation of such a policy
conforms to the belief that the economy can only be
freed from the lagging and cumulative downward effects
of past System policy actions if the level of negative
free reserves is slowly reduced. A cautious modifica
tion of policy should be possible of accomplishment with
out major repercussions on the prices of U. S. Government
securities. For that matter, any risk of instigating a
speculative upward movement in the prices of U. S.
Government securities that is inherent in a modification
of existing Federal Reserve System monetary and credit
policy is outweighed by the greater risk that its
continuation will in due course have so severely limited
the availability of credit as to require a drastic
policy reversal. If that should be the case and liquidity
is then forced into the economy by policy actions as an
antidote, the stage will have been set for a new and
immoderate swing in the Federal Reserve System's policies.
With regard to the exchange, Mr. Mills said he wished to align
himself with those who would exchange into the one-year maturity.
Mr. Robertson said that despite the scholarly presentation
of economic factors and judgments by Messrs. Young and Thomas the

11/4/59 -48
future-even the short-term future--was so uncertain in his own
mind that he could see no justification for a change of policy.
In saying this, he hoped that the System would do nothing toward
lessening of restraint. He had felt for a long time that the
System was not being tight enough. In recent weeks, he had the
feeling that perhaps he might have been wrong and that the policy
had been just about right and was beginning to take effect. Last
week, however, he was not sure this was the case. At present he
would recommend staying just about still, with no intentional
diminution of restraint. This posture, he felt, was needed as a
starting point to deal with the situation as it unfolded following
settlement of the steel strike. He would not change the directive
or the discount rate at this time. As to the exchange, he would
also align himself with the majority of those who had spoken. He
did not think that the System would eliminate the charge of being
doctrinaire by a change in the usual policy which had no apparent
reason and which would not actually indicate flexibility.
Mr. Shepardson noted the high degree of uncertainty at the
present time as to future trends. Because of that situation, it
seemed to him highly desirable for the System to maintain its
present position. He felt the Committee should not overlook the
comments by Mr. Allen regarding the wage settlements that had been
taking place and that it seemed reasonable to expect would be

11/4/59 -49
reflected sooner or later in price adjustments. The movement of
prices reported by Mr. Young was still another matter of concern.
As System experience would indicate, it is always easier to ease
than to tighten. Therefore, while there might be adverse effects
of the strike that would retard the movement of the economy most
generally expected in the months ahead, he felt that the System
would be well advised to maintain its present position until further
developments made themselves clear. Accordingly, he would maintain
the present degree of restraint giving appropriate leeway to the
Manager of the Account to measure the effect of that restraint. He
would not favor changing the directive or the discount rate. As to
the exchange, Mr. Shepardson noted the statement that no particular
reason had been advanced for changing the usual policy. However,
it had also been implied that there was no particularly strong
argument against deviation. If the latter was true and if there
might be some beneficial psychological effect in some quarters, he
would see no harm in splitting the System's subscription to take
on the order of $4 billion of the one-year securities and $1 billion
of the four-year securities.
Mr. King said he saw no reason to rejoice in the fact that
the steel settlements already made were perhaps less inflationary
than the ones entered into a few years ago. The settlements made
thus far probably were going to be inflationary to some extent.
One might delude himself into thinking that wage increases in the

11/4/59 -50
vicinity of 20 cents an hour were not particularly inflationary, Mr.
King said, but they sounded uite inflationary to him unless they
were coupled with other things that the steel industry had been try
ing to achieve. He did not know that any of those things had been
achieved and gathered that they probably had not.
Mr. King expressed the view that the degree of restraint in
force had been desirable and adequate. In the face of current uncer
tainties, he would give no evidence to the public of a change in
policy one way or the other, although he would feel that the Account
Manager should have leeway to do as he thought proper in this
uncertain period. With respect to the reference that had been made
to the possibility of another Committee meeting before three weeks,
Mr. King said he could not conceive of any development taking place
so fast as to necessitate a special meeting. He would think that a
meeting at the normal time probably would be adequate to take what
ever action might be necessary. He would favor leaving the directive
in its present form and making no change in the discount rate at
this time. With regard to the exchange, he would not take the
longer-term security. The Committee probably was justified in acting
to authorize a split earlier this year when the Government securities
market was under considerably more pressure than at present, and if
the market developed more pressure at some time in the future he
might again favor such a decision. At the present time, however,
the market seemd to be doing quite well and appeared to have turned
a hill that it had to climb.

-51
11/4/59
Mr. Fulton reported that the steel strike had exerted
profound effects in the Fourth District. Unemployment was now
rising rapidly, as evidenced by the fact that General Motors,
the largest employer in the Cleveland area, had practically shut
down its operations. Inventories in the hands of steel customers
were lower now than had been thought possible. Further, there was
the concern that the strike had lasted so long that an actual
permanent loss of tonnage demand had occurred. This year it was
expected that the figures would be about 95 million tons of
production against projections of 115 million tons, which left a
residue of 20 million tons not produced. It was feared that about
25 per cent of this loss would be irretrievable. Also, there had
been an unknown amount of damage to the equipment and furnaces by
reason of their lying idle this long, and it was not anticipated
that much tonnage would be turned out for the first two or three
weeks, particularly since the mills had shipped practically every
thing on the floor before the strike. In addition, the ore situation
was tight. There were ore boats still in the Cleveland harbor with
no place to go, there was a limited time remaining for pulling ore
down, and many crew members had gotten other employment. While it
might be possible to squeak through the coming spring, it would be
necessary to have some high cost ore brought in by rail. The
agreement with Kaiser read quite well on the surface: 10 cents an
hour in fringe benefits the first year, and then the cost admitted

11/4/59 -52
in the second year would be about 9-1/2 cents. However, steel men
maintained that if the same package were accepted by the older mills
it would cost those companies about 19 cents an hour the first year
and then the other 9-1/2 cents. There was great pressure on the
part of the union for the companies to accept that kind of settlement
but without doubt such a settlement would mean a significant increase
in the price of steel. The steel companies reportedly had made three
offers, each one a little better than the preceding one, but the
union apparently had made no counter-offer after the original proposal.
In the field of automobiles, Mr. Fulton said, production was
now very flat, with only Studebaker and American in good production.
In a recent conference of business economists held at the Cleveland
Bank, it was indicated that it would take six or seven weeks for the
automobile industry to get back to prestrike levels. With sales high,
inventories of dealers would be reduced substantially. It is presently
anticipated that 6.5 to 7 million domestic cars will be produced in
1960. On the brighter side, the rubber industry was overcoming
inventory deficiencies. Tire stocks were at record lows and the
industry was now building stocks to load up the dealers, a normal
process at this time of year. It was felt that demand again would
be good in 1960. The glass industry had not shut down because this
period was being used to rebuild stocks of glass used by the auto
industry. Plate and window glass had also gotten quite low.
Manufacturers of large appliances recorded that sales were up 19 per

11/4/59 -53
cent over last year and that it was hard to maintain inventories.
Production was going "out the window" to consumers, perhaps because
consumers felt that steel would be short and it would not be possible
to get the appliances later. Business machines were reported to have
been showing strong sales this year and enough steel reportedly was
available to continue operations through the rest of the year. In
aluminum, this had been a record year for primary production but
customers found themselves with large inventories. Orders therefore
had been falling off, with production cut back.
Mr. Fulton said that the district unemployment situation was
not good. In Youngstown, Ohio, for example, over 25 per cent of the
labor force was out of work due to the effects of the strike upon the
steel industry and allied industries. Department store sales, how
ever, had been holding up quite well and for the district as a whole
were 6 per cent over last year. Loans of district reporting banks
declined slightly during the past week, while total deposits increased.
With the exception of the week ended October 28, when country banks
borrowed rather heavily, member banks had not been coming to the
discount window to an unduly large extent. Borrowings had been
running from 5 to 7 per cent of the national total.
Mr. Fulton said that he did not believe any relaxation of
policy should take place. He felt that the Desk had done a good job
and that ample latitude should be given to the Manager of the Account

with a view to maintaining the current degree of firmness in the
market. He would favor no change in either the directive or the
discount rate. With regard to the exchange, he concurred in the
views expressed by Mr. Shepardson. The effect on the liquidity of
the Account seemed to be a matter of academic interest, at least
in the small degree that it would be affected by a partial exchange
into the four-year securities. Accordingly, for the sake of
appearance alone and in the absence of any strong reason for not
doing so, he would consider putting $1 billion in the four-year
notes and the balance in the one-year securities.
Mr. Bopp made substantially the following comments:
We have just completed our annual survey of capital
expenditures by manufacturers in the Philadelphia area,
and they are expected to be about the same in 1960 as
expenditures this year. Estimates for 1959 total about
the same as the revised estimates reported in a re-check
last spring, but the total is substantially higher than
for the original estimates made last fall. Our experience
has been that manufacturers underestimate their expendi
tures during periods of business expansion, the underesti
mate usually being largest during the first year of the
upturn. Manufacturers also reported that they expect
little change in employment, production, and inventories
from the third quarter of this year to the second quarter
of 1960. Nearly 70 per cent of the firms expect their
inventories to remain about the same, 18 per cent expect
an increase, and 12 per cent a decrease. A re-check
with several of the large firms last week revealed that
their capital expenditure plans have not been affected
so far by the strike.
Idleness caused by the strike increased about 14,000
in Pennsylvania in the past three weeks, according to the
Pennsylvania State Department of Labor and Industry. This
is about one-third more than the increase in the previous

11/4/59 -55
three weeks. Metals and metal products manufacturing
and railroads accounted for most of the newly idled.
Nevertheless, new and continued unemployment claims
have not risen significantly.
I agree that there should be no change in the degree
of restraint, in the discount rate, or in the directive.
With regard to the exchange, I do not feel strongly, since
whatever we do will have no effect on the liquidity of the
economy and the liquidity of the central bank creates no
concern on my part. On balance, however, I would take the
one-year certificates.
Mr. Johns said he wished to align himself with those who had
stated that they would not vary policy one way or the other at the
present time. He would like to adopt as his own views the analysis
presented by Mr. Robertson. Without arguing the merits of the
exchange question, he would express himself firmly on the side of
exchanging in full into the shorter-term securities.
Mr. Szymczak said he felt this was a time when the System
ought to ease somewhat the policy followed through the spring and
summer. He would not change policy to the extent of changing the
directive, but he would get ready for a change in case of develop
ments that might result from the strike and in view of the dampening
of the economy that usually comes after the beginning of the calendar
year. Developments could snowball into something quite serious.
Accordingly, he would recommend some easing, to the extent that it
was possible for the Manager of the Account to ease without a change
in basic policy. As to the exchange, it would have been most un
fortunate had the Secretary of the Treasury requested that the
System take $2 billion or $3 billion of the longer-term securities.

11/4/59 -56
However, the problem of the Secretary must be borne in mind. To
the extent that the System could assist in meeting this problem,
he (Mr. Szymczak) would favor going along and taking some of the
four-year notes, even up to $2 billion, rather than to wait until
the Secretary might ask the System to follow such a course.
Mr. Balderston said that the central question was the extent
to which the steel strike was resulting in permanent injury to the
economy as opposed to a mere postponement of the filling of demands.
Between now and the time of the next Committee meeting the impact of
the strike would become more apparent as stocks were exhausted and
workers were laid off. Already the available data indicated a
reduction of inventories at an annual rate of about $10 billion,
and the situation had begun to be reflected in a lower demand for
business loans. Turnover of demand deposits outside the principal
financial centers leveled off some five months ago and the increase
in the money supply has been only about 0.5 per cent. In short,
the strike seemed not only to be pushing part of the boom over into
whatever valley might be ahead but was continuing to a point where
some actual injury to the economy might be evident between now and
Christmas.
As to policy, Mr. Balderston said that he would favor no
increase in restraint. He felt, however, that the current degree
of restraint should be continued until the situation clarified
itself. If there were to be deviations, he would hope that for

11/4/59 -57
the immediate future they would be on the lower side. He did not
feel strongly about the exchange. However, he lacked an explanation
as to why the System should take any of the four-year notes.
Consequently, he would stick with the shorter securities.
Summarizing the meeting, Vice Chairman Hayes said that
certainly the overwhelming view expressed today was in favor of no
change in basic policy. There had been considerable indication
that the Manager of the Account should have leeway in implementing
that decision. More comments were in the direction of saying that
there should be no increase in restraint or that any deviations
should be on the side of ease, to the extent that there were
deviations, than there had been comments in the opposite direction.
In neither direction, however, had the comments been frequent enough
to constitute a majority view. The consensus, therefore, favored
no change in basic policy, with ample latitude to the Manager of
the Account in carrying out that decision. The consensus also
favored no change in the discount rate.
The Vice Chairman inquired whether there was any disagreement
with this statement of the consensus, and no comments were heard. He
then inquired whether any Committee member wished to vote negatively
on the policy indicated by the consensus.
Mr. Mills stated that his vote should be recorded as contrary
to the consensus. He added, however, that in his opinion the Committee
was making a serious mistake in voting on this subject and that a

11/4/59 -58
record vote was going to produce comment, discussion and in
vestigation that would not be helpful to the Federal Reserve
System.
The Vice Chairman then stated that in the absence of
Chairman Martin he felt the Committee should not revise the
procedure instituted at the last meeting. Certainly the subject
was open for discussion, and the Committee was only experimenting
with the current procedure. However, he would be inclined to
follow, at least for the time being, the procedure that the Chairman
followed at the last meeting.
Mr. Szymczak commented that his position was not sufficiently
different from the consensus as stated by Mr. Hayes for him to record
a negative vote, although he thought his position was closer to the
individual views Mr. Hayes had expressed earlier than to the con
sensus.
Mr. Hayes likewise commented that his position was not
sufficiently different from the consensus to cause him to vote
against the policy indicated by the consensus.
Mr. Szymczak then inquired whether the point Mr.M ills had
raised about voting procedure would not come back for further discus
sion, following which Mr. King asked for clarification on the purpose
of the vote.
In response, the Vice Chairman noted Mr. King's comment that
he thought the statement of the Chair properly set forth the consensus

11/4/59 -59
of the meeting. However, the purpose of the vote now being taken
was to determine whether the members of the Committee agreed with
the policy views set forth in the consensus as stated, or whether
any member wished to be recorded as voting in opposition to those
policy views. In other words, this was a vote on the policy to be
followed until the next meeting.
Mr. King then inquired whether a vote on the policy directive
would not afford a member sufficient opportunity to record himself,
to which Mr. Hayes replied that the opinion had been expressed by
certain members of the Committee that a vote on the directive did
not provide a sufficient opportunity. Therefore, the Committee was
experimenting with this procedure.
Mr. Shepardson said he had thought that Mr. Mills was one
of those who felt there should be a record vote on the policy indi
cated by the consensus.
Mr. Mills replied in the negative. His contention, he said,
was that the minutes in the past had recorded a vote that was not
actually taken by poll of the Committee members. In response to a
further question, Mr. Mills said his preference would be that a
consensus be reflected, that a vote not be asserted, and that the
minutes be drafted in a manner that would indicate the different
polls of opinion. The consensus would state the policy.
Mr. Szymczak commented that the opinions he had stated would
be recorded in the minutes and that such a procedure was sufficient
as far as he was concerned.

11/4/59 -60
Mr. Mills said this was what he had felt in the past but
that he objected to recording as a vote a consensus of opinions
which on occasions hid a rather wide range of individual policy
views.
The Vice Chairman inquired of Mr. Mills whether he would
advocate the procedure that was followed up until the last meeting
of the Committee.
Mr. Mills indicated an affirmative response, except that he
objected to recording a vote that was not actually taken.
Mr. Erickson said it was his understanding that the consensus
would stand as always. However, within that consensus the opinions
might vary from one extreme to the other.
Mr. Robertson interjected that the statute called for a vote
on policy.
Mr. Mills said that he did not recall the exact language of
the statute and that he was not certain that it contained a mandate
for a vote.
The Vice Chairman then turned to Mr. Hackley for clarification
of the statutory requirement. Mr. Hackley stated that the statute
does, in so many words, require a vote. He then read the last para
graph of section 10 of the Federal Reserve Act which provides that
the Board of Governors (rather than the Federal Open Market Committee)
shall keep a complete record of the action taken by the Board and by
the Federal Open Market Committee upon all questions of policy relating

11/4/59 -61
to open market operations and shall record therein the votes taken
in connection with the determination of open market policies and
the reasons underlying the action of the Board and the Committee
in each instance. The paragraph further provides that the Board
shall keep a similar record with respect to all questions of policy
determined by the Board and shall include in its annual report to
the Congress a full account of the action so taken during the pre
ceding year with respect to the policies determined by it and shall
include in such report a copy of the records required to be kept
under the provisions of this paragraph.
Mr. Hackley said that it was clear, therefore, from the law
that the vote on any open market policy action taken by the Committee
must be recorded. The question was what constituted such an action.
Mr. Hayes agreed that this was the question, adding that
there had been a difference of interpretation in the past as to
whether the action taken on the directive was the only policy action
taken.
Mr. Riefler commented that it had always been assumed in the
past that the action on the Committee's directive constituted the
action on the policy to be carried out during the period between
that meeting and the next one. However, in the past year or two a
question had been raised regarding this procedure, and the modifica
tion presented by Chairman Martin at the October 13 meeting had
been suggested with the thought that it would help answer this question.

11/4/59 -62
Mr. Hayes said that if anyone, like Mr. Mills, felt that
the Committee was proceeding on the wrong tack it would be desirable
for that member to give the Committee a memorandum of his views and
to discuss the matter at a future meeting. Although he was not
present at the last meeting, it was his understanding that the
Committee was proceeding on an experimental basis with the revised
procedure.
In response to a question from Mr. King regarding Chairman
Martin's letter of October 9, 1959, suggesting a modification in
the voting procedure, Mr. Hayes stated that the procedure did not
contemplate a vote on whether the Chair had stated the consensus
correctly, but rather on whether the Committee members approved
the policy indicated by the consensus.
Mr. Riefler noted that the first step in Chairman Martin's
letter indicated that the Chair would guide the discussion to a
statement of the consensus. The second step contemplated was a
vote on the policy embodied in the consensus.
Mr. Hayes noted that this vote had just been taken and that
one dissent had been found.
Mr. Johns, who was not present at the October 13 meeting,
said that upon reading Chairman Martin's letter, and even now, he
was a little confused by the idea that the Committee would have two
policy determinations, one on the policy indicated by the consensus
and the other on the directive. He inquired in what respect these
determinations were thought to be different.

11/4/59 -63
In reply, Mr. Riefler said that the Committee had always
assumed that the vote on the directive to be issued to the Agent
Bank was the vote on the policy to be carried out and that opera
tions must always be within that policy for the period until the
next meeting. This had been challenged within the past year or
two, and it had been suggested that the Committee was not really
taking a vote on policy and that the minutes were not truly
reflecting the Committee's decisions on policy. As a result of
this question having been raised, the procedure suggested in
Chairman Martin's letter of October 9 was devised as a procedure
that would meet the legal requirements for a vote and which would
give an additional chance for any member who wished to do so to vote
against the policy as stated in the consensus. This was in addition
to the vote on the directive to the Agent Bank.
Mr. Johns said it seemed to him that such a procedure
necessarily involved some sort of admission that there might be a
difference between the directive and Committee policy. It also
probably involved a confession that during all the years when the
other procedure was followed the Committee really had not recorded
its policy decisions correctly.
Mr. Hayes commented that this might be possible but that
another interpretation could be that the directive states policy
in very broad terms and that this was a step to refine it more
definitely within that broad policy. He then inquired of the

11/4/59 -64
Secretary who had challenged the former procedure, to which Mr.
Riefler replied that the question had been raised originally by
Mr. Mills.
Mr. Johns then said that, as he understood it, Mr. Mills
merely had challenged that the minutes recorded a vote that was
never actually taken.
Mr. Szymczak commented that, in policy matters, no one
can be so precise as to know exactly the proper amount of restraint
to be applied at any particular time. Therefore, there must be
varying degrees of acceptance of the agreed upon policy.
At this point the Vice Chairman suggested that since Mr.
Mills originally had raised the question on the procedure that
had been followed, it would be helpful if Mr. Mills would submit
a memorandum of his views as to why the procedure instituted at
the October 13 Committee meeting did not meet the objection that
he had raised earlier.
Mr. Mills stated that he would be agreeable to presenting
such a memorandum.
With regard to the policy directive, the Vice Chairman
noted that a suggestion for a change in clause (b) had been made
by Mr. Mills. As he recalled, everyone else who mentioned the
directive expressed the view that it should not be changed at this
time. He then inquired of the Committee whether it desired to
change the directive in accordance with the suggestion of Mr. Mills.

11/4/59 -65
Mr. Balderston observed that Mr. Leach had indicated
some degree of discomfort with the fact that the directive had
not recognized a situation (the steel strike) that was of concern
to the Committee. While he shared this thought, unless there was
actually a change in policy he (Mr. Balderston) would not desire
to change clause (b) of the directive. On the other hand, the
directive was going on meeting after meeting with no reflection
of the situation discussed by the Committee.
Mr. Johns expressed the view that the policy record would
explain and distill the comments that would appear in the minutes
regarding the steel strike. Thus, he did not think that in the
policy record that would appear in the annual report the steel
strike would be overlooked.
Mr. Riefler added the comment that a shift in policy actually
occurred at the meeting on September 22, 1959, when the decision was
made that any deviations should be on the side of ease.
Mr. Hayes then inquired whether there were other comments
as to wording of the directive, and Mr. Mills stated that he would
vote "no" on its present wording.
The Vice Chairman stated that a vote would be recorded as
favoring no change in the policy directive, except that Mr. Mills
dissented. He added that the minutes would reflect the language
suggested by Mr. Mills.

11/4/59 -66-
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the policy indicated by
the consensus, as stated earlier by the
Vice Chairman, was approved, Mr. Mills
voting "no" for the reasons he had
stated.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
the Committee then voted, with Mr. Mills
voting "no," to direct the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, until otherwise directed
by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (in
cluding replacement of maturing securities, and allowing
maturities to run off without replacement) for the System
Open Market Account in the open market or, in the case of
maturing securities, by direct exchange with the Treasury,
as may be necessary in the light of current and prospective
economic conditions and the general credit situation of the
country, with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in
the market to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to
restraining inflationary credit expansion in order to foster
sustainable economic growth and expanding employment op
portunities, and (c) to the practical administration of the
Account; provided that the aggregate amount of securities
held in the System Account (including commitments for the
purchase or sale of securities for the Account) at the
close of this date, other than special short-term certifi
cates of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be
increased or decreased by more than $1 billion)
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with
discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue
participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such
amounts of special short-term certificates of indebtedness
as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total
amount of such certificates held at any one time by the
Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate
$500 million.
With respect to the exchange of maturing securities now held
in the System Open Market Account, the Vice Chairman stated that the

11/4/59 -67
majority clearly favored taking the shorter-term securities only.
Therefore, unless someone wished to change his position in the
light of the go-around, that would stand as the decision. He in
quired whether anyone wished to change the views that he had
previously expressed and there were no comments to such effect.
The Vice Chairman then noted that four Committee members,
during the go-around, had indicated that they would favor taking
some of the four-year notes.
Mr. Thomas commented that one reason that might be cited
for taking some of the four-year notes was that there would be a
possible risk of having an outstanding issue held predominantly
by the System. Conceivably, the result might be that $5 billion
of an issue totaling less than $7 billion would be held by the
System.
Mr. Hayes said that, abandoning his position as Chairman
of the meeting, he was sympathetic to the point Mr. Thomas had
made. There was an area of doubt and he felt that the Secretary
of the Treasury, in spite of his expression of neutrality, would
be happier if the System were to take some of the four-year notes.
Under these circumstances, Mr. Hayes said he would take a modest
amount.
Mr. Shepardson stated that he felt there was a difference
between a general policy against buying longer-term securities in

11/4/59 -68
the market and taking a portion of longer-term securities on exchange.
He would not be in favor of going into the market and buying longer
term securities but on an exchange the proposition seemed to him
somewhat different.
Mr. Hayes noted that this point had been brought out in con
nection with the refunding earlier this year.
Mr. Mills then said that he would like to present a basis for
taking the shorter-term securities in entirety. It was only at the
last refunding that the System split its subscription, and that
produced a certain amount of comment in the press. If the System
again split at this time, it might in the eyes of the interested
public seem to be making a change in its basic policy. Thus, the
public might reasonably look forward to a repetition on each similar
occasion when the System held maturing securities. Mr. Thomas
recalled two occasions--one last year and one this year--when a
split was made, and Mr. Mills added the comment that in such
circumstances the System might appear all the more to be falling
into a groove.
Mr. King commented that if the System took $1 billion of
the four-year notes, that would be a relatively small portion of
the total financing. If the Committee were going to depart from
its general policy, he would rather depart from it at a time when
the market was in more trouble than at present and then possibly
take a larger amount of the longer-term issue. The question

11/4/59 -69
involved the principle of whether the System was going to go into
the longer-term issue every time.
Mr. Szymczak said he had the reverse feeling. When the
System patently was going in to help the Treasury, the market
would clearly assign that as the reason. However, on an occasion
when the Treasury did not appear to need any help, an opportunity
was provided for the System to get away from what could become
dogma.
Mr. Johns noted that in this case the Secretary of the
Treasury had said that he neither wanted nor solicited help and
that he was only thinking of the System protecting itself against
the charge of being doctrinaire.
Mr. Thomas commented that he felt that it might hurt the
Treasury issue for the System to hold some of the longer-term
securities more than it would help.
Mr. Balderston said that in talking with the Secretary of
the Treasury, on an earlier occasion than the one previously
mentioned, he had advanced the hope that the interest rate fixed
by the Treasury would be rich enough to attract buyers so that the
Federal Reserve would not end up by owning the entire issue. The
point of discussion at that time was the question of a rate of
4-3/4 per cent or 1/8 per cent less. Mr. Balderston said he
expressed the hope that the offering would be so priced as not

11/4/59 -70
to fail in the market, thereby leaving the System with the entire
issue. In view of the point just made by Mr. Thomas, Mr. Balderston
asked Mr. Rouse whether there was any indication from the market as
to whether non-Federal Reserve holdings of the one-year security
would be substantial.
Mr. Rouse replied that he thought it was generally believed
that corporations would go more for the one-year certificate than the
four-year note. There would be some evidence in the attrition of
expectations as to rates. On the whole, however, he felt that the
System would have ample company in the one-year category.
Mr. Balderston said that if this were not the expectation he
would vote to take some of the four-year notes for the reason Mr.
Thomas had advanced.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, it was voted that all of
the $5 billion 3-3/8 per cent certifi
cates of indebtedness maturing on
November 15, 1959, and held in the
System Open Market Account would be
exchanged for the 4-3/4 per cent
certificate maturing November 15, 1960.
On this motion Messrs. Hayes, Erickson,
Shepardson, and Szymczak voted "no" for
the reasons they had stated.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held at 10:00 a.m. on Tuesday, November 24, 1959.
In connection with the date fixed for the next meeting, Mr.
Johns, speaking as Chairman of the Conference of Presidents of the

11/4/59 -71
Federal Reserve Banks, noted that a committee consisting of
Governor Robertson, representing the Board of Governors, and
the members of the Committee on Fiscal Agency Operations, repre
senting the Presidents' Conference, had been working on problems
relating to the verification and destruction of United States
currency and that a joint meeting of the Board and the Presidents
had been suggested in order to consider the recommendations that
would soon be made available by the special committee. Mr. Johns
inquired whether it would be agreeable to hold this joint meeting
following the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on
November 24, and it was decided that the joint meeting would be
held at such time.
Mr. Johns also referred to the fact that the Vice Chairman
of the Board of Governors had referred to the Presidents' Conference
for comment a letter addressed to him under date of October 30, 1959,
by the Under Secretary of the Treasury with respect to proposed
Federal Reserve Bank participation in the United States Savings
Bonds program during 1960. Mr. Johns raised the question whether
the Presidents should meet on this matter today or following the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on November 24.
After discussion it was agreed to follow the latter procedure
if it developed that this would not involve too long a delay in
replying to the Treasury.

11/4/59 -72-
Secretary's Note: Subsequent to this
meeting, it was decided that the
Presidents would meet later today on
the questions raised by the Under
Secretary's letter.
Mr. Johns then noted that if the usual schedule were
observed, a meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee would
be held December 15,1959. He inquired whether it would be agree
able to schedule a meeting of the Presidents' Conference on
December 14 and 15, and possibly on December 16 depending on the
agenda that developed.
There being no objection, Mr. Johns stated that the Secretary
of the Conference would be instructed to make plans on the basis of a
meeting of the Presidents' Conference on the dates mentioned.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary