A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, July 28, 1959, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Allen
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Deming
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Johns
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Messrs. Bopp and Leedy, Alternate Members of the
Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Leach, Irons, and Mangels, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Dallas,
and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Marget, Mitchell, Roosa, and Young,
Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Special Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Keir, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Ellis, Hostetler, Daane, and Tow,
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of Boston, Cleveland, Richmond,
and Kansas City, respectively
Mr. Einzig, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Mr. Anderson, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia

7/28/59 -2
Mr. Coldwell, Director of Research, Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas
Mr. Litterer, Business Economist, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Messrs. Stone and Holmes, Managers, Securities
Department, Federal Reserve Bank of New
York
Chairman Martin noted a request by the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York that Mr. Holmes participate in this meeting, and no objection
was indicated.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of
the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee held on July 7, 1959, were
approved.
Upon poll by the Secretary of the available members, the Fed
eral Open Market Committee on July 16, 1959, authorized exchange of
approximately one-half of the System Account holdings of $8,143 million
of Treasury certificates of indebtedness maturing August 1, 1959, into
4-3/4 per cent Treasury notes to be dated August 1, 1959, and mature
August 15, 1960, and approximately one-half into 4-3/4 Treasury notes
to be dated July 20, 1959, and mature May 15, 1964.
Chairman Martin commented that the Treasury was anxious to
have a division of System Account subscriptions to assist in evening
out the maturity schedule. As it developed, considerably less than
one-half ($2.6 billion) of the Account holdings of the August 1, 1959,
certificates were exchanged into the May 15, 1964, notes.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the action taken by the Federal Open
Market Committee on July 16, 1959, was
ratified.

7/28/59 -3
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report of open market operations covering the
period July 7 through July 22, 1959, and a supplementary report cover
ing the period July 23 through July 27, 1959. Copies of both reports
have been placed in the files of the Committee.
Mr. Rouse recalled that at the time of the July 7 meeting of
the Committee the outlook for the U. S. Government securities market,
and especially for the Treasury's financing activities, was markedly
unfavorable. Rates for short-term issues were rising rapidly in the
face of auctioning two successive special issues of Treasury bills,
to be followed by the refunding of the August 1 maturities. In this
atmosphere the System did what it could to help the Treasury by
supplying reserves promptly to meet increased requirements resulting
from the sale of the two issues to commercial banks on book credit.
However, funds injected for this purpose were less than might have
been expected, due in large part to a high level of float through the
latter part of the period and to large sales by banks to their
customers. Funds were supplied to a large extent on a temporary re
purchase agreement basis. Outright purchases during the period
totaled $153 million, and no sales were made. New repurchase agree
ments were made in the amount of $392 million but $369 million were
resold. The money market remained reasonably stable, though still
tight, and with the development of a much improved atmosphere in
the securities market no serious pressures emerged to require further
open market operations.

7/28/59 -4
The average rate of 4.72 per cent on the auction of July
bills was considerably higher than indicated by earlier estimates.
Since there was little prospective nonbank demand for that issue,
the necessary bank underwriting was effected at rates calculated to
enable banks to stay with the bills for some time. However, the
strong secondary market that developed for those bills seemed to
demonstrate that an attractive rate will still bring out new funds,
and it was interesting to note that considerable demand reportedly
came from sources not ordinarily interested in Treasury bills.
Even so, there was no avoiding a 4-3/4 per cent rate on the refunding.
Once again, the rate proved to have a strong pull, both in the ex
change and in the secondary market, with a margin of the same unusual
type of buyers who purchased the July bills.
These operations, Mr. Rouse said, served to illustrate the
weakness of borrowing too large an aggregate amount within a brief
period on successive auctions. In such circumstances, the market
tends to overdo its rate adjustment, with prejudicial effects on
subsequent Treasury financing operations. Unfortunately, the
Treasury felt it unwise to take the responsibility for setting a
rate on the issues to be sold for cash.
In view of the successful refunding operation, the Treasury
now believed it could get by without borrowing new money until the
latter part of August, when a modest amount of funds would be
required. The Treasury was now considering borrowing about $1 billion

7/28/59 -5
at that time to meet its immediate needs, and also to anticipate
some portion of its October requirements, thus reducing the size
and the difficulty of the job to be done in October, an operation
currently estimated at about $4 billion or somewhat more.
Mr. Rouse reported that the atmosphere in the Government
securities market currently was one of moderate optimism now that
it had become apparent that the Treasury would not have to borrow as
much in August as had been anticipated. In the background, there was
the feeling that the upward surge of the economy might be tempered by
the current steel strike. Consequently, investors and market pro
fessionals appeared to feel that rates had at least reached a
temporary plateau, with no further upswing in prospect for the near
future. Nevertheless, with offerings of bills of up to 90 days'
duration to be had only at 3 per cent or less in the present circum
stances, there was still a storm cellar attitude on the part of large
investors.
Mr. Rouse noted that according to the staff memorandum on the
outlook for member bank reserve positions distributed under date of
July 24, 1959, the need for reserves over the next few months would
be large. For the next three weeks, estimates indicated that in the
absence of System action net borrowed reserves might reach close to
$750 million. The money market should continue tight, with borrowings
from the Reserve Banks generally at a high level. Therefore, unless

7/29/59
credit policy were to be more restrictive, further open market
operations to supply reserves would seem to be in prospect.
Chairman Martin expressed the view that the Desk had handled
the situation well in the past three weeks and that a difficult period
had been weathered successfully.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the open
market transactions during the period July
7 through July 27, 1959, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Supplementing the staff memorandum distributed under date
of July 24, 1959, Mr. Young made substantially the following statement
with respect to recent economic developments:
Economic expansion in the second quarter has proved to
be more vigorous than earlier figures had indicated. Gross
national product, measured in terms of prices, rose at an
annual rate of $13 billion to a total nearly $50 billion
larger than a year earlier. The increase over the quarter
in physical volume amounted to about $10 billion, so that
there was $3 billion of inflationary price rise, i.e., an
annual rate of a billion dollars a month. Consumer spend
ing took a near-record jump of $7.5 billion after increasing
to an average rate of about $4.5 billion in the preceding
four quarters. After declining in May, new orders for
durable goods were up again in June; in fact, they were
almost 50 per cent above their recession low. Thus, the
backlog of unfilled orders resumed its rise.
Demand has been running strong in producer durable
goods markets, as a result both of increased consumer
spending and of rising business investment. Output of
consumer durables rose at an accelerated rate in the second
quarter in response to the unusually strong surge in con
sumer buying of new autos and household goods. Activity in
business equipment lines has been moving up rapidly.
Altogether--with nondurable goods lines also showing con
tinuing gains from already record levels-the industrial

7/28/59 -7-
production index rose in June to 155 per cent of the
1947-49 average. This level was 6 per cent above the
1957 prerecession high.
The steel strike, which began July 15, has reduced
steel production very sharply to 13 per cent of capacity,
While steel is an important item in industrial production,
the momentum of expansion in autos and other lines (after
seasonal allowances) is likely to provide a sufficient
offset to permit the July production index to hold at or
close to the June level. Continuation of the strike
through August, however, would undoubtedly cause a decline
of a few points in total industrial production.
Major secondary effects of a prolonged strike would
not be expected to develop before September. Steel stocks
held by manufacturers are very large and in most cases,
particularly autos, ample stocks of finished steel products
have been accumulated at the retail level.
Complete figures are not yet available on total June
inventories, but the Council of Economic Advisers includes
in its estimates of GNP for the second quarter a $9 billion
seasonally adjusted annual rate of inventory accumulation.
This is almost $3 billion greater than the first quarter
accumulation, and it is the most rapid rate since 1951.
Combined accumulation by metal fabricators and by auto
dealers accounted for about two-thirds of the second quarter
rise in nonfarm business inventories. Accumulation by auto
dealers--and presumably also by manufacturers of metal
products--continued through early July. Partly in anticipation
of model changeovers ahead, domestic auto stocks were boosted
to a new high of 945,000 on July 20. This is almost two-fifths
larger than at this time in most other recent years.
Acceleration of the auto sales rate, on top of strong
consumer demands for goods and services generally, led in June
to expansion in consumer instalment credit outstanding at an
annual rate of $5 billion, nearly as rapid as in 1955 when
the peak quarter approached a $6 billion rate. Instalment
credit extensions have increased more rapidly than disposable
income, and the ratio of extensions to income in June was
close to the previous monthly record established in 1955.
The ratio of repayments to income, however, is still below
earlier highs.
Construction activity continued close to peak levels in
June. New housing starts held at a seasonally adjusted
annual rate of 1,370,000, and the total for the first half of
the year nearly reached the record attained in 1950. Pres
sures of the exceptionally heavy volume of home financing

7/28/59 -8-
have been reflected in some further increases in mortgage
interest rates--on conventional mortgages to 5.8 or 5.9
per cent. Reflecting in part the recent marked increase
in the volume of completions, the Census Bureau sample
survey found that the over-all residential vacancy rate
rose to a postwar high of 3.2 per cent in the second
quarter, as compared with 2.9 per cent in the first.
Buoyancy in consumer markets in recent months stems
partly from an acceleration in employment recovery and
the accompanying rapid growth in wage and salary income.
Seasonally adjusted nonfarm employment increased 200,000
in June and about 2 million from a year ago. More than
half of the latter rise took place since March. Unemploy
ment continued in June at the 4.9 per cent seasonally
adjusted rate reached in May. Total personal income in
June reached a new record seasonally adjusted annual rate
of $383 billion, as wages and salaries expanded further
while other types of income changed relatively little.
Average hourly earnings at factories were 5 per cent above
a year earlier while weekly earnings, owing to longer
hours, were 9 per cent above.
Average wholesale prices of all industrial commodities
have continued to mark time in July, at a level 2-1/2 per
cent above the spring of 1958, although price advances have
continued for some sensitive industrial materials. The
latest consumer price index--for June--showed an abrupt rise
of .4 per cent, as a temporary run-up in retail food prices
gave an extra fillip to the slow uptrend of prices of most
services and many nonfood items in evidence in recent months.
Lower retail food prices are in prospect. In the face of
large current and prospective supplies, wholesale prices of
farm products have declined 2 per cent since mid-May to a
level 7 per cent below a year ago.
Our foreign trade balance appears to be improving
moderately. Exports have been increasing somewhat, and
according to estimates of the National Foreign Trade Council
they may be at an annual rate of $17 billion by the end of
this year, as compared with just under $16 billion in May.
Imports, meanwhile, have been showing signs of stabilizing
at the record annual rate of nearly $16 billion reached in
May. While further increases in imports of manufactured
products may reasonably be expected, imports of some
materials recently at very high levels are likely to fall off.
It is interesting to note that one-sixth of the total increase
in imports over the past year was accounted for by a nearly
threefold increase in steel imports, and this partly reflected
precautionary buying against the present strike.

7/28/59 -9-
Rapid expansion of economic activity is continuing in
Western Europe. Of particular importance is the fact that
capital expenditures are rising, and growing demands abroad
will soon be impinging more heavily on foreign production of
materials.
Mr. Thomas made the following statement with respect to finan
cial developments:
Financial developments in July were dominated by
Treasury financing operations. Perhaps, however, as a
result of the large volume of new funds raised by the
Treasury and the new high level of interest rates that
was reached in the process, the task of Treasury financing
in the next few months may be less formidable than it
appeared a few weeks ago. For the same reason, the
problem of monetary policy may be lightened somewhat.
The $5 billion of new cash raised by the Treasury
through two bill offerings and the refunding of $14 bil
lion of maturing issues were massive operations.
Difficulties and uncertainties connected with the earlier
operations resulted in a sharp rise in rates to the high
level of 4-3/4 per cent for a one-year issue. This rate,
however, attracted funds from widespread sources. As a
consequence the refunding offer at 4-3/4 per cent on both
a 12-1/2 month issue and a 4-year, 9-month issue was a
tremendous success with an unusually low attrition. This
reduces the amount of prospective new financing far below
the amount that was expected to be needed in August, and
maybe in later months as well. The tone of the market has
improved and yields on very short-term issues showed a
pronounced decline that eliminated most or all of the
increase earlier in the month. Rates from six months to
five years are still higher than a month ago. Long-term
rates, which had shown little previous rise, declined only
slightly in the course of July.
New capital issues by both State and local governments
and by corporations have been smaller in July than in any
month since last August, reflecting in large part seasonal
influences. Pressure on the Government securities market
was thus relieved somewhat by this small volume of new
issues and also by investment of the proceeds of previous
issues. Mortgage demands, however, continued heavy and
interest rates on mortgages are approaching the 6 per cent
level.

7/28/59
-10-
Banks aided Treasury financing by substantial increases
thoTinhfor eeldaiirsnu grys bills and in loans on Govern
ments in the first two weeks of July. Partial figures for
city banks indicate marked declines in these items in the
third week of July. City banks continued to reduce their
holdings of Treasury certificates, notes, and bonds. The
increase in loans on Government securities was partially
offset by a decline in other loans to brokers and dealers
in securities, but business loans, loans to financial
institutions, real estate loans, and consumer loans continued
to increase moderately. In the same period of other recent
years, business loans and finance company loans have generally
declined.
The money supply, seasonally adjusted, declined slightly
in June, following little change in May. Partial figures for
the four weeks since June 24 show an increase which may have
been somewhat greater than seasonal. In general, however, it
appears that the money supply growth has leveled off in recent
months. Time deposits declined slightly in July. U. S.
Government deposits at banks increased sharply in the first
two weeks of July, in connection with Treasury financing, but
began to show a decline in the third week. In the past year
city banks have shown a pronounced decline in interbank
deposits--both demand and time and including those due to
domestic, as well as to foreign, banks.
Member banks have needed additional reserves in recent
weeks to cover the increase in required reserves associated
with Treasury financing and also a larger than usual holiday
currency demand, followed by a smaller than usual return
flow. Float declined more than expected in the early weeks
of the month but then increased more than usual. Reserves
were supplied through System open market operations, which
included an increase of about $500 million of outright holdings
since late June and a continuous volume of repurchase contracts
that varied from below $50 million to as much as $175 million
on one day. Member banks as a group have been rather heavy
borrowers both at the Reserve Banks and through Federal funds.
Borrowings at the Reserve Banks have averaged close to $1
billion, and all classes of banks have participated in these
borrowings. There has continued to be some tendency for banks
to build up reserve surpluses through heavy borrowings early
in the statement week and to have excesses toward the end of
the week.
Pressures on credit markets may be somewhat lighter in
August and September than has been the case in recent months.
Treasury financing demands will be relatively small, unless
some later needs are anticipated, and the Treasury's deposit

7/28/59 -11-
balance will generally be declining or at a low level.
The new issues calendar also promises to be light for
awhile. Business borrowing at banks should decline--or
at least increase less than usual-as steel and related
inventories are reduced and as automobile dealers work
down their very large stocks of new cars before new
model introductions. By October, however, assuming
settlement of the steel strike, credit demands may be
expected to increase.
According to the usual seasonal pattern, there should
be little need for additional reserves until the end of
August. Temporary variations might be covered through re
purchase contracts. Early in September reserve needs will
increase somewhat, with a further increase in October,
particularly at the time of Treasury financing. Additional
reserves of about $300 million will presumably be supplied
at some time in the next few months through purchases of
bills by the International Monetary Fund from the proceeds
of gold sold back to the Treasury. The timing of these
operations is uncertain and no allowance has been made for
them in the projections presented. These are likely to
offset the gold outflow of $25 million a week assumed in
the projections for three months, beginning probably in
September. This would reduce the need for System operations.
As for the policy direction in coming weeks, it is
probably reasonable to conclude that the present degree of
restraint is adequate. As Treasury tax and loan accounts are
reduced and funds are shifted to private holders, banks should
be under pressure to make adjustments so that there will not
be an undue increase in the private money supply on the basis
of reserves that were provided temporarily for Treasury
finance. This process will be completed in the next two or
three weeks. The current level of borrowings should provide
all the restraint needed, and there may be some doubt as to
whether an increase in discount rates is needed until there
is evidence of undue credit expansion.
At the request of the Chairman, Mr. Marget made the following
comments with respect to the United States balance of payments and
certain proposed investment transactions of the International Monetary
Fund,
When I first spoke at these meetings on the subject of
our balance of payments, I suggested that what mattered about
our balance-of-payments deficit was not so much the absolute

7/28/59 -12-
level of that deficit as the direction in which it seemed
to be moving. On that basis, I suggested, we could hardly
afford to ignore the fact that in 1958 our over-all
balance-of-payments deficit was at least twice as large as
the average deficit of the years preceding.
It would be very gratifying to be able to report that
our balance-of-payments position looks better now than it
has looked at any time since I made that remark. Unfortunately,
it looks worse. It is true that gold movements give no indica
tion of a deterioration. But the reason for this is that in
the second quarter of this year, for example, only one-third
of the total transfers of gold and dollars to foreign
countries (that is, one-third of our over-all deficit with
those countries) took the form of gold transfers, whereas in
the second quarter of 1958, when our gold outflow reached a
record level, the transfer of gold to foreigners covered
virtually the entire balance-of-payments deficit. The simple
fact is that, as against the $3. billion over-all deficit
that we incurred last year, projections now being made for
our balance-of-payments deficit in 1959 run to around $4.5
billion; and, since our balance-of-payments performance
earlier this year had been such as to lead us to expect a
balance-of-payments deficit of about the same size as last
year, this means that these projections imply, for the second
half of this year, a seasonally adjusted annual rate of $5
billion. Whatever else one can say of projections like these,
they can hardly be said to indicate the kind of change in
direction in our balance-of-payments deficit for which we
had been hoping.
When I first spoke to this Committee on the subject, I
suggested also that of the two possible ways to work toward
a balance in our international accounts--a balancing downward
or a balancing upward--it was only the latter that could be
regarded as the right way of doing it; and that this meant,
basically, that we had to count primarily on an increase in
our exports to effect the balance. One sometimes hears it
said that, desirable as this might be, it fails to do justice
to the fact that, after all, we have had, during the past year,
an accelerated upswing in imports. But the fact is that even
during the second quarter of this year, when imports increased
markedly, total merchandise imports were still no more than
3.2 per cent of GNP. Over the past half dozen years this
ratio has crept up only slightly. Cyclical swings brought
it down from 3.0 per cent in 1953 to 2-3/4 per cent in 1954,
and up to 3.1 per cent in late 1955 and early 1956. By the
first half of 1958 it was down to 2.9 per cent, and now, as
I have said, it is up to 3.2 per cent, or one-tenth of one

7/28/59
-13-
percentage point higher than at the end of 1955. This
means that the growth of imports from 3-1/2 years ago
has exceeded an amount proportionate to growth of GNP by
no more than half a billion dollars, as against an increase
in the balance-of-payments deficit from around $1.5 billion
to the $4.5 billion projected for 1959.
Moreover, we can hardly ignore the salutary effect of
imports on pricing policy and competitive practices generally
in the United States. It is difficult, for example, to dis
sociate the recent price reductions in the field of heavy
electrical equipment (large steam turbine generators) from
the foreign competition that our producers have been
experiencing in that field. For it is on our ability to
compete both abroad and at home that the future of our
balance of payments is going to depend. The turn in our
balance of payments for which we are hoping will undoubtedly
be greatly helped by the revival of economic activity abroad,
which is going ahead, and by the removal of discriminatory
restrictions against U. S. goods, which is also going ahead,
although not as rapidly as some of us would like. But the
"help" these developments will provide will be help in the
form of an opportunity to sell our goods abroad. Whether we
succeed in selling them will depend thereafter on our ability
to compete, and on that alone.
I am very anxious not to seem to be trying to make our
balance-of-payments problem more serious than it really is.
I wish to report, therefore, that we received yesterday
morning the Census Bureau's release on its preliminary estimate
of U. S. exports in June, and that they show, for the first
time in months, a sharp rise in our exports. Unfortunately, we
have no details as to the nature of this increase, either as to
the commodities or the countries involved. It is barely pos
sible (though by no means certain) that this may be the turn
in our exports for which we have been hoping. But even if it
proves to be just that, it is quite clear that we still have a
very long way to go before we get our foreign accounts into
balance; and that whether we succeed in doing so will continue
to depend overwhelmingly on the extent to which we can keep
ourselves competitive.
With respect to the transactions of the International
Monetary Fund, you may recall that in January 1957 the Fund
inquired informally, through the U. S. Executive Director, as
to whether the System would perceive any objections, from the
standpoint of its responsibilities with respect to monetary
policy, to the Fund's selling $200 million of gold and
investing the proceeds thereof in U. S. Government securities.

7/28/59
In a letter dated January 8, 1957, to Frank Southard, U. S.
Executive Director of the Fund, Mr. Riefler, on behalf of
the Open Market Committee, wrote as follows:
"At the conclusion of the discussion of the
question which you raised, the Federal Open Market
Committee agreed that it would express no views to
the International Monetary Fund with respect to
the form in which the Fund chooses to draw upon
its resources. This action was taken to preserve
the utmost freedom to the International Monetary
Fund in meeting its problems and in the hope that
the Fund will inform the Federal Open Market Com
mittee in advance of its operations in the American
market."
Recently the Managing Director of the Fund proposed that
in the light of the increase in the Fund's resources, and what
the Fund's management believed to be required thereby in the
way of reserves, the Fund should sell an additional $300 mil
lion, to be invested also in Government securities. On July
24, 1959, the Executive Board of the Fund voted to carry out
this proposal. It is worth noting that in the discussion in
the Fund Board it was repeatedly made clear that the operation
would be effected in close coordination with System authorities.
The U. S. Executive Director, for example, stated that the
Federal Reserve authorities "would wish, as before, to be kept
informed as to the timing of the investment and as to any change
in investment portfolio, so as to be able to take any necessary
action with respect to the money market or to make any appropri
ate comment to the Fund at such times." Similarly, the
Executive Director for the Netherlands quoted the statement
made by the U. S. Executive Director in 1957 "as to the right
of the Federal Reserve authorities to express a decisive view
on the management of the Fund's investment in the U. S. money
market." He agreed with the Canadian Executive Director
"that at any time Federal Reserve authorities raised any
question the Fund should be prepared to let the investment
run off." Mr. Southard, the U. S. Executive Director, has
made it very clear to the Board's staff that the Fund would
welcome any suggestions the System might offer on any of the
technical aspects of the operation, such as the timing of the
investment operations, and also as to the distribution of the
investment among various maturities of securities up to one
year.
With further reference to the investment program of the Inter
national Monetary Fund, Chairman Martin noted that the New York Bank,

7/28/59 -15
which had raised certain questions regarding the original transactions
in 1957, also had questions with respect to the current program. He
then turned to Mr. Hayes for a further statement on the matter.
Mr. Hayes said that when the earlier transactions were under
taken the Fund was clearly running in the red and that was given as a
reason for making the move. Now, however, the picture had changed.
Although it was argued that the Fund should have larger reserves, the
need was substantially less than it had been. Therefore, in the present
atmosphere of apprehension throughout the world about the gold situation,
questions might be raised by foreign central banks and foreign govern
ments as to whether the contemplated transactions were being undertaken
as much to help the Fund's earnings as to help maintain the gold stock
of the United States. While the possibility of such questions being
raised had been borne in mind constantly by the United States Executive
Director on the Fund and efforts had been made to couch the proposal
purely in terms of Fund benefits, Mr. Hayes said that he continued to
have a somewhat uneasy feeling. He noted that an integral part of the
proposal was a specific agreement on the part of the Treasury to
resell gold to the Fund and that, from the standpoint of the Fund,
the legality of proceeding under such an agreement appeared somewhat
questionable. Mr. Hayes doubted, however, whether this was an area
where it was within the province of the System to intervene too
strenuously.
Chairman Martin stated that the points raised by Mr. Hayes had
been passed along to the Secretary and the Under Secretary of the

7/28/59 -16
Treasury. He understood Mr. Hayes had also talked to the Treasury,
and Mr. Marget had presented the points to the National Advisory
Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems. It was
his belief, the Chairman said, that these matters were primarily the
responsibility of the Treasury and the Fund, and not the System.
Mr. Rouse commented that he and Mr. Thomas had discussed what
advice might be given to Mr. Southard as the best way, from the System
standpoint, for working the Fund transactions in gradually. Mr. Thomas
added that Mr. Southard, when he called to ask for suggestions, indi
cated that the Fund would be willing to buy six-month and one-year
bills as well as three-month bills.
Mr. Hayes then presented the following statement of his views
on the business outlook and credit policy:
Almost all recent data continue to reflect rapid economic
growth. Even with a steel strike of relatively long duration,
the present momentum of economic recovery will almost certainly
continue to carry the economy higher through the balance of
this year and well into 1960, although production and employ
ment statistics will weaken briefly this summer because of the
strike. Housing starts and the rate of inventory accumulation,
while unlikely to show much further growth, are being well
maintained at a high level. I would expect higher consumption,
especially in durables, to provide added stimulus over the
remainder of 1959, and business plant and equipment expendi
tures seem to be in an upward phase which should pick up speed
in late 1959 and 1960.
As Mr. Marget has pointed out, one serious problem
accompanying the expansion in business has been the worsening
balance-of-payments situation. Preliminary figures for the
second quarter show no improvement over the first quarter;
and it now looks as if the total accumulation of gold and
dollar assets by foreign accounts in 1959 will be something
over $4 billion as compared with $3.4 billion last year.

7/28/59 -17-
The price outlook likewise affords no grounds for
complacency. In spite of relatively steady wholesale
prices, the consumer price index, which failed to decline
in the recession, is again moving higher. The increase in
June may be no more than seasonal, but there has been a
rather steady uptrend of prices for services and most
manufactured goods, which for a time was obscured by falling
food prices. Of course, the pattern of negotiations in the
steel and aluminum industries gives ground for hope that the
ultimate wage settlements in these areas will not provide
further upward impetus to prices. Such an outcome would be
of inestimable value in checking inflationary developments
throughout the economy.
While the success of the latest Treasury refunding was
very gratifying, Treasury finance will continue to be a
troublesome problem for the rest of the year. However, as
Mr. Thomas has pointed out, the problem does not seem as
formidable now as it did three weeks ago, before the highly
successful Treasury refunding. We estimate that about $7.5
billion of new money will be required between now and
December, with the first portion of this cash financing
probably to be announced within the next two or three weeks.
Demand for bank credit continues heavy, although the rise
in total loans at all commercial banks in June was less
spectacular than in April and May. The growth in business
loans in June was not as great as in 1956 or 1957, but consumer
and real estate loans continued to increase sharply. Un
fortunately the data on the weekly reporting banks for the first
three weeks of July are hard to interpret because of newly
introduced changes in the method of reporting without comparable
figures for earlier years. However, loan demand apparently has
continued strong. There was further sizable liquidation of
bank-held securities in June, resulting in virtually no change
in the seasonally adjusted money supply. The increase in the
money supply in the first six months was at an annual rate of
only 2 per cent.
Continuation of the present degree of monetary restraint
appears to me to be amply justified by the generally strong
business picture, the strength of credit demands, the need to
keep the Treasury's seasonal deficit financing in the next few
months from swelling the money supply unduly, the continued
threat of unsound wage and price trends, and the failure of
the balance of payments to show any improvements. On the
other hand, we must recognize the major element of uncertainty
injected into the immediate business outlook by the steel
strike. It remains to be seen whether a prolonged strike may

7/28/59 -18
have unexpectedly damaging effects on the economy or whether
it may lead to a rush of ordering and restocking which would
set off an unusually rapid forward spurt in over-all activity.
We must also recognize, I think, the very delicate
situation in which the Treasury and the Federal Reserve System
find themselves in the light of the current discussions con
cerning the ceiling on Treasury bond rates. I would think it
unwise to intensify monetary restraint under these circumstances,
and in fact doubts as to the proper degree of restraint should
generally be resolved on the side of ease. The directive and
the discount rate should be left unchanged.
Looking ahead, we shall be faced with the need for
maintaining an "even keel" policy during some period in August,
possibly commencing before the next meeting, if the Treasury
goes through with its present cash financing plans. Thereafter,
we shall have an opportunity to review the whole discount rate
question in the light of such factors as developments in the
steel industry, the pressure of seasonal credit demands, and
the level and trend of short-term market interest rates, which
have shown such a dramatic, if perhaps temporary, decline in
the last week or two.
Mr. Johns said he found no reason to disagree with the conclusion
of Mr. Hayes, which was also suggested by the statement of Mr. Thomas,
that in the interval until the next meeting of the Committee the Manage
ment of the Account should attempt to maintain about the same degree
of restraint as had existed recently. To go beyond that degree of
restraint seemed to Mr. Johns to be unnecessary at this time. However,
he felt that the System might have work to do this autumn.
Mr. Bopp reported that steel operations in the Philadelphia
region dropped to 15 per cent of capacity in the latest week, and
Pennsylvania State authorities estimated that about 150,000 steel
workers were out of work in the State. They had estimated that about
14,000 coal miners, factory workers, railroad employees, and store
clerks would be laid off in the first week of the strike, with the

7/28/59 -19
figure increasing to 18,000 in the second week. Likewise, it was
estimated that a one-month strike would cost the State $300,000 in
relief funds, while a six-week strike would cost $800,000. Thus far,
however, the strike had had only limited secondary effects in the
district. Generally speaking, the district economy was strong.
As to policy, Mr. Bopp said he would agree essentially with
the views expressed by Mr. Johns. He would favor continuing the
present degree of restraint for the next three weeks but, like Mr.
Johns, he felt that the System might have its work cut out for it
later on in the year.
Mr. Shepardson stated that he did not disagree with the com
ments made thus far. The uncertainty occasioned by the steel strike
seemed to him to call for some pause from the standpoint of considering
any change in the direction of System policy. On the other hand,
general prospects for the months ahead suggested that the System should
maintain a tight rein. In summary, he would agree with what Mr. Hayes
had suggested.
Mr. Robertson said that on the basis of the facts and judgments
expressed by Messrs. Young and Thomas and the reasons set forth by Mr.
Hayes, he would come to a different conclusion. While he would not
seek a real tightening of policy in the next few weeks, he would con
sider it a serious mistake to ease. As he read the information before
the Committee today, the reserve position of banks would tighten if
the System did not take offsetting steps, and in his judgment the

7/28/59 -20
tightening should be offset as little as possible. He would try to
maintain the degree of restrictiveness that the System had been
seeking to achieve and would resolve any doubts on the side of
greater restrictiveness rather than less. The steel strike, if it
should continue, might provide reason for a different course of action
policywise, but he felt that any easing at this time would represent a
major mistake. He would not favor a change in the discount rate or in
the policy directive at this time.
Mr. Mills stated that his reasoning ran parallel to that of
Mr. Hayes and others who had spoken in the same vein. He was impressed
by the comments of Mr. Thomas regarding the advantage the markets had
been able to obtain through the lull in capital financing. Beyond that
factor, he would like to probe back into other areas of activity af
fected by System policy and on the influence of that policy since the
last meeting of the Committee. Mr. Mills then read the following
statement:
The period since the last meeting of the Open Market
Committee has seen material strength develop in the short
term sector of the U. S. Government securities market and
also a trend toward price stability in the long-term
sector. The improved tone in the U. S. Government securi
ties market can be traced to the moderation that has
occurred in the pressure against the reserve positions of
the commercial banks. The fact that the long-term sector
of the market has not revealed as much strength as the
short-term sector possibly is due to suspicion in the
investment fraternity that Federal Reserve System policy
will in due course become more severely restrictive in
character.

7/28/59 -21
There are good grounds for belief that continued modera
tion in the degree of restraint exercised by Federal Reserve
System policy over the expansion of commercial bank credit
will be adequate to contain such inflationary pressure as now
exists. To the extent that this belief should be shared by
th full Open Market Committee, an opportunity is now offered
to capitalize on the improved tone of the U. S. Government
securities market by refraining from allowing any increased
pressure to be brought against commercial bank reserves. The
market reaction to this kind of policy in a real sense should
allow the "bills only" theory to find concrete expression by
way of transmission of a lower yield trend in the short-term
sector on to the long-term sector of the U. S. Government
securities market. The greater stability in the prices of
long-term U. S. Government securities that would ensue might
be expected to rejuvenate confidence in the investment
attractions of longer-term U. S. Government securities and
thereby give added strength to that market. A better tone to
all sectors of the U. S. Government securities market could do
much to dissipate the acrid controversies that have arisen
within and without Congress as to the relationship between
Federal debt management and monetary policy.
The mechanical operation of the kind of policy envisaged
would conceive maintaining a degree of pressure on commercial
bank reserves only sufficient to force a gradual, as contrasted
to a hurried, divestment by the commercial banks of recently
acquired U. S. Government securities as they are confronted
with the necessity of finding room within the structure of
their resources in which to meet the legitimate seasonal bor
rowing demands of their customers. The projections that have
been made of movements in the volume of reserves over the
next several weeks indicate that the commercial banks would be
subjected to undue pressures if they were compelled to meet
their loan demands entirely by the substitution of loans for
U. S. Government securities and, accordingly, it seems to be
necessary for the System to supply the commercial banks with
a marginal volume of new reserves in the weeks to come. The
provision of additional reserves will also be necessitated if
appropriate disciplinary action is taken by the Federal
Reserve Banks against their continuous member bank borrowers,
the retirement of whose discounts, in response to admonition,
would remove the availability of a substantial core of
reserves on which the credit operations of the commercial
banking system have come to depend.

7/28/59 -22
Mr. Leach reported that the major sectors of the Fifth
District economy had registered further gains. Manufacturing man
hours worked in June in both durable and nondurable industries
continued the steady expansion apparent since the first of the year.
Textile mill order backlogs and inventories continued favorable and
the industry was reportedly in its strongest position in many years.
Spokesmen were even optimistic that the industry might be overcoming
its long-standing overcapacity problem. Construction employment rose
last month to a new high for the year, while department store sales
in June equaled May and the indicated July figure was an all-time
high. These gains in activity were not reflected in nonagricultural
employment which, seasonally adjusted, held at approximately the May
level.
Loan demand at district banks continued very heavy, Mr. Leach
said, with the weekly reporting member bank loan increases paralleling
the rapid expansion in 1955. Loans were increasing in spite of the
fact that member banks in the district were under considerable pres
sure because of a combination of factors, including high loan-deposit
ratios, substantial depreciation in Government securities, withdrawals
of deposits for investment in Government securities, and warnings
from the Reserve Bank in regard to continuous borrowing. Some banks
had disposed of Governments at a loss, but daily average borrowings
from the Reserve Bank were still near the six-year record level
reached in June.

7/28/59 -23
Mr. Leach mentioned having been informed by bankers that the
recently available yields on Treasury bills had caused even smaller
corporations and some individuals to cut down their bank balances,
while treasurers of the larger corporations appeared to be sharpening
their pencils even further. Some companies were reported to be
sending out invoices with the request that remittance be made to a
designated post office box number in Richmond or some out-of-district
point, from where the funds were transmitted to purchase Treasury bills
and save one day in the process.
Mr. Leach expressed agreement with what was said in the staff
report about the vigorous expansion that had taken place in the economy
and felt that it called for continuing a tight rein on credit. He
noted that the strengthening in the Government securities market and
the Treasury's improved cash position and nearby outlook apparently
provided an opportunity for greater freedom of System action over the
next two months. The degree of pressure now being exerted on banks
and the uncertainties surrounding the steel strike made him think it
would not be desirable to increase the discount rate at the moment or
to increase the degree of restraint that had been maintained.
Mr. Leedy agreed that this was a period when the System should
engage in watchful waiting. The economic picture, the steel strike,
and the change that had occurred in the Government securities market
all indicated to him that for the moment the System should mark time.
In the next three weeks he would undertake to deviate as little as

7/28/59 -24-
possible from what had been done in the last three weeks, with no
intent to increase further the pressure on reserves.
Mr. Allen commented as follows with respect to developments
in the Seventh District:
I will try to refrain from repeating the content of
the Board's excellent memorandum on business conditions
and will confine myself to comment on the steel and
automobile situations in the Seventh District.
The Chicago area accounts for 18 per cent of the
nation's steel capacity. The mills on strike include all
but 5 per cent of the capacity in our area, the principal
unit still in operation being the Wisconsin Steel Works
of International Harvester. In Detroit the Ford Steel
Plant, which produces 50 per cent of Ford's own needs, is
still in operation. The immediate effect of the strike in
the Chicago area is that 75,000 steel workers are out (the
90,000 quoted in the press includes supervisory and other
persons who remain on the payroll). In addition, about
10,000 transportation workers have been furloughed because
their services are not needed when the steel plants are
idle. Thus, less than 4 per cent of the employment of the
Chicago area is involved so far. In Detroit 15,000 steel
workers are on strike, a little more than 1 per cent of
total employment there.
Speaking generally, it appears that there is about a
two months' supply of steel on hand, although the situation
varies greatly from firm to firm with the large, well
financed concerns in the best supply situation. The auto
industry and its suppliers have enough steel to complete
their 1959 models and to begin the 1960 model run, with
Ford in the best position because of its own steel plant.
Parenthetically, automobile production in July is likely
to be around 525,000 and to drop in August to around 250,000
as many makes complete their 1959 run. The new models
produced in September should total about 260,000, with
enough steel on hand to just about make that figure.
We have endeavored to secure information on the new
compact cars and are told that the suggested retail price
of the Chevrolet Corvair will fall below $2,000 and
probably not more than $1,800 - f.o.b. Detroit.
Accessories such as automatic transmissions will be extra.
Chevrolet expects to lose 20 per cent of the normal market

7/28/59 -25-
for its regular cars to the new small car. They think that
the Corvair, the Ford Falcon, and the Chrysler Valiant will
knock 25 per cent from the peak import figures of perhaps
550,000. If they are right, imports would level off at
around 400,000 annually. Chevrolet will shoot for daily
production of 1,440 Corvairs (against 7,200 regular
Chevrolets) and hopes to reach that figure by December.
They expect to build 330,000 of the Corvairs in the 1960
model year. Ford and Chrysler are shooting at somewhat
lower figures, possibly 175,000 each in the 1960 model year.
Sources in Detroit feel that the steel strike has over
shadowed the possibility of a strike in aluminum, and there
is at the moment much scurrying around for aluminum because
shortages of that metal could have serious implications for
auto manufacturers. The new Chevrolet car will have an
aluminum engine and the Chevrolet plant at Massena, New York,
takes molten aluminum from an adjoining Reynolds Aluminum
Plant, which makes accumulation of aluminum impossible. Ford
has a similar arrangement with Reynolds in Alabama.
Demand for credit in the Seventh District, particularly
by business, remains strong. Loans to business by District
reporting banks (on the new reporting basis) rose $60 million
in the two weeks ended July 15, with increases broadly based
over most classes of borrowers. Chicago banks showed an
additional $20 million gain in the week ended July 22. In
both 1958 and 1959 these loans dropped sharply during July.
Holdings of U. S. Government securities by reporting
banks rose sharply as acquisition of bills and certificates
were offset only in part by sales of longer maturities.
However, Chicago banks reported a net increase of only $60
million in Treasury bills from July 1 to 15, compared with
acquisitions of over $700 million by New York banks. In
the week ended July 22, Chicago bill holdings dropped $41
million. While loans and investments of reporting District
banks expanded, deposits also rose. As a result, additional
pressure on reserve positions of District banks was moderate
and was concentrated mainly outside the Chicago market. The
two largest banks have been net sellers of Federal funds and
have not borrowed at the discount window for several weeks.
Seventh District country banks show relatively the greatest
reserve pressure, with the volume of borrowing by such banks
now higher than it was two years ago at the peak of the 1957
tight money period.
Mr. Allen expressed the view that the current degree of restraint
should not be varied in the next three weeks. At last week's meeting of

7/28/59 -26
the Chicago Bank's directors, he said, some feeling of restiveness
with respect to the discount rate was evident on the part of a
minority of the directors, reflecting the view that the System had
an inflationary situation to deal with and should move as soon as
possible. Mr. Allen said he had no difficulty in persuading the
directors that this would not be an appropriate time to move on the
rate. Neither did he think such action would be appropriate in the
next three weeks, but there was some feeling that the System ought
to be doing something.
Mr. Deming stated that with two important qualifications the
general economic picture in the Ninth District was brightly colored.
Most economic indicators now equalled or exceeded the 1956-57 peaks,
some showing substantial gains over the previous boom figures. The
two important qualifications had to do with iron mining and agriculture.
The moisture situation remained critical over large sections of the
district and July 1 crop estimates indicated substantial declines in
1959 output of most important district crops. Relative to 1958,
winter wheat output was estimated at 37 per cent lower, and spring
wheat at 26 per cent less. Soy bean production would be down about
29 per cent and most other major crops showed up no better, the only
important exception being that corn production was estimated at 31 per
cent higher than in 1958. Pasture growth and hay yields were poor in
the Dakotas, but adequate to plentiful in Montana. Cattle and calves
on feed in Minnesota and South Dakota were, on July 1, 13 and 12 per

7/28/59 -27
cent higher than a year earlier, a somewhat greater gain than
registered in the other major feeding States.
Mr. Deming felt that the steel strike might prove to be
quite serious in its impact on the Ninth District. About 31,000
iron miners and lake crewmen were idle, with weekly pay roll losses
of $3.5 million. While the strike apparently was highly unpopular
in the iron industry, the feeling seemed to be growing that it would
be a long strike and that its effects on the iron ranges would be
severe. By last week, 40 iron ore carriers were anchored in the
Duluth-Superior harbor and the vessel captains had ordered their
crews home. Following settlement of previous strikes, mining and
shipping activity snapped back quickly, but with rising ore imports
there was fear that this would not take place in the Lake Superior
region this year, particularly if the strike was of long duration.
District banking statistics, Mr. Deming said, continued to
show rising loans and declining bank liquidity. At mid-July, city
bank loans were 17 per cent higher than a year earlier and country
bank loans were up 12 per cent. While seasonal deposit gains had
been evident recently, they had not been sufficient to match loan
growth, so that loan-deposit ratios continued to rise. For city
banks, the June ratio was above 56 per cent, higher than at the
1957 peak.
Turning to policy questions, Mr. Deming said it seemed to
him the record of economic expansion argued that Federal Reserve

7/28/59 -28
policy had been reasonably good and that it could hardly be
characterized as unduly restrictive to date. Nevertheless, he
was becoming somewhat concerned about the effects of policy in the
future. The substantial slowdown in money supply growth, the rising
velocity rate, the bank liquidity picture, and, most particularly,
the falling ratio of the money supply to gross national product
suggested to him that any further restrictiveness would be unwise
at this time. As a matter of fact, if agreement could be reached
on what represented normal seasonal requirements, he would like to
see reserves supplied over the next several months to cover those
requirements, plus some allowance for growth, with further restrictive
ness if demands should exceed such requirements. He saw no need to
change the directive at this time or to act on the discount rate in
the immediate future.
Mr. Mangels said that for reasons already expressed by others,
it was his conclusion that there should be no increase in restraint at
this time. He would have in mind maintaining net borrowed reserves
in the range of $300 to $500 million.
With respect to the Twelfth District, Mr. Mangels said the
lack of firmness of some areas of the economy that he had mentioned
at the July 7 meeting still existed. While total employment was up
and unemployment in California had dropped to 4.1 per cent, somewhat
below the national average, unemployment had risen to 6.8 per cent in

7/28/59 -29-
Oregon and 7.3 per cent in Washington, due in some measure to
cutbacks in the production of lumber and metals along with the
fact that industries were not expanding fast enough to absorb
increases in the labor force. Heretofore, defense-related industries
had been a strong spot, but in that category there now appeared to be
a leveling off of employment. In California, agriculture was a little
above average, but in other States it was barely holding its own in
comparison with last year. Farmers' bank debt, other than real estate
debt, was now about 25 per cent above 1958, production credit loans
were in excess of last year, and processors' advances on crops like
wise were higher. As to residential construction, only one State,
Oregon, showed an increase in June in comparison with May.
Mr. Mangels reported that Twelfth District banks were becoming
quite firm with potential borrowers. Two of the larger banks in the
San Francisco area had stopped making veterans' loans on housing and
they no longer were making advance FHA commitments to builders.
Bank loans were up moderately in the past three weeks, along with
demand deposits, but total time deposits were down. Savings deposits
showed an increase, so the decline in total time deposits resulted
primarily from other time deposit money going into short- and
intermediate-term Government securities. Borrowings from the Reserve
Bank were down slightly during the past two weeks; last Thursday,
nine banks were borrowing a total of $61 million. Purchases and

7/28/59 -30
sales of Federal funds in the past week were about in balance, but
this week district banks were expected to be net purchasers to the
extent of perhaps $250 million.
Mr. Mangels felt that the policy directive was satisfactory in
its present form. He expressed the view that consideration of the dis
count rate could be deferred until the next meeting of the Committee.
Mr. Irons reported that the Eleventh District picture was one
of general strength, with high level activity, except for the continued
problem in the petroleum industry. Allowables in Texas were still set
at nine days, the same as in June, product stocks were still high, and
in general the picture in petroleum was about as it had been. On the
other hand, retail trade, employment, construction, and other areas of
activity were at high levels. The banking situation continued about
as it had been over the past three to six weeks, with a very strong
demand for credit. Some bankers had indicated that they were being
more selective in the extension of credit and one or two referred to
this as "putting our houses in order." Borrowings from the Reserve
Bank were running somewhat higher recently, although not too much
above three weeks ago. Some tendency was noted for banks to borrow
on Friday and for borrowings then to taper off heavily during the
first part of the succeeding week. Borrowing was mostly by city
banks, with country banks borrowing only in small numbers and for
seasonal purposes. There continued to be some discussion about with
drawals of certificates of deposit as the result of the Treasury bill

7/28/59 -31
rate, with bankers probably divided about evenly in opinion as to
whether they would like to be able to pay a higher rate on time
deposits. In short, while the banks did not seem to be a great deal
tighter in their reserve positions than they had been, it appeared
that they were being a little more selective and careful in their
lending policies.
Mr. Irons said that he would favor no change in the discount
rate or in the policy directive at this time. If the Account Manage
ment could administer open market operations during the next three
weeks in the same manner as during the past three weeks, he felt that
this would be just about right. He would not actively seek greater
restrictiveness and instead would attempt to maintain about the same
degree of restraint as now being imposed. If there were deviations-
and he hoped that there would not have to be--he would be inclined to
let them fall on the side of less restraint.
Mr. Erickson stated that the First District economy reflected
pretty much the national pattern, except that in some sectors the pace
of activity was not as strong. The latest survey of 80 mutual savings
banks showed that in June deposits were still running better than 6 per
cent ahead of last year. New deposits in June were more than 11 per
cent ahead of last year, but withdrawals were almost 20 per cent
greater. Some reports were heard concerning the withdrawal of deposits
for investment in Treasury issues. While banks indicated that their

7/28/59 -32
position was very tight, borrowings at the Reserve Bank discount
window during the first 24 days of July were at a rate equal to
only half the daily average in June, this being true both in the
case of Boston and other member banks. During this period, borrowings
at the Reserve Bank were less than 2.5 per cent of the System total,
whereas they were running higher than 5 per cent of the total in June.
It might be that the banks were using Federal funds to a greater
extent than in June.
Mr. Erickson said that he saw no reason for changing the
policy directive or the discount rate at this time. With respect to
the operation of the Open Market Account, he found himself in agree
ment with Mr. Hayes.
Mr. Balderston said that in the main he agreed with the policy
suggestions that had been made around the table, but only because he
saw nothing else to do during the interval until the next Committee
meeting. His concern stemmed from the fact that the boom was again
feeding the urge to borrow and to speculate. In time, he supposed
that price pressures from things produced in other countries might
dampen the speculative urge, but he saw too many evidences of a
repetition of the 1955-56 period to leave him confortable[sic].
Mr. Balderston suggested that the System ought not again fall
into the policy adopted in the middle of 1956 when a steel strike was
in progress. As he recalled his own state of mind, it was that he
did not know how long the strike would last, how many people would

7/28/59 -33
be out of work, or what the secondary effects might be, and these
uncertainties inclined him toward a degree of ease that he later
regretted. The strike ended after 35 days, and in 1957 he felt
personally that he had been led into a frame of mind that was in
error. At present consumer debt is mounting, not only for auto
mobiles but for such things as boats and travel, at the same total
rate as in 1955. Furthermore, the new credit card plans have made
consumer borrowing even more easy and inviting. Corporations appear
to be highly liquid, more so than in 1955. Consequently, the System's
own estimate of the leveling off or flattening out of the rate of
increase in the effective money supply might be deceptive unless
account is taken of the fact that the money substitutes available
might have great inflationary potential. To sum up his feelings at
the moment, he would not change the discount rate during the period
between now and the next Committee meeting for the timing seemed
inappropriate. He would continue the existing policy directive and
maintain the degree of restraint that had prevailed prior to last week.
However, he would resolve doubts on the side of tightness now that the
Treasury had obtained its funds.
Chairman Martin commented that in one sense this was an easy
meeting to summarize, but that summarization was more difficult when
one came to questions of degree. While he would like the Account not
to err on the side of either ease or tightness during the next three

7/28/59 -34
weeks, that would be an impossible directive. He felt that Mr.
Balderston had made some good points and that the Committee members
would do well to review what happened during the period of the steel
strike in 1956 and also review the minutes of the Open Market Com
mittee meetings during that period. It would be worthwhile to recall
just what views were expressed at that time and try to fit them into
one's own thinking at present.
The Chairman suggested that there appeared to be a period of
status quo for the moment. It was clear that the majority would not
want to change the policy directive or the discount rate at this time
and the difficult problem was one of degree, involving whether to
resolve doubts on the side of tightness or of ease. At present, there
was less need to resolve doubts on the side of ease in view of the
successful Treasury refunding and to that extent he would hope the
Account Management would not lean unduly on the side of ease.
Essentially, however, the Account Management ought to aim at about
the same degree of restraint as now prevailed. There were going to
be pressures in the market as the result of views on the steel strike
and varying views with respect to Treasury financing. The situation
might be favorable for a time and then people might turn the other
way, depending on their estimates with regard to the business situation.
Chairman Martin then asked Mr. Mills for clarification with
respect to the latter's position on the discount rate and the policy

7/28/59 -35
directive, and Mr. Mills replied that he would not favor a change in
the discount rate or amendment of the directive at this time.
The Chairman then stated that in the absence of objection the
Committee would approve the policy directive and no change in the
discount rate at this time would be contemplated.
Mr. Hayes said he had the distinct feeling that there were more
at this meeting who, if doubts had to be resolved one way or the other
would prefer to err a little on the side of ease rather than of re
straint, and Chairman Martin replied that, although the statement might
be correct, it would probably be a futile process to take a count of
the Committee. That was why he had endeavored to state the consensus
in the framework of a "perfect" operation.
Mr. Shepardson recalled that in his remarks he had expressed
agreement with Mr. Hayes. As he saw it, the Committee favored trying
to hold things about where they were, with a minimum of deviation. If
there had to be any deviation, in his view it should be of a minimum
nature. He gathered that was what a number of others around the table
thought also.
Chairman Martin then stated that in the absence of objection
the matter would be disposed of on that basis.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York until other
wise directed by the Committee:

7/28/59 -36
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges
(including replacement of maturing securities, and
allowing maturities to run off without replacement) for
the System Open Market Account in the open market or,
in the case of maturing securities, by direct exchange
with the Treasury, as may be necessary in the light of
current and prospective economic conditions and the
general credit situation of the country, with a view
(a) to relating the supply of funds in the market to
the needs of commerce and business, (b) to restraining
inflationary credit expansion in order to foster sustain
able economic growth and expanding employment opportunities,
and (c) to the practical administration of the Account;
provided that the aggregate amount of securities held in
the System Account (including commitments for the purchase
or sale of securities for the Account) at the close of this
date, other than special short-term certificates of in
debtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be increased or
decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with
discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue
participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such
amounts of special short-term certificates of indebtedness
as may be necessary from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the total
amount of such certificates held at any one time by the
Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate
$500 million.
Chairman Martin suggested that, in order to avoid the Labor
Day holiday, it would seem advisable to schedule a meeting of the
Committee for September 1 rather than September 8, 1959. If this
should be agreed upon, the question would remain as to whether a
meeting on August 11 or August 18 would be preferred.
After a brief discussion, it was agreed that the next meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, August
18, 1959, at 10:00 a.m., that the next meeting would be tentatively

7/28/59 -37
scheduled for September 1, 1959, and that meetings thereafter would
tentatively be scheduled at three-week intervals.
In this connection, Mr. Johns suggested to the other Presi
dents that a meeting of the Presidents' Conference be scheduled for
September 21-23, 1959, and there was agreement on the part of the
Presidents with this suggestion, with the understanding that an
Open Market Committee meeting would be scheduled for September 22.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary