A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, June 16, 1959, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman (presiding)
Mr. Allen
Mr. Deming
Mr. Erickson
Mr. Johns
Mr. King
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Messrs. Bopp, Bryan, Fulton, and Leedy, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Leach, Irons, and Mangels, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Dallas,
and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Jones, Marget, Mitchell, Parsons,
Roosa, and Willis, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Special Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Associate Adviser, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Keir, Acting Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Hostetler, Daane, Tow, Rice, and Wheeler,
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Cleveland, Richmond, Kansas City, Dallas,
and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Anderson, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia
Mr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Brandt, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta

6/16/59 -2
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on May 26, 1959, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report of open market operations covering the
period March 23 through June 10, 1959, with emphasis on the period
from May 26, 1959, and a supplementary report covering the period
June 11 through June 15, 1959. Copies of both reports have been
placed in the files of the Committee.
Mr. Rouse stated that the principal matter of interest at the
start of the period following the last Committee meeting was the re
action of the Government securities market to the increase in discount
rates. This reaction was about as expected. Prices of notes and bonds
were virtually unchanged, while rates on the longer maturities of
Treasury bills moved up slightly and rates on 91-day bills increased
fairly sharply. The average rate on the 91-day bills in yesterday's
auction was 3.28 per cent--40 basis points above the average rate
three weeks ago, while the average rate on the 182-day bills was 3.49
per cent yesterday--11 basis points over the average of three weeks
ago. The increase in net borrowed reserves to more than $500 million
had little or no impact on the market, perhaps because at the time the
increase occurred the tone of the money market was not as tight as
suggested by those figures. This contrast between the figures on the
one hand and the atmosphere of the money market on the other had been

6/16/59 -3
described in the reports sent by the New York Bank to the Committee.
Basically, the contrast reflected the effects of reserve distribu
tion, with the distribution generally favoring banks in the money
centers; the position of the reserve city banks remained particularly
tight, as indicated by their heavy borrowings over the past two weeks.
It might turn out, because of the Treasury debt retirement on June 22
and the probable need to put reserves into the market soon afterward,
that this contrast will not resolve itself much before the next meet
ing of the Committee. On the other hand, the contrast could be less
sharp if there were large increases in dealer or other loans at the
New York banks. As regards the June 22 debt retirement, about one
half of the $3 billion issue of tax anticipation bills was expected
to be turned in for cash.
The increase of net borrowed reserves from slightly over $300
million in the week ended May 27 to more than $$00 million the follow
ing week was accomplished through the operation of natural market
factors and did not require any action by the Account. Since the
time of the last meeting, in fact, the Account had conducted only
one operation (other than rolling over Treasury bills) and that was
on Friday, June 5, when about $40 million of bills were purchased in
the open market.
By the time of the next meeting the Treasury would have con
ducted another cash financing operation in which around $3.5 to $4.5
billion of new money would have to be raised. It was expected that

6/16/69 [sic]
4,
the Treasury once again would be confined to the short-term area
in this financing, the terms of which, under present plans, were
to be announced late next week.
Reserve projections as of last night indicated that net
borrowed reserves for the week ending tomorrow would be around
$425 million, although whether this figure was realised or not
would depend largely on what happened to the Treasury's balance
yesterday and what would happen to the balance today and tomorrow.
The projections showed an increase of net borrowed reserves to over
$550 million on average for the week ending June 24, largely because
of a drop in float, and a further sharp increase over the following
two weeks, largely as the result of a currency outflow associated
with the July 4 holiday. Assuming that the Committee followed an
even keel policy in the midst of the Treasury financing, a substantial
volume of reserves would have to be supplied between now and the next
meeting.
Mr. Rouse went on to say that the Administration' formal
proposals to Congress concerning the debt limit, the interest rate
ceiling on Governent bonds, and revision of the tax laws to facili
tate anyf uture exchange of low coupon, near-maturity issues far
higher coupon, longer-ter bonds were regarded by the market as
highly constructive. The proposal to revise the tax laws, he said,
was perhaps more important in the long run than the other recommenda
tions submitted to Congress. The proposals as a whole were believed

6/16/59
to represent a courageous and realistic attack by the Treasury on
the difficult problems of debt management that it had faced and
that it might well continue to face over the coming months.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period May 26
through June 15, 1959, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Supplementing the staff memorandum distributed under date of
June 12, 1959, Mr. Thomas made a statement substantially as follows
with respect to recent economic and financial developments:
Economic expansion continues on a broad front to new
high records. Production, sales, income, and employment
show further increases. Unemployment in May was below 5
per cent of the labor force for the first time since the
end of 1957.
The industrial production index rose 2 points further
in May to a figure of 152--20 per cent above last year's
low point and 5 per cent above the peak in 1957. Businesses
are adding to their inventories at an unusually high rate
and have revised upward their plans for new plant and equip
ment expenditures. Construction shows some signs of leveling
off, but at an advanced level.
Output of nondurable goods, which showed little recession,
has long been above previous peaks, and production of durable
goods has risen faster than in 1954-5 5 .
The gross national product for the second quarter will
probably be at least 2 per cent higher than in the first
quarter, and about 7 per cent above the peak reached in the
third quarter of 1957. Adjusted for price changes, the
increase in the past two years has been close to 5 per cent.
Averages of commodity prices have been relatively stable
in recent months, but pressures for price increases may be in
process of generation. Recent price behavior in many re
spects has been similar to that in 1955 before the upswing
began. Variations within the price structure, moreover,
have been of significance.

6/16/59
Private credit demands are expanding in both short-term
and long-term markets. The Federal Government will still
have very large borrowing needs during the next seven months,
even though the fiscal year about to begin will show little
or no deficit. Short-term open market interest rates were
generally adjusted upward following increases in the prime
rate and the discount rate. Yields on medium-term Govern
ment securities rose further to new high levels. Adjust
ments in long-term rates have been more moderate.
Bank loans have been increasing at a faster pace than
usual at this time of the year, but banks have continued to
reduce holdings of Government securities. Total bank credit
expansion, including that of the Federal Reserve Banks, has
been adequate to meet gold outflow and provide for a further
expansion in the money supply. Nonbank investors, particu
larly corporations, have been absorbing the bulk of the
increase in public debt. Other forms of financial savings
have continued to expand, though somewhat more slowly in
the aggregate than they did last year.
Abroad, where recovery from a much milder economic
recession lagged somewhat behind ours, general economic
expansion seems clearly in process. Foreign countries
continue to show a strong balance of payments position
and to accumulate gold and dollar reserves.
It should not be expected or desired that the pace of
general economic expansion will be sustained at the steady
rate that has persisted now for over a year. The economy
is approaching the limits of resource utilization. The
delicate problem that lies ahead is the attainment of a
balance in production, consumption, saving, and investment
that can be sustained.
The rate of business inventory expansion--at around
$8 billion on an annual basis-has already reached a pace
that could not be long sustained. This situation is
temporarily influenced by anticipation of a steel strike
and some adjustment should be imminent. Another question
relates to the sustainability of home building at the
recent pace. Housing starts of over 1.3 million a year
compare with family formation of around 800,000;
demolitions, etc. may amount to 00,000. The projected
growth in business capital expenditures at considerably
below the 1957 level seems to be moderate, but how long
will they remain within the bounds indicated? What, on
the other hand, will be the over-all effect of the eventual
disappearance of the large Federal Government deficit? Can
local governments continue to expand their commitments at

6/16/59
the pace of recent years? How long will the remarkably
steady growth in personal consumption expenditures continue?
To what extent will our economy be affected by the restored
competitive potential of other countries?
An important aspect of these future problems will lie
in the adjustments of costs and prices. This is not altogether
a problem of inflation, i.e., of rising prices resulting from
a more rapid expansion in buying power than in productive
capacity, although the possibility of inflation presents a
threat. The price problem, regardless of inflation, is the
essence of the maintenance of stable economic growth. An
apparent stability in over-all price indexes that reflects
increases in prices of industrial commodities and consumer
goods, counterbalanced by declines in agricultural products
because of increased supplies, may be building up elements
of serious instability. Perhaps there is too much emphasis
now on the problems of inflation and not enough consideration
is being given to other potent elements of instability that
may arise.
Maintenance of balanced growth in the credit area presents
formidable problems. Private credit demands are growing before
the Federal Government has completed the task of financing the
recession-created deficit. State and local government borrowing
remains at an all-time high level. On the basis of the recent
rate of housing starts, mortgage demands will also continue for
a while above any previous volume. Consumer instalment credit
extensions are again at a new high, and net expansion in out
standings in April was only moderately below peaks reached at
times in the past. Corporate capital issues are still below
the levels of the three previous years, but comparable to the
highest of earlier years. Unless business capital expenditures
expand more than is so far indicated, these issues should con
tinue to be moderate. Short-term business loans at banks have
shown contra-seasonal increases in recent weeks, reflecting at
least in part the business inventory expansion. The increase
for the year to date, however, has not been as large as in 1955
and 1956. If the inventory expansion slackens in the third
quarter, borrowing at banks should also moderate.
Much of the large credit demand, including that of the
Federal Government, for the year to date has been met from
nonbank lending sources. Banks, however, have provided a
goodly share with a resulting further growth in the money
supply, added to last year's substantial expansion when actual
cash needs were moderate. In addition, a considerable portion
of the nonbank lending has taken the form of acquisition of
liquid assets. The problem for the future will be to refund
a portion of these liquid holdings into long-term investment,

6/16/59 -8-
or to be prepared to deal with the effect of increased flows
of funds should attempts be made to shift into cash for spend
ing. The question is how much liquidity the public will
continue to hold without an acceleration of turnover.
In a situation of this sort, it would be dangerous and
probably futile to attempt to maintain stability in interest
rates. Fluctuations are to be expected until a better balance
is attained, and should be permitted to occur. The best that
monetary policy operations can be expected to do is to smooth
out recognizable temporary variations of significant magnitude
in the availability of cash. There might be some provision
for long-term growth, but the amounts required for this purpose
are so uncertain, in view of possible adjustments in the use of
cash, and in any event are so small in any relatively short
period of time, that the necessary reserves can be largely
obtained through borrowing at the Reserve Banks. When pressures
seem to be getting too severe, they can be relieved through
open market operations.
One of the striking, though perhaps temporary, developments
in recent weeks has been the moderateness of pressures on the
money and Government securities markets following the raising
of discount rates and the substantial increase in member bank
borrowings. To some extent this may have been due to previous
overselling in the securities markets. It reflected in part,
however, heavy borrowing by member banks early in reserve
periods that gave them surplus reserves later in the period.
This practice was particularly noticeable in Reserve Districts
where discount rates had not yet been increased. These borrow
ings resulted in the creation of reserves that spread through
the market. Operations in Federal funds have been in unusually
large volume during the period.
It remains to be seen whether, with the universally higher
discount rates, the larger volume of borrowing will be reflected
in greater lending restraint by member banks, as well as in
interest rates. If member banks show indications of becoming
complacent--or less unwilling--borrowers and continue to expand
credit, then further action may be needed. On the other hand,
if credit should be contracted and market pressures mount unduly,
then some relief through open market operations would seem
appropriate.
In any event, seasonal and other temporary demands will
require fairly substantial additions to the supply of reserves
in the last week of June and the first week of July (assuming
Treasury financing in the latter week). The usual mid-June
liquidity demands may begin to exert some pressures during the
next week even with little change in net borrowed reserves from

6/16/59
the recent level of around $500 million. Some of the early
July reserve needs will be temporary, and probably could be
met through repurchase contracts. Reserves will need to be
supplied again in August on a more lasting basis.
Mr. Marget made substantially the following statement with re
spect to the balance of payments situation:
I might repeat the two figures which in a sense symbolize
the international economic performance of the United States
last year: an over-all deficit of $3.4 billion, of which $2.3
billion took the form of gold outflow.
As I suggested at the last Committee meeting, the over
all deficit this year seems to be running at about the same
level as last year. The gold situation is different.
Specifically
During the first ten days of June, foreign countries
purchased $43 million of gold from the United States Treasury
and increased their dollar holdings with the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York by $96 million. The monthly rate correspond
ing to these figures was exactly the same as in May, when
foreign countries purchased $128 million of gold and increased
their dollar holdings with the Federal Reserve Bank by $287
million.
As in previous months, foreign gold purchases in the last
six weeks were less than half of those purchases in the cor
responding period of last year. However, as in previous months,
total gold and dollar transfers appeared to be substantially
larger than last year. This development might be hailed as an
indicator of unimpaired foreign confidence in the dollar: while
foreign countries and international institutions had added only
$100 million to their short-term dollar holdings in the first
half of 1958, they increased their holdings by $600 million in
the first four months of 1959 alone, and apparently did so at
an even faster rate in May and June.
From the point of view of the U. S. balance of payments,
however, the development is less welcome. The over-all
balance-of-payments deficit, of which the gold outflow is only
one symptom, has obviously continued at least as large as last
year, in spite of an apparent lower level of outflow of U.S.
private capital. As long as this continues to be so, a
moderation of the rate of gold outflow should not blind us to
the need for action designed to correct the clear disequilib
rium, not only for its own sake but also for what a failure
to do so could mean in the eyes of the foreign monetary
authorities who hold such large "deposits" in the U.S. "bank."

6/16/59 -10-
And in the list of required actions, monetary policy
certainly continues to hold its place.
Mr. Hayes presented a statement of his views on the business
outlook and credit policy substantially as follows:
Business statistics becoming available since our last
meeting have strongly confirmed the impression of vigorous
expansion which was already clear at that time. Of major
importance was the further reduction in total unemployment
in May, bringing the seasonally-adjusted percentage figure
close to a range where it can no longer be regarded as a
serious problem. Consumers continue to spend freely, aided
by substantial gains in outstanding consumer credit. The
sizable growth of manufacturers' and distributors' inven
tories in April was mainly a reflection of steel accumula
lation and a build-up of dealers' stocks of cars. However,
improved consumption in both of these fields has at once
tempered the rise in inventories and has pointed to a need
for higher stocks than would have been required a few months
ago. In fact, in spite of inventory increases, over-all
inventory-to-sales ratios are at the lowest level of the
last several years. With continuing expansion of the
economy, it now appears less and less likely that a steel
strike, if it materializes, will cause anything more than
hesitation in the sectors directly affected, while over-all
business expansion should continue strong at least through
the end of the year.
Economic expansion has reached a point where business
men have begun to raise their goals for capital spending,
although as yet only in a modest degree, and a general
feeling of optimism pervades the business community. The
latest survey of capital spending plans points to a $1.7
billion rise in the annual rate of outlays for this current
quarter, a further $1.1 billion rise in the third quarter,
and a continued uptrend through the balance of the year.
Under these circumstances the price situation is still
surprisingly steady, especially in the area of raw materials,
and sensitive scrap and waste materials. It is encouraging
that the weekly index of wholesale prices moved sideways in
May and the first week of June. More importantly, its non
food component remains unchanged from three weeks ago.
However, we can hardly feel complacent in view of the
possibility of an excessive wage settlement in the steel
industry, and the probable impact of such a settlement in
other industries.

6/16/59 -11
As for bank credit, the rapid growth in loans reported
for April at the last meeting, continued in May. The gain
at all commercial banks exceeded the May increase for any
other recent year, with business loans, real estate loans,
and consumer loans all moving up strongly. In contrast with
loans, bank investments declined sharply in May as nonbank
investors continued to add to their holdings of Governments
as the banks reduced theirs.
The further vigorous advance in econmic activity indi
cates that the move toward greater monetary restraint agreed
upon at the last meeting of the Committee was fully justified
and that a continuation of firm restraint is called for. It
seems to me that the discount rate increase was well received.
Furthermore, the market was not unduly disturbed by the rather
sharp upward movement of net borrowed reserves, recognizing
that the distribution of reserves and other factors prevented
any undue market tightness. In fact, there has been a con
sideraly more stable atmosphere in the bond market, aided by
the announcement of the Treasury's constructive debt proposals,
while the stock market has lost some of its exuberance, at
least for the time being.
I think we should stay about where we are in degree of
restraint, both because of business and credit conditions and
because the Treasury's new cash financing announcement is only
some ten days away. I don't believe we should try to set any
very exact target or range for net borrowed reserves. For
example, a $500 million level of net borrowed reserves may
prove to be too high if, as a result of redistribution of
reserves, pressures in the central money market should in
crease materially. On the other hand, if reserve distribution
continues as it has been in recent weeks, a figure of $500
million or more might easily be maintained. Hence, I think
the Manager should continue to be guided principally by the
feel of the market with a view to maintaining approximately
the present degree of tension.
Obviously, there is no need to consider either the
discount rate or the directive.
Mr. Johns commented that having returned to his desk only re
cently after an extended absence, during most of which he was out of
touch with developments in the nation and the Eighth District, he still
had a great deal of catching up to do. However, he found himself quite

6/16/59 -12
in agreement with the steps taken recently to intensity restraint,
both through open market operations and the change in discount rates.
A period was now being entered during which it is said the System in
all likelihood will feel it appropriate to supply some reserves, and
it would be his suggestion that in the process of furnishing any such
reserves the System guard against any appearance of relaxation of
restraint. This might argue in favor of requiring member banks to
come to the discount window for a considerable portion of their
reserve needs. As Mr. Thomas had suggested, that would raise in
may places--and he felt sure in the Eight District-some questions
of continuous borrowing. In fact, there were already some such
problems, although not of major proportions. Mr. Johns was not sure
whether the borrowing banks were or would be complacent borrowers,
but they were in such condition from the standpoint of their port
folios of Government securities that they might feel obliged to borrow.
At the least, they seemed likely to be somewhat more insistent at the
discount window than they had been at some other times. There would
certainly be problems of administration of the discount window, but
these were not insoluble nor were they problems that the Reserve Bank
would approach with reluctance.
Mr. Bryan said there was nothing in the Sixth District that
differed significantly from the national picture. Most of the recent
district figures, including those on employment and indicators of
retail sales, were up on a month-to-month basis. Only in the case

6/16/59 -13
of construction contracts did a considerable downturn appear, but
construction contracts were still at an extraordinarily high level,
well above 1958 and 1957. The demand for credit was strong and
bank loans had risen sharply in the last month.
Mr. Bryan said that he had no quarrel with Federal Reserve
policy. He did not believe that the System was in a position to
increase restraint materially at the moment, but he felt that it
should guard against relaxation. He agreed with what Mr. Johns had
said regarding the discount window.
Mr. Bopp said that the general upward trend in business
activity continued in the Third District, although at a somewhat
slower pace than for the nation as a whole. Fortunately, the un
employment situation was improving gradually. New claims for un
employment benefits in Pennsylvania were now down to the level of
1957, and continued claims were rapidly falling to that level.
Three major labor market areas were reclassified upward in May:
Reading from D to C, Altoona from F to E, and Atlantic City from
E to D. Business and consumer demand for credit was strong, and
total loans of district reporting banks rose substantially more in
the three weeks ended June 3 than in the same period last year.
Business loans were up moderately in contrast with a decline last
year, real estate loans showed a steady rate of increase, and loans
to consumers had been advancing recently at a somewhat more rapid
rate. Total deposits dropped sharply, reflecting decreases in

6/16/59 -14
private demand, United States Government, and interbank deposits,
with most of the deposit loss occurring at reserve city banks. As
a result, the reserve positions of the large Philadelphia banks,
particularly, fell under pressure. The daily average basic deficiency
of reserve city banks rose in each of the past three reserve weeks
from $100 mllion to $150 million in the latest week-and to meet
the drain on reserves banks liquidated substantial amounts of Govern
ment securities, purchased Federal funds, and borrowed from the Reserve
Bank. Developments were gradually getting to the point where discus
sions with the Philadelphia banks regarding the use of the discount
window would be necessary.
Mr. Bopp said that he thought the Account Management had done
a good job, that the present degree of pressure was about right, and
that it should be continued. In view of the distribution of reserves,
attention should be paid to the reserve position of banks outside
New York City as well as those in New York. He saw no need to change
either the discount rate or the policy directive at this time.
Mr. Fulton reviewed the progress of wage negotiations in the
steel industry and pointed out that they suggested the possibility
of a strike of rather long duration. On the other hand, he felt
that shipments of foreign steel to Great Lakes ports through the St.
Lawrence Seaway might have a sobering effect on the negotiations.
In general, activity in the Fourth District was going forward at a

6/16/59 -15
high rate. In the machine tool industry, there had been a slow
increase in orders, but shipments had not yet increased to any
extent because of the long lead time between receipt of orders
and delivery. Unemployment was continuing to decline and the only
remaining bad spots were in coal regions affected by strike condi
tions. Retail sales had kept up well and construction remained at
a high rate, due largely to residential building. There had been
quite a surge in that sector of the industry, but it was not ex
pected to last long; there had been a considerable degree of over
building in numerous sections.
Mr. Fulton said that reserve city banks in the Fourth District,
like those in the Third, had been losing deposits while country banks
were gaining deposits. Reserve city banks were experiencing a
considerably heavier loan demand, in contrast to country banks, and
borrowings at the discount window in the past week had doubled.
District banks as a whole showed negative free reserves during the
last half of May.
Mr. Fulton expressed the view that current System policy was
both adequate and proper. The only apprehension he had was that a
redistribution of reserves might cause the New York money market to
tighten, possibly precipitously. Also, at some time in the not too
distant future there might be a substantial change in short-term
rates if corporations and others should dispose of their holdings of
short-term securities with any rapidity. He would suggest continuing

6/16/59 -16
the present feel of the market, and he had confidence in the Desk,
which he thought had done an excellent job, being able to maintain
about the degree of pressure that had prevailed in the past few weeks.
Mr. King expressed the view that present policy, as reflected
in the discount rate and open market operations, was both adequate
and desirable. In his opinion, the current degree of restraint was
as much as needed at the present time. He agreed substantially with
what Mr. Hayes had said about maintaining the present feel of the
market and the existing degree of pressure on reserves.
Mr. Shepardson said that, as the reports at this meeting
indicated, the general picture seemed to be one of growth and
expansion. There was uncertainty, of course, about the situation
in the steel industry, and the rate of growth in inventories seemed
to be approaching its limit. Those things might result in some
slackening; however, in view of the present posture of the
Congressional hearings on the Administration proposals with respect
to debt management, it seemed to him highly important that the System
stand in a firm position, without change in either direction, for the
moment. While this would be normal in the face of an impending
Treasury financing, he thought that it was particularly desirable
in view of the debate going on in the Congress. In other words, it
was important that the System show no change of substance in a
position that he thought was highly appropriate at the present time.

6/16/59 -17
Accordingly, he concurred in the comments that had been made with
regard to holding pressure as nearly as possible at the level that
now prevailed, and he would avoid any sign of easing.
Mr. Robertson said he saw merit in the comments that had
been made around the table, but he would put emphasis on the side
of being firm rather than relaxing. Everyone seemed to be in agree
ment that there should be no relaxing, but he would want to firm
that up. As he saw it, the country was in the midst of a boom;
inflation was already here, although camouflaged by the declining
trend in the prices of farm products. Definitely, therefore, there
should be no relaxation, and personally he would like to see net
borrowed reserves moved up to $550 million or $600 million as fast
as possible, and then be held there through the forthcoming Treasury
financing period. He felt that the System should show absolute
confidence in the firmness that had existed for the past few weeks,
and if anything become just a little tougher rather than a little
easier.
Mr. Leach said that business sentiment in the Fifth District
seemed to have achieved a virtual unanimity of optimism. A joint
meeting of the Richmond Board of Directors with the branch boards
last week brought forth reports of a further improved outlook in
many areas and industries. A general absence of reservations con
cerning the future seemed to be the most important feature of today' s

6/16/59 -18
economy, and detailed information on current developments in the
district was at least consistent with this optimism. The cotton
textile industry was reported to be enjoying its best volume since
1951, and mills were in an excellent inventory and order backlog
position. Bituminous coal had shown some further improvement and
still faced a favorable inventory situation. Furniture output was
holding at advanced levels, although sales were reported to be
somewhat spotty for lower-priced lines and in some Eastern industrial
cities.
Mr. Leach went on to say that since the last meeting of the
Committee the System had moved promptly and effectively, in his
judgment, to implement the objective of restraining inflationary
credit expansion, both by the increase in the discount rate and the
achievement of substantially higher levels of net borrowed reserves.
Because of special factors, however, the central money market had not
tightened as much as might have been expected. The disparity in
pressure between New York City and outside might be reduced in the
near future by the disappearance of those special factors, but it
probably would not be eliminated for it reflected also the relatively
stronger demand for loans outside New York. Outside New York, both
borrowings from Reserve Banks and loan-deposit ratios approximated
mid-1957 levels.
In view of the degree of pressure now affecting banks outside
New York and the forthcoming Treasury financing, Mr. Leach felt that

6/16/59 -19
it would be inadvisable at the moment to push toward further
restraint. However, he would continue to maintain about the
current degree of pressure, with no easing.
Mr. Leedy stated that he had nothing of particular signifi
cance to report by way of changes in the Tenth District since the
last Comittee meeting. In parts of the district, the weather had
been somewhat damaging to the wheat crop and the full extent of the
damage was not yet known. As reported earlier, there definitely
would be a smaller wheat crop in the district than last year.
Pastures and ranges continued in good condition.
The Tenth District, Mr. Leedy said, had been experiencing
the same development reported in the Third and Fourth Districts with
respect to interbank balances. Between May 6 and June 3, there was
a total reduction of $43 million in those balances at weekly reporting
member banks and that loss of deposits, together with some other
drains, had kept the reserve positions of reserve city banks under
considerable strain. The Kansas City Bank continued to have more
than its normal proportionate share of member bank borrowings,
averaging around $115 million. Since the excess reserves of Tenth
District Banks, on average, had been in the neighborhood of $50
million, this meant that the district had accounted for about $65
million of the net borrowed reserves for the country as a whole.
It appeared, therefore, that System policy was having a greater
effect in the Tenth District than throughout the country generally.

6/16/59 -20
In view of the Treasury financing to be announced shortly,
it seemed to Mr. Leedy that there was little, if anything, the
System could or should do in the way of changing current policy.
He agreed that reserves should be kept under pressure and subscribed
to the view that there should be no relaxation. If errors were made,
he would prefer that they be on the side of a little more restraint
rather than on the side of less pressure.
Mr. Allen reported that the business picture in the Seventh
District continued to strengthen, with machinery and equipment
producers benefiting from a faster inflow of orders. Makers of
transportation equipment--freight cars, diesel locomotives, trailers,
and trucks--were in an especially strong position. In steel, further
development of foreign competition was noted. Until recently, imports
had been confined largely to the low profit lines such as barbed wire
and reinforcing bars, but steel users in the Chicago area now were
receiving, and were seeking out, offers to sell steel of highly
specialized types. There was some thought that this developing
competition from abroad might militate against a lengthy work
stoppage in the steel industry. In the Chicago area it was thought
also that the St. Lawrence Seaway might have a significant impact
on the domestic steel industry; heretofore, the cost of shipping
foreign steel by rail from the East Coast ports had been high enough
to preclude use of any large amounts in the Midwest.

6/16/59 -21-
In Seventh District farm areas, Mr. Allen said, there was
a strong demand for farm loans, reflecting continued shipments of
feeder cattle into Illinois and Iowa at a high rate. In western
Iowa the volume of new non-real estate farm loans in May was 40 per
cent above a year ago; in eastern Iowa 20 per cent higher. The
high level of feeder cattle prices and the large amount of credit
involved created some concern that unsound loans were being made.
However, barring severe drought and a reduced demand for feeders,
the "experts" believed that prices would hold up fairly well through
the remainder of the year.
With regard to the automobile situation, Mr. Allen mentioned
that the model changeover timing was similar to that of last year.
Chrysler would be down for the full month of August; General Motors
from about mid-August until mid-September; Ford from late August to
late September. The "small cars" of General Motors and Ford were to
be introduced at the same time as their other lines, while Chrysler's
small car would come out later in the year.
Mr. Allen went on to say that since the Committee meeting,
when there was reference to so-called pockets of unemployment, the
Chicago Bank had reviewed the Detroit situation more carefully. The
number of unemployed in Detroit as a percentage of the labor force
reached a high of 19.5 per cent last August, after which steady
improvement brought the figure down to about 9.8 per cent in May.

6/6/59 -22
However, looking at the gains in the number of employed persons over
the same period, it was clear that reemployment took care of only a
part of the drop in jobless and that in the year May 1958 to May 1959
Detroit lost at least 92,000 from its pool of workers. The Michigan
Employment Security Commission did not know where they went, but it
was apparent that the natural laws were working, that many auto
workers became convinced they would not be called back and moved to
other areas where expanding business offered employment.
Mr. Allen said that reporting banks in the Seventh District
had shown strong increases over the past few weeks in both real estate
and business loans. In Chicago, banks reported a rise of $26 million
in business loans in the week ended June 10, compared with $21 million
a year ago and $25 million in the first tax week last March. The
impact of greater monetary restraint on Seventh District banks had not
been particularly heavy as yet. The basic deficit position of Chicago
central reserve city banks had become somewhat higher than the May
average, but the situation was not particularly tight. Moreover,
district reserve city and country banks had not shown the pressure
evident in some other areas and their borrowing had not risen
significantly. In the country bank group there were fewer "problem
borrowers" at present than in the past few months. Over all, the
use of the Reserve Bank's discount window had been less than what
might be regarded as a normal percentage of total member bank borrowings.
Mr. Allen expressed agreement with those who felt that the
System should attempt to continue to maintain the present degree of

6/16/59 -23
restraint during the next three weeks. If errors were made, they
should be on the side of restraint.
Mr. Deming stated that current economic trends in the Ninth
District did not differ significantly from those in the nation. The
upswing had been intensified in May and early June, and two exhibits
served to highlight the strength of the upward movement. Iron ore
shipments in May were the largest for any May since 1953, while
electric power used by manufacturing in the Twin Cities and surround
ing area in May was 14 per cent higher than a year earlier-one of
the largest increases on record. Farm conditions, while less favorable
than last year, had improved with fairly widespread rains.
The district banking picture, Mr. Deming said, showed growing
tightness at both city and country banks, reflecting sizable loan
growth and intensified loan demand. City bank loans were up strongly
from year end-a contraseasonal movement-and country bank loans were
up about twice as much as in comparable periods in 1957 and 1958.
Various measures of bank liquidity, including ratios of loans to
deposits, short-term Governments to deposits, borrowings to required
reserves, and number of banks borrowing, all reflected rather sharp
liquidity decreases in absolute terms and relative to national trends.
Mr. Deming recognized that tightness should be the order of
the day against a background of a strongly expanding economy. He
felt, however, that the degree of tightness in the Ninth District

6/16/59 -24
was far greater than might be inferred from the tone of the central
money market, which, in turn, had been easier than the statistics
would indicate. This caused him to be a bit uneasy about the immediate
future for, should these differentials continue, greater tightness
in the central money market could lead to overly severe pressures
outside. Therefore, he would prefer to approach the next three
weeks with some caution and without any attempt to seek a given
level of net borrowed reserves. Certainly, he would not like to
see any greater tightness than at present.
Mr. Mangels said that general conditions in the Twelfth
District were about the same as reported nationally. A total of
nine labor market areas in the district had been reclassified
recently, with the result that only three large cities and seven
small areas were now in the substantial labor surplus category.
In the Seattle area, Boeing had reduced employment by about 6,500
in the first five months of this year and a continued reduction was
expected for the rest of the year, but airplane plants in southern
California were looking forward to a steady employment situation
for the next few months. Continued employment gains were antici
pated in defense-related manufacturing industries. Lumber mills
were now operating at about 85 per cent of capacity, and the work
week had been reduced to a four-day basis; with some buyer resistance
developing, prices had again been reduced. Labor negotiations in
the lumber industry were settled without a strike, although some

6/16/59 -25
increased benefits were granted. Steel operations were at about
93 per cent of capacity and West Coast steel people believed that
even if there were no strike, the volume of business would continue
high because of consumer demand. There had been some reopening of
additional pot lines in aluminum plants in the Northwest because
consumers were increasing inventories to some extent in anticipation
of a possible strike, and also because of an improvement in basic
demand. Residential and nonresidential construction were holding
steady; factory construction, in the first four months of 1959, was
65 per cent over 1958, and residential construction was 43 per cent
higher. Most residential builders had adequate financing commitments
to enable them to feel that they could continue at the present rate
for the remainder of the year; however, new commitments under
Government guarantee programs were virtually nonexistent. Same
money was available from local and other sources for conventional
loans at rates about the same as had prevailed over the past few
months. While housing sales continued brisk, a sharp increase in
vacancy rates was noted. Agricultural conditions were excellent and
there was increased buying of farm equipment, fertilizer, and in
secticides.
As to banking developments, Mr. Mangels said that during the
three weeks ended June 3, when bank loans for the nation as a whole
increased $166 million, Twelfth District banks showed a $174 million
increase, about $100 million of which was in business loans. Holdings

6/16/59 -26
of Government securities were down $122 million. Bankers reported
a heavy loan demand and indicated that they were becoming quite
selective in considering loan applications. Federal funds purchases
by district banks were about even with sales, while bank debits in
the 37 largest cities showed an increase of 15 per cent over 1958
for the first five months of this year. Despite the increase in
loans, the ratio of loans to deposits for district banks, at 60 per
cent, was below the national average, and also below the ratios pre
vailing in New York City and Chicago. Borrowing at the Reserve Bank
had been rather heavy during the past three weeks, with all but one
or two of the large reserve city banks in and out of the discount
window. Borrowings of $217 million on June 5 were the largest since
November 1955.
Mr. Mangels said he felt that the System was proceeding in the
right direction in its program of restraint; however, like certain
others who had spoken, he wondered whether the System might not be
going a little too far too fast. Net borrowed reserves had averaged
over $500 million for the last two weeks, and long-term interest rates
were at high levels. The Treasury was facing a seasonal deficit which
might aggregate some $7 billion in the second half of the year, so
Treasury operations would draw funds from the market and exert pressure.
Accordingly, he felt that the System should proceed with caution in
order to avoid inflicting too great a burden on the Treasury and
impairing the Treasury's ability to carry on its financing operations.

6/16/59 -27
For the coming period, he would suggest that net borrowed reserves
not be over $500 million, but rather somewhere between $300 and
$500 million. Within that range, it would be in order for the Desk
to proceed on the basis of the feel of the market.
Mr. Irons commented that the economic picture nationally was
one of great strength and that this was also true in the Eleventh
District. Retail trade, industries right down the list, employment,
and unemployment all showed further improvement. The agricultural
picture also had improved generally during the past three weeks,
although rains were posing a problem in some places. On the whole,
the district was moving continually to new highs, with a persistent
building up of strength.
Mr. Irons expressed the view that the growing economic strength,
both nationally and in the Eleventh District, made appropriate the
policy of restraint followed during the past three weeks. He would
like to see the current degree of restraint maintained. In saying
this, he did not have in mind any particular amount of net borrowed
reserves, but rather the rate situation and the feel of the market.
While he would avoid any easing tendency, neither would he advocate
further restraint at this particular time for he considered the
present degree of restraint appropriate in light of the economic
picture, the financial picture, the Treasury situation, and other
factors that entered into the makeup of the market. In general, he

6/16/59 -28
agreed with the statement of Mr. Hayes with regard to policy.
Mr. Erickson stated that business activity in the First
District continued to expand steadily, as exemplified by consumer
spending, the index of manufacturing, and construction. In April,
construction was up 72 per cent over last year; while this was due
primarily to one large contract, contracts were up in all classifica
tions and the increase in residential construction was 67 per cent.
Compared with a year ago, employment was up strongly in manufacturing,
particularly electrical machinery and shoes. For the week ended
May 16, insured unemployment was 50 per cent less than last year.
Mr. Erickson then summarized a study of commercial loans and
total loans, adjusted, at weekly reporting banks from January to June
during the last four years. This showed not only an increase as
compared with last year, but also an increase about twice as great
as in 1957. In comparison with 1956, however, the increase was only
about half as large in both classifications. He then turned to a
study of various measures of First District bank liquidity going back
to the year 1954, which included not only the Boston banks and the
so-called "money market" banks in the district but also weekly
reporting country banks and other country banks. This study showed
that the total liquid assets ratio for Boston banks for the second
quarter of the respective years was 44.2 in 1954, 38.3 in 1955, 34.3
in 1956, 31.1 in 1957, 39.1 in 1958, and 28.0 on June 10, 1959.
Loan-deposit ratios for those banks for corresponding dates were

6/16/59 -29
52.8, 56.2, 63.3, 65.8, 59.2, and 66.9. Only in the third quarter
of 1957 was the loan-deposit ratio for the Boston banks higher than
on June 10 of this year. For weekly reporting country banks, the
trend was apparent, with the liquid assets ratio having fallen to
31.4 on June 10, 1959, which was the lowest ratio for these banks
going back to 1954. Their loan-deposit ratio, 58.1,was the highest
in the series for those banks.
Mr. Erickson expressed the view that the Desk had done a good
job in the past few weeks. He would leave it to the Manager of the
Account to continue to maintain the present degree of restraint on the
basis of the feel of the market.
Mr. Szymczak said that with the reported expansion of the
economy, he did not think anyone could say that Federal Reserve policy
should be eased. In view of the forthcoming Treasury financing, it
also appeared that the System would have to continue to follow the
policy that it had been pursuing. In the light of current Congressional
debate, he felt that the System was likely to be placed in the position
of being held responsible for high interest rates, when actually those
rates reflected the situation existing in the economy, including the
demand for money. The System, he thought, must be able to explain
how interest rates operate because it seemed likely to be blamed for
both high interest rates and for inflation. It must explain that
fiscal policy, administered prices, and labor policies were essential

6/16/59 -30
factors when considering the over-all financial stability of the
economy. While System operations could not be precise as to the
amount of reserves available to the banks, they must not provide
reserves to such an extent as to lead to inflation. Keeping that
in mind, the System must be prepared to answer questions when called
upon for explanation of its policy.
Mr. Hayes, in summarizing the meeting, said that he did not
perceive basic differences in the views that had been presented this
morning. In the light of the optimistic business outlook and existing
inflationary pressures, there was a general feeling that the prevailing
policy of restraint should be continued. At the same time, attention
had been called to a few uncertainties that could not be overlooked.
There seemed to be almost nationwide pressure for bank loans, with the
situation quite striking in some districts. As a result of this
pressure and in view of Federal Reserve policy, the banks were feeling
substantial restraint and use of the discount window was increasing.
The extent of this restraint appeared to vary quite a bit among
districts and to be a good deal less in the money centers than in
some other areas. Thus, while it seemed clearly necessary to maintain
pressure on reserves, a watchful eye should be kept on the extent of
this pressure in some of the districts to make sure that our policies
were not having unduly restrictive effects in those districts, even
though the New York situation might seem quite satisfactory. Further
more, one person had expressed apprehension that the pressure might

6/16/59 -31
become severe in the money centers if there should be a change in
the distribution of reserves.
The consensus as to the appropriate degree of restraint, Mr.
Hayes said, seemed to be that the System should stay about where it
was in terms of the feel of the market. This was regarded as
justified on the basis of general business and credit conditions,
the imminence of the forthcoming Treasury financing, and the fact
that the current situation in the Congress behooved the System to be
sure of its ground. Thus, the System should give no evidence of
easing and instead should follow a firm and steadfast course.
Mr. Hayes noted that a number of those who had spoken ex
pressed the hope that the Desk would strive to avoid errors on the
side of ease and that any errors would be on the side of tightness.
However, there were also a number who urged caution in appraising
the effects of actions on the side of excessive tightness. The con
sensus appeared to favor staying as close as possible to the existing
degree of pressure.
Mr. Hayes also called attention to the fact that there had
been very little mention of specific figures of net borrowed reserves.
While one or two of those around the table mentioned amounts, the
majority appeared inclined to de-emphasize actual figures and give
the Desk considerable discretion according to the feel of the market
and the distribution of reserves.

6/16/59 -32-
Continuing, Mr. Hayes commented that it had been pointed
out that the pressure on the discount window was becoming greater
in several districts. This was giving or might give rise to problems
of continuous borrowing or complacent borrowers. It seemed incumbent
upon the Reserve Banks to consider that kind of problem and try to
meet it if and as it developed.
Mr. Hayes noted that there seemed clearly no desire to change
the policy directive at this time or to change the discount rate. He
then inquired whether he had expressed correctly the consensus of the
meeting, and there were no comments to the contrary.
Mr. Hayes next stated that it would be in order to confirm the
Committee's general directive to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
adding that he understood it to be the wish of the members of the
Committee to renew the directive in its present form. Again, there
was no indication of disagreement.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, it was voted unanimously
to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York until otherwise directed by
the Committee.
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges
(including replacement of maturing securities, and
allowing maturities to run off without replacement) for
the System Open Market Account in the open market or,
in the case of maturing securities, by direct exchange
with the Treasury, as may be necessary in the light of
current and prospective economic conditions and the
general credit situation of the country, with a view (a)
to relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs

6/16/59 -33-
of commerce and business, (b) to restraining inflationary
credit expansion in order to foster sustainable economic
growth and expanding employment opportunities, and (c) to
the practical administration of the Account; provided that
the aggregate amount of securities held in the System
Account (including commitments for the purchase or sale
of securities for the Account) at the close of this date,
other than special short-term certificates of indebtedness
purchased from time to time for the temporary accomodation
of the Treasury, shall not be increased or decreased by
more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with
discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue
participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) such
amounts of special short-term certificates of indebted
ness as may be necessary from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided that
the total amount of such certificates held at any one
time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in
the aggregate $500 million.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, July 7, 1959, at 10:00 a.m.
Mr. Hayes reported receipt, through Mr. Shay, Legislative
Counsel of the Board of Governors, of an informal request from the
staff of the Congressional Joint Economic Committee that certain
representatives of the New York Bank, including the Manager of the
System Account, present an explanation of technical matters involved
in the operation of the Desk at a hearing to be held by the Joint
Economic Committee in New York City on August 5, 1959. It was
understood that the hearing would be connected with the Committee's
study of Employment, Growth, and Price Levels and that this part
would be devoted to monetary, fiscal, and debt operations. Mr. Hayes

6/16/59 -34
said that Chairman Martin had expressed the view that it would be
appropriate and desirable to comply with the request. Mr. Haye
added that he would like to have the approval of the Committee for
the Manager of the System Account and his associates to cooperate
with the Joint Committee.
After discussion, it was the view of the Committee that an
indication of willingness to comply fully with the request would be
in order, provided a formal request from the Chairman of the Joint
Economic Committee was received.
Secretary's Note: At this point, Mr.
Hayes stated that, acting in his capacity
as Chairman of the Committee on Emergency
Planning of the Conference of Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks, he had asked
Mr. Harris, the Board's Coordinator of
Defense Planning, to provide the Presidents
with as much written information as possible
regarding what would be expected of the
Federal Reserve Banks in connection with
Operation Alert 1959. This contemplated
that questions might then be brought up by
the Presidents when they were in Washington
at the time of the July 7 meeting of the
Open Market Committee.
The meeting then adjourned.
Assistant Secretary