A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, May 26, 1959, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
MMrr.. H ayes, Vice Chairman
Allen
Mr. Balderston
Mr. D eming
Mr. Erickson
Mr. King
Mr.
Mr. R obertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Bryan, Alternate for Mr. Johns
Messrs. Bopp, Fulton, and Leedy, Alternate Mem
bers of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Leach, Irons, and Mangels, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Dallas,
and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Jones, Marget, Mitchell, Parsons,
Roosa, and Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Special Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Associate Adviser, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Keir, Acting Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Freutel, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis

5/26/59 -2
Messrs. Ellis, Hostetler, Daane, Tow, Rice,
and Wheeler, Vice Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston,
Cleveland, Richmond, Kansas City, Dallas,
and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Anderson, Economic Adviser, Federal Re
serve Bank of Philadelphia
Mr. Brandt, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta
It having been noted that Mr. Freutel, First Vice President
of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, was in the Board's building
today, he was invited to attend this meeting in the absence of Mr.
Johns.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of
the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee held on May 5, 1959, were
approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report of open market operations covering the
period May 5 through May 20, 1959, and a supplementary report cover
ing the period May 21 through May 25, 1959. Copies of both reports
have been placed in the files of the Committee.
Mr. Rouse stated that the money market was steadily tight
during the first part of the period since the last meeting, then
turned easier, and over the past few days tightened again. The
reasons for the temporary easing, which essentially reflected excess

5/26/59 -3
borrowing around May 15, were spelled out in reports sent to the
Committee last week. The Account purchased Treasury bills and
made some repurchase agreements in the early part of the period
in an effort to temper the tightness in the market during the
period of Treasury financing, but the direction of operations was
subsequently reversed and bills were sold to foreign accounts,
while all outstanding repurchase agreements were allowed to run
off without replacement. The System Account remained on the side
lines during the past few days, and the market tightened itself.
Over the period as a whole, outright holdings of bills were up by
$181 million, while repurchase agreements were down by $163 million.
Average net borrowed reserves had been running between $200 and
$300 million, and reserve projections as of last night indicated
an average of somewhat over $300 million net borrowed reserves for
the week ending tomorrow.
Mr. Rouse went on to say that the Treasury's auction of
April bills turned out to be quite successful. The volume of bank
tenders was fairly large, partly because the banks needed the tax
and loan account deposits in order to avoid a depletion of such
deposits on May 15. Also, some banks regarded the April bill as a
good piece of paper to hold. Generally, the issue had performed
well and banks wishing to sell the bills had been able to make good
progress in distributing them. The bidding on the December bill,

5/26/59 -4
however, was unexpectedly light and a large part of the issue ended
up in the hands of dealers and banks which had not expected to
acquire so many bills at the rates they tendered. Dealer awards
were over $850 million, but no serious problems were created since
the dealers were confident that they could carry the bills without
loss until such time as they could be distributed, and in fact a
substantial distribution of the issue had now been made. The
attrition on the 1-1/4 per cent certificates that matured on May 15
was somewhat high at 30 per cent but was no higher than the market
had come to expect. The small new 4 per cent certificate issue had
performed well in the market and closed yesterday at 100-1/8 bid.
Mr. Rouse also stated that short-term bills had remained in
short supply; a fairly well sustained storm cellar demand had kept
rates on these issues at presently low levels. In the intermediate
and long-term sectors of the Government securities market, prices
had tended to move slightly higher in the past few days on light
volume. While the market generally anticipated an early increase
of 1/2 per cent in the discount rate, it was felt by many that
intermediate and long-term rates had already discounted an increase
of that size and that such rates might hold at around present levels,
over the short run at least. The market apparently felt, however,
that bill rates were too low in terms of the underlying realities,
and such rates were expected to move upward with an increase in
the discount rate.

5/26/59 -5
Mr. Rouse said that the short-term market had absorbed a
large volume of Federal Agency securities during the past three
weeks. Total agency financing in this period amounted to $525
million, of which $300 million represented new money. All of this
financing was at nine months or less, and rates ranged between
4-1/4 per cent for six months and 4-1/2 per cent for nine months.
Mr. Rouse observed that over the past few weeks an increase
had occurred in the amount of six-month Treasury bills tendered for
by foreign accounts. In yesterday's auction foreign accounts
tendered through the New York Bank for about $100 million of the
six-month bills--almost one-quarter of the issue. They were
acquiring the six-month bills with the proceeds of sales and redemptions
of shorter bills and by switches out of time deposits.
Mr. Rouse also commented that this would be an active week
in the capital markets. Outstanding in size and importance were
the $104.8 million issue of New Housing Authority tax-exempt bonds
and the $75 million issue of Consolidated Edison mortgage bonds being
offered today. There would be offered tomorrow an $80 million mort
gage bond issue of National Steel and a $30 million bond issue of
the City of Chicago. Yesterday, a 5 per cent reoffering yield was
placed on a double-A rated utility issue for the first time since
August 1957. The issue, which initially moved slowly, had no
special provision protecting the holder from an early call.

5/26/59
Mr. Rouse called attention to the fact that the appendix
to the weekly report to the Committee had grown very substantially
and usually ran between 20 and 25 pages in length. It was proposed
to make some deletions and consolidations in the appendix, and either
this week or next an abbreviated version would be sent along with
the regular appendix material. He would like to be informed if it
was believed that anything useful had been left out of the abbrevi
ated version.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period May 5
through May 25, 1959, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Young made a statement on the economic situation, supple
mentary to the staff memorandum distributed under date of May 22,
1959, substantially as follows:
Domestically, productive activity has been spurting
ahead and the economic climate has become more palpably
inflationary. In virtually every sector, expectations
are optimistic; indeed, about the most pessimistic busi
ness comment one encounters is that "it may not be as
good as the figures show" or "we now expect the figures
to level off some." The lag in United States exports
persists, and participants in international financial
transactions report a deepening concern in foreign
circles about United States balance of payments trends.
In industrial countries abroad, the onset of general
economic recovery asn ow better than well-confirmed and
there is every reason to expect such recovery soon to
burgeon into a full-fledged expansion movement, as it
has already in Canada and Japan. The European economic
climate appears less inflationary than our own, but this
may reflect merely the early stage of recovery there.

5/26/59
Whatever the actuality, it is clear that reattainment of
European industrial expansion will do much to relieve the
adverse balance of payments pressures that materials
supplying areas have been suffering. One may also hope
that renewed European expansion will help a great deal in
alleviating the United States international payments
deficit which continues to rival that of last year.
As to specifics:
April expansion in industrial production, which carried
the Board's index up two points for the third consecutive
month, reflected mainly gains in output in durable goods
industries, producer as well as consumer lines. The weekly
output data so far available for May indicate another brisk
advance in total industrial output, possibly again up two
index points.
New orders at manufacturers, which showed a sharp
step-up in March, took another sizeable upward step in
April. Forward commitments for machinery purchase have
been a conspicuous feature of new order developments.
Since December, unfilled orders at durable manufacturers
have been rising, in recent months most impressively.
For several months now, personal income has been climb
ing at a rate of better than $3 billion a month, principally
because of higher wage and salary payments. This pace of
increase is rivalling, if not beating, that for the com
parable months of the 1955-57 period of inflationary
expansion. For seven months now, total unemployment payments
have shown decline.
Reflecting rapidly rising personal income, April retail
sales exceeded slightly the very large March volume and were
some 12 per cent higher than the cycle low of March 1958,
An advance estimate of department store sales for May puts
sales almost 4 per cent higher than April, a degree of rise
that may be partly statistical illusion. However, sales of
new autos in early May were running 9 per cent higher than
in early April, nearly 50 per cent higher than a year ago,
and 15 per cent higher than in early May 1957. In used
car markets, sales continue very strong and prices, at a
level some 15 per cent higher than a year ago, appear firm.
Since late 1958, a robust expansion in consumer
instalment credit has supported rising sales of autos and
high level sales of household durables. The first quarter
increase in auto credit was the largest since the first
quarter of 1956, and the credit rise for diversified
consumer durables was the largest since the last quarter

5/26/59
of 1956. Liberalization of credit terms in late model
used car financing was apparently a factor of some
importance in the rise in auto credit. Collections on
instalment paper have shown steady improvement since
last fall and now compare with prerecession standards.
Strength of housing markets was attested by the April
starts figure approximating 1.4 million units, seasonally
adjusted. Starts for the first four months of 1959 were
the highest on record. Mortgage markets, as indexed by
mortgage yields and by FNMA activities, give further signs
of hardening. This is scarcely surprising if the staff's
estimate of first quarter increase for real estate mortgage
debt is correct; the rise was nearly $4.2 billion, a
handsome first quarter performance by postwar criteria.
The new Dodge seasonally adjusted monthly index of the
dollar value of total construction contracts has just been
published. It shows an 8 per cent increase in contract
awards during April to the highest level on record, 31 per
cent above a year earlier. Covering 48 States, the index
includes residential and nonresidential building as well
as heavy engineering. It is based on a 1947-49 monthly
average equal to 100, and it is available solely for total
awards and not their components. Relative to the 1947-49
base, the April index was 299.
With markets for products exhibiting perceptible vigor,
all-round strength should and does characterize the labor
markets. Unemployment compensation claims continue to
decline. At mid-May, the Department of Labor reclassified
major labor markets by unemployment status as compared with
mid-March. All 149 markets experienced some reduction in
unemployment rates and the number with rates of 6 per cent
or more was lowered from 74 to 60. Michigan markets con
tinue to fall in the high rate classification; other markets
in this category have either coal or durable goods as a
production base.
Accepting a 40-hour week as a standard, manufacturing
industry in April attained an average overtime basis of .3
of an hour. In most metal-working and some nondurable
industries, average overtime was one hour. Reflecting a
lengthened workweek and a further increase in hourly earnings,
average weekly earnings of factory workers rose again in
April by 60 cents to $89.87.
In agriculture, crop prospects appear less favorable
than last year. But, reflecting last year's prosperity,

5/26/59 -9-
farmers have been adding substantially to their debts,
or at least did in the first quarter. Also, they have
continued to bid up land values. Farm land values as of
March 1 were up on average some 3 per cent from November 1
of last year and up 8 per cent from a year ago.
Industrial prices rose further in April and additional
advance has occurred in May. At mid-May, the level was up
2.5 per cent from a year ago and 2 per cent above the pre
recession high reached late in 1957. Sensitive materials
prices have advanced more and this has provided a base for
lifting the prices of finished products made from these
materials. With average prices of farm products showing
little change, recent price advances in the industrial
sector have been raising the average of all prices.
Consumer prices rose slightly in April. Food prices
changed little but prices of other goods, services, and
some taxes increased. With these price trends persisting
in consumer markets, a further modest rise in the May index
is projected.
At an earlier meeting this spring, we observed that,
from a cyclical standpoint, upward price pressures typically
gain powerful force only after economic activity has breached
the highs of the prerecession period. Such a breaching,
accomplished with obvious ebullience, is now a matter of
history. A feature of the breaching phase has been an ab
normally high rate of bank credit and monetary expansion,
regarding which Mr. Thomas will comment on in detail. One
may well wonder whether, despite System plans and hopes to
avoid such a contingency, financial forces fostering another
inflationary whirl have not gotten well ahead of System policy.
The accumulating body of factual evidence to this effect is
quite impressive.
Mr. Thomas made a statement on financial developments substanti
ally as follows:
In financial markets, the month of May has been
characterized by unseasonably heavy credit demands and
further increases in interest rates to new high levels.
Nearly all interest rates rose except yields on 90-day
Treasury bills, which continued to move within the lower
part of the 2-3/ to 3 per cent range that has generally
prevailed since late February. The six-month bills,
following a little drop in late April, rose back to around
the 3-1/3 per cent level. Yields on longer bills have

5/26/59 -10-
been as high as 4 per cent for the new April issue.
The spread of one per cent or more between the yield
on three-month bills and that on issues maturing in around
one year is the largest on record. It unquestionably
reflects the desire on the part of investors for maintenance
of liquid positions in view of the possibility of further
interest rate increases. At the same time, the rate is
attractive enough to draw in funds that might otherwise be
held as bank balances.
Announcement of the increase in the lending rate on
prime customers' loans by large city banks from 4 to 4-1/2
per cent on May 15 was followed by only a mild reaction in
the Government securities markets. Long-term rates con
tinued to rise somewhat, but short-term rates have steadied.
The firmness in short rates probably reflected some temporary
ease in bank reserve positions as well as investment of the
proceeds of the redemption of maturing Treasury issues.
Yields on long-term Treasury bonds and on both new and
seasoned corporate issues rose last week to new high records.
Offerings of new issues of securities were in moderate
volume last week, but are scheduled to be larger this week.
Although the higher yields have met better reception than
the lower yields on last month's offerings, there have,
nevertheless, been some deferments of new offerings because
of market conditions. The calendar for future issues by
State and local governments continues large. Prospects for
corporate borrowing are uncertain, particularly in view of
the large cash flow being derived from depreciation
allowances, retained earnings, and accrued tax liabilities.
For the year to date new issues by corporations and by State
and local governments have been in somewhat smaller volume
than they were last year, but aggregate demands on credit
markets have continued large, reflecting needs of the
Federal Government and increased mortgage borrowing, as
well as a larger volume of bank loans to businesses and
consumers.
Stock prices have again risen to peak levels. The rise
in prices has kept pace with increases in dividends, so
current yields continue low, compared with their past record
and with bond yields. Stock market credit has increased
somewhat further and customers have drawn upon their credit
balances at brokers.
The Treasury continues to show a relatively favorable
cash position, notwithstanding the large redemption of
maturing issues in mid-May. It appears likely that no
additional borrowing will be needed until early July, with
announcement of terms near the end of June. About $3.5

5/26/59 -11-
billion of cash will be needed then, but the exact amount
will depend upon the extent to which appropriated, but yet
unexpended, funds are used before the end of the fiscal year.
Additional financing operations for refunding and for new
cash will be in process from late July until around mid
August with no further needs until early October. Borrowing
needs for both cash and refunding will be large in the fourth
quarter and will probably require frequent offerings in all
months and also possibly in January. On balance, net cash
borrowings in the next 8 months, though still very large,
will be nearly $4 billion less than in the same months last
year and they will be followed by substantial debt retirement
instead of continued borrowing.
Following an exceptionally large increase in bank loans
at all commercial banks in April, city banks showed a further
expansion in loans during the first three weeks of May. In
the same weeks of the two previous years loans at city banks
declined, and increases in 1955 and 1956 were not as large as
this year's additions. The increase has been particularly
large in business loans, but real estate and consumer loans
have also continued to show marked increases, and loans on
securities have stayed up.
City banks have continued to liquidate holdings of
Government securities on balance, notwithstanding acquisition
of new issues at times of financing operations. Substantial
reductions have occurred in holdings of bonds, notes, and
certificates. Banks have fewer long-term issues and relatively
more medium and short-term issues than they had a year ago.
At city banks total holdings of Government securities are less
than they were a year ago.
The ratio of total loans to total loans and investments
of banks, which declined moderately last year, has risen again
to close to the high level reached in 1957. In view of the
relatively high loan ratios at banks, some question may be
raised as to their ability to meet a substantial further ex
pansion in loans without impairing their liquidity positions.
Because of declines in prices of securities, banks may be
somewhat more inclined to meet additional loan demands through
borrowing rather than through further liquidation of securi
ties.
Private deposits at city banks declined somewhat more in
the first three weeks of May than in the same weeks of other
recent years. It would appear that on a seasonally adjusted
basis, the demand deposit component of the money supply may
have shown little if any further growth in the first three

5/26/59 -12-
weeks of May, following marked increases in the three preced
ing months. U. S. Government deposits have increased more
than usual, and some shift from Treasury deposits to private
deposits may occur in the next few weeks. Currency in circu
lation appears to have shown a greater than seasonalincrease
in May to date, following a less than seasonal decline in
April. It is evident that the money supply in the aggregate
has shown a marked increase in recent months, after adjust
ment for seasonal variations. The growth has been at an
annual rate of 4 per cent or more.
In addition to the increase in the volume of money, the
turnover of bank deposits has also increased in recent months.
In other words, economic activity has expanded somewhat faster
than the volume of money. There is evidence that much of the
cyclical variation in economic activity may be reflected in
turnover of money rather than in changes in the volume of
money.
It may be said that the reserve base for the expanded
money supply--or the less than seasonal decline--has been
obtained from an increase in member bank borrowing. Although
the System has increased its open market portfolio in recent
months, contrary to usual seasonal tendencies, the additions
have been only sufficient to cover unusual drains on reserves
from other factors. These include particularly the contra
seasonal increase in currency in circulation and in recent
weeks the resumed outflow of gold. Since the end of January,
required reserves have declined by some $300 million less than
the seasonal projection, reflecting a less than seasonal de
cline of about $1.5 billion in demand deposits adjusted and
an increase of $700 million in Treasury deposits. In the same
period, net borrowed reserves have also increased by about
$300 million. Somewhat similar results, with different figures,
may be shown for the past two months.
Whether by happenstance or by design, it is appropriate,
in view of the strength of the economic advance and of credit
demands, that banks should find it necessary to borrow the
reserves needed to cover deposits in excess of normal seasonal
amounts. It is nevertheless true that if banks have been
willing to borrow for this purpose, they may be willing to
borrow more to meet further credit demands. It is evident
that the added restraint of a discount rate increase is
appropriate, particularly in view of the recent further rise
in market interest rates.
Question may also be raised as to whether borrowings
might be permitted to increase further, even to cover custom
ary seasonal needs, in order to strengthen the restraint on
banks. Projections indicate that seasonal needs, together

5/26/59 -13
with a continued gold outflow projected at $25 million a
week, may bring net borrowed reserves close to $500 mil
lion during the next month, with a rise to around $800
in late June and early July. Perhaps if the discount
rates are raised, net borrowed reserves of around $300
million would be appropriate, if monetary expansion keeps
within the seasonal pattern. If, however, banks increase
their loans and investments sufficiently to produce a
greater than seasonal growth in the money supply, then
the additional reserves might be supplied through the
discount window rather than by open market operations.
Mr. Balderston referred to comments by Mr. Thomas concerning
the money supply and inquired as to the recent trend in time deposits.
In response, Mr. Thomas stated that in the first four months of this
year time deposits at commercial banks increased $1.3 billion com
pared with an increase of $3.8 billion in the same period last year.
For the twelve months ending April 30, 1959, the increase was $4.6
billion compared with an increase of $6.9 billion during the twelve
months ending April 30, 1958. Thus the rate of increase had slowed
down but was still not insignificant. In the first three weeks of
May, however, there was practically no increase in time deposits.
At the request of the Chairman, Mr. Marget made substantially
the following statement with respect to the balance of payments
situation:
The simple facts with respect to our balance of
payments are these:
Last year we ran an over-all deficit of $3.4 bil
lion, of which $2.3 billion took the form of gold
outflow.
Thus far this year we have been running an over
all balance-of-payments deficit at about the same rate.
This year a smaller proportion of it has taken the form

5/26/59 -14
of gold outflow. But even if it were safe to count on
this continuing to be so, that would only mask the fact
that we were running a very sizeable deficit. It would
not mean that we had brought our international accounts
into balance.
The outflow of gold and dollars as a result of an
over-all balance-of-payments deficit of the United States
is in itself nothing new. In the four years 1953 to 1956,
for example, we ran over-all deficits which resulted in
the transfer, on the average, of around $1.5 billion in
gold and dollars to foreigners each year.
What, then, is new about our balance-of-payments
position?
What is new, in the first place, is the size of the
deficit, by comparison with previous deficits. What
matters most about our balance of payments deficit is the
direction in which it is going, and after all $3 billion
is twice as much as $1.5 billion.
But what is also new is the competitive setting in
which we have to work our problem out. The annual deficits
of $1.5 billion in the years 1953-56, and the transfer of
gold and dollars in which they resulted, could be regarded
as part of our contribution to world recovery. It helped
our trading partners build up monetary reserves while they
continued to gather strength and approach the degree of
competitiveness with us that is needed for international
balance. But it is quite obvious now that our principal
partners have in fact become competitive, and that the
goal, from now on, should be one of establishing balance
in our international accounts.
There are only two ways of establishing balance.
Either we balance downwards or we balance upwards.
We don't want to balance downwards, by restricting
imports, or by slashing aid programs beyond all reason,
or by interposing obstacles to outflow of private capital.
We don't want to do it this way, if for no other reason,
because the downward "adjustment" would in all probability
turn into a cumulative downward movement, which is the
last thing in the world that we want.
So we must think in terms of an adjustment of our
balance of payments upwards and this means, basically, an
expansion of our exports to a level such that they will
be sufficient to cover our total import bill, plus such
aid programs and private capital outflow as we wish to
support, instead of our having to meet a considerable
part of this total by the transfer of gold and dollars.

5/26/59 -15-
And an expansion of our exports means two things,
basically. It means, first of all, the use of the
influence of our Government, in every appropriate inter
national forum, to secure the removal of such discrimina
tory restrictions as continue to exist against our exports.
But it means, much more importantly, that we dare not flag
in our pursuit of those policies which we must follow if
we are to keep our exports competitive. Quite obviously,
it will not be monetary policy alone that will decide
whether our exports will remain competitive. But, just as
obviously, monetary policy certainly has its contribution
to make toward that end, and, so far as our balance-of
payments position is concerned, there can hardly be any
question as to the direction in which that contribution
ought to be.
Mr. Hayes then made a statement of his views on the business
outlook and credit policy substantially as follows:
It seems to me clear that, now that the Treasury's
financing is out of the way and there is in prospect a
"free" period of about a month before the next Treasury
operation, it behooves us to give a very careful look at
current monetary policy to see whether it is appropriate
to the current state of the economy and is doing all that
it can to promote sustainable growth and to prevent an
inflationary upsurge.
There has been an accumulation of evidence in the
past three weeks pointing to broadening and strengthening
of the business expansion, which now appears to have
sufficient momentum to carry it at least through this
calendar year. Heretofore we have faced an appreciable
risk that firm credit restriction might put a real crimp
in the upward movement of the economy--but now this risk
appears much less serious than at any time since the
recovery began.
I shall not try to document the strength of the current
expansion, as Mr. Young has already done that admirably, but
it has been marked by great vigor of personal consumption,
a high level of construction activity, growing inventory
accumulation, and a tendency, as yet quite moderate, toward
an upward revision of planned business expenditures on
plant and equipment. Inventory-sales ratios are still close
to their lowest levels, thus suggesting scope for considerable
expansion.

5/26/59 -16
Perhaps the most encouraging single development of the
last few weeks has been the marked improvement in the em
ployment situation reported for April. Although unemploy
ment remains somewhat higher than at a similar stage of
other postwar recovery periods, the recent trend suggests
that, apart from certain pockets of "structural" unemploy
ment, the unemployment problem, with all of its economic
and political implications, should fade in importance as
the year progresses.
At the same time price stability is threatened more
seriously than at any time in the past year, chiefly in
the area of manufactured and semimanufactured products.
While more abundant meat supplies should bring lower
average food prices in the summer months, and raw material
prices as a whole are showing no clear upward trend,
numerous producers of manufactured goods are reported to
be eager to raise their prices in view of the improved
demand situation and to be only waiting for the expected
rise in steel prices, following the current wage negotia
tions, before announcing increases for their own products.
Thus the steel negotiations take on even more than usual
significance in terms of probable widespread repercussions
throughout the economy.
Recent credit developments also support this view of
an increasingly dangerous inflation potential. I am think
ing of the recent emergence of vigorous and pervasive loan
demand all over the country in almost all major categories
business loans, security loans, consumer loans, and real
estate loans. The money supply itself has not grown unduly,
particularly in relation to the rapid expansion of gross
national product since last year. On the other hand,
nonbank liquidity as a whole, including short-term Government
holdings and other money substitutes, has increased much more
rapidly--in fact somewhat faster than gross national product.
Another disturbing factor is, of course, the continued
exuberance of the stock market, together with the persistent
upward trend of total credit used for purchasing or carrying
stocks.
In considering how to meet these problems, we cannot
lose sight of the Treasury's remaining financing program
over the rest of 1959, which will involve cash offerings
of at least $12 billion, and perhaps several billion dollars
more, besides a number of sizeable refundings. We must have
in mind the need for preventing the cash offerings from
adding unduly to the money supply, as well as the influence
of interest rate changes on the ease or difficulty of
carrying through this financing. Incidentally, it seems

5/26/59 -17-
probable that growing business needs, together with these
steady Treasury demands, may make it increasingly diffi
cult to place most of the new Treasury issues outside of
the banks--although the high level of corporate profits
and corporate liquidity argue for a gradual rather than
a sudden change in this respect. When to these factors
is added consideration of new developments relating to
the United States' balance of international payments and
the vital need of maintaining our costs and prices on a
competitive basis with those of the other leading
industrial countries, the present situation stands out
as a clearly crucial one. Mr. Marget's statement has
presented the issues in excellent clarity, and I agree
fully with all he has said. The major question before us,
as a nation, is whether we can restrain inflationary
tendencies and enjoy a considerable period of sound and
sustainable growth or whether we shall soon dissipate the
benefits of the recovery through a resurgence of infla
tionary forces.
In the light of these threats to our economy, I am
convinced that the time has come for a decisive signal of
the Federal Reserve System's determination to do its part
to check inflationary trends. The discount rate is of
course the most obvious instrument for giving such a signal.
In a sense it is unfortunate that the commercial banks
"stole our thunder" by raising the prime rate by 1/2 per
cent ten days ago, for it is now generally assumed that
the Federal Reserve will follow promptly with a 1/2 per
cent rise in the discount rate. A 1/2 per cent rise will
therefore be a relatively weak signal for the more
sophisticated observers, although it may seem more dramatic
to the general public. It seems to me that a prompt in
crease of 1/2 per cent is the minimum action called for.
In my judgment our directors would be willing to vote
such an increase this week.
I believe a very good case can be made for a larger
increase if we are to give a really clear signal. Also,
I have in mind the fact that we shall not have many
opportunities for further moves later this year (a period
of about a month, from mid-August to mid-September, appears
to be the only other promising occasion). In view of the
current level of the discount rate and the gravity of the
issues involved, I would be reluctant to see changes
measured in quarters of one per cent. If a change of
more than 1/2 per cent is appropriate, the desirable
amount of increase would seem to be 1 per cent. A

5/26/59 -18-
decisively higher rate might conceivably encourage a prompt
upward adjustment in market interest rates to a plateau that
could be maintained and that would encourage a growing be
lief that rates were about as high as they were going to go
for some time. This could of course stimulate the flow of
investment funds into fixed income obligations and could
prove very helpful to the Treasury's program.
On the other hand, I confess I have serious misgivings
about the wisdom of a 1 per cent increase if we are to make
the move without the enthusiastic endorsement of other arms
of the Government whose cooperation is essential in any
effective attack on inflationary threats. A 1 per cent
increase would be highly unusual and dramatic, suggesting
to the public the existence of an extremely urgent problem-
and if, in spite of such a move, a clearly inflationary
settlement should be made in the steel industry, our action
might appear capricious and futile as an anti-inflationary
move and might at the same time subject us to severe
criticism for causing the Treasury unnecessary hardships,
particularly if the Treasury had indicated any lack of
enthusiasm on the change. Thus there would be a real risk
of our being discredited in the public eye, with an intensi
fication of the political risks to which the System is always
subject. We must also face the additional risk that a sharp
increase in the discount rate might cause market rates of
interest to advance to levels that could prove to be inappro
priately high in relation to the present stage of the business
cycle.
For my own part, I would like very much to see explored
the possibility of our obtaining the active backing of the
Treasury, at the very least, for a decisive rate increase,
and preferably the issuance of a public statement of the
Treasury's determination to work within its area of responsi
bility to achieve not merely a balanced budget but a budget
surplus in the coming fiscal year. Our own move would be
sufficiently decisive to warrant, at the same time, a public
statement of intent by the Chairman. And finally, I would
hope that there could be a simultaneous re-affirmation by
the White House of the vital need for non-inflationary
settlement of all pending wage issues. Perhaps this is too
much to expect, but I think the general subject well worth
exploring. If there is a chance of moving on this broader
front, I would be agreeable to holding up my recommendation
to our directors until the first week in June, in order to
provide ample opportunity for a full-scale effort. I would
hope, though, that it might prove possible to do everything

5/26/59 -19
this week, and that all Reserve Banks which wish to take
action on the rate could do so as nearly as feasible on
the same day, in order to get the maximum impact from any
System move.
As for open market policy, it would be my suggestion
that we move moderately, but not intensively, in the
direction of greater restraint, being guided somewhat by
the impact of the discount rate move itself. I think it
unnecessary to define the objective in terms of a figure
for net borrowed reserves, but would merely instruct the
Manager to pursue tactics which would assure an atmosphere
of firm restraint.
I believe the time has come to recognize in our
directive the very substantial improvement in the economy
and the growth of inflationary tendencies since adoption
of the present wording. Our suggestion for clause (b),
which has already been submitted in writing to the
Secretary, is as follows: "to restricting the expansion
of money and credit with a view to restraining infla
tionary tendencies and thereby promoting sustainable
growth."
Mr. Erickson said that business in the First District con
tinued to improve. Although, as he had reported before, the pace
of recovery in that area was not as rapid as for the nation as a
whole, production and employment were up in April and the most
recent survey of New England purchasing agents showed a rise in
the percentage expecting increased production. In the four States
for which April statistics were available, there had been a greater
than seasonal improvement in employment, with construction and trade
the most important factors. Three labor areas had now shown improve
ment in their classification; at present there were no labor areas
with unemployment of 12 per cent or above, four areas with 9 to 12
per cent unemployment, and eight areas with 6 to 9 per cent

5/26/59 -20
unemployment. Of the twelve areas having 6 per cent or more
unemployment, four were textile centers that had been areas of
labor distress for a number of years. The April survey of mutual
savings banks revealed for the first time in some period a smaller
percentage increase in deposits than reported for the previous
month.
As to the discount rate, Mr. Erickson said that he had given
consideration to the possibility of an increase of more than 1/2 per
cent. However, after weighing all factors, he was inclined to feel
that a 1/2 per cent adjustment would be appropriate. The directive
should be changed, and his suggestion was among those listed in the
memorandum distributed by the Secretary of the Committee under date
of May 25, 1959. Any directive, he felt, should contain the word
"inflationary" as well as a reference to sustainable economic growth.
Open market policy should provide further restraint. While he
hesitated to suggest any particular figure of net borrowed reserves,
he would say that if $250 million denoted the measure of restraint
to date, an increase to a range of $300-$350 million was about what
should be accomplished.
Mr. Erickson commented that he was intrigued by the sugges
tions of Mr. Hayes regarding the possibility of arranging for
statements by various parties within the Government in conjunction
with a decisive discount rate increase. If all the things mentioned

5/26/59 -21
by Mr. Hayes could be worked out, the net result might be salutary.
However, if those things were not done, he could see the possibility
of danger to the Treasury's position.
Mr. Irons stated that the Eleventh District was following
the national pattern of a strengthening, rising level of activity,
and broad recovery. Production, distribution, and employment all
moved upward during April and thus far into May, and a stronger
confidence had developed among businessmen and the public generally
that the country was now in a period of prosperity. The principal
question at this point concerned the level to which activity might
move up. A month or two ago businessmen had some reservations about
such factors as the level of unemployment, the possibility of a steel
strike, and the level of oil output, but such reservations had now
been overbalanced by confidence and optimism in the level and trend
of current economic activity.
Turning to financial developments, Mr. Irons said that loan
demand was strong, especially in business, consumer, and real estate
loans, and the strength of demand was increasing week by week.
However, borrowings from the Reserve Bank thus far had not been too
large except over the May 15 week end. Whenever Federal funds were
available at a rate comparable to the discount rate, district banks
appeared to prefer to purchase such funds, possibly building their
record against the day when Federal funds were not available. A

5/26/59 -22
check of free reserves of country banks for the months of January
and April showed a daily average of $47 million in January and $45
million in April, and in no day during the latter month did country
banks show less than substantial free reserves. In contrast, the
situation was getting to be quite firm in the reserve cities.
Mr. Irons expressed the opinion that a discount rate of
3-1/2 per cent would be in order, although some arguments could be
made for moving to a higher rate. If the latter alternative were
decided upon, however, he felt it might be desirable to proceed
along the lines Mr. Hayes had suggested, including consultation
with the Treasury. In support of the 3-1/2 per cent level he stated
that in July and August there might be some evidence of the usual
summer doldrums, and also there was the uncertainty with regard to
a possible steel strike. For these reasons he was inclined to feel
that a discount rate of 3-1/2 per cent would be appropriate at this
time, thus leaving the System in a position to consider a further
increase in the early fall. The next regular meeting of the Dallas
directors was not scheduled until June 11, so that earlier action
on the discount rate would require a special meeting.
As to the directive, Mr. Irons noted that his suggestion for
clause (b), included on the memorandum distributed by the Secretary,
was similar to that suggested by the New York Bank.
With regard to open market operations, Mr. Irons said he
felt there should be further restraint upon the availability of
credit and that any deviations clearly and certainly should be on

5/26/59 -23
the side of tightening. He would like to see a degree of restraint
such as to assure a short-term rate structure in which Federal funds
and Treasury bills would, so far as possible, press firmly on the
discount rate, whatever that rate might be.
Mr. Mangels reported that Twelfth District business conditions
continued to reflect an increase in activity, although the rate of
increase in April and the early part of May was not as rapid as in
March. This was due in part to weather conditions in the Pacific
Northwest, which exerted an effect on lumbering and construction.
Recent information, however, showed lumber orders and production up,
with inventories down. While there had been some cutback in employ
ment at aircraft factories in the Northwest, this was offset by
increases in employment at electronic and ordnance firms. Unemploy
ment in the Pacific Coast States stood at 4.5 per cent in April
compared with 4.6 per cent in March and 7 per cent in April 1958.
Mr. Mangels said that retail sales, including auto sales,
continued to show improvement although dealers reportedly were being
loaded up with new cars. It appeared that the 1959 fruit crop would
be heavy, especially in California, and the canning industry was
expecting a large pack.
On the financial side, Mr. Mangels stated that district
banks were experiencing a strong demand for loans, with some loans
apparently being made to finance the accumulation of steel in
ventories. There was also reported to be a demand from small

5/26/59 -24
business firms for loans ranging from $100,000 to $1 million which
were in essence capital loans on a long-term basis. Borrowings
from the Reserve Bank were rather spotty, ranging in the past couple
of weeks from a high of around $150 million to a low of $15 million.
The large district banks continued to be net purchasers of Federal
funds and it was estimated that net purchases might be around $800
to $900 million this week. Deposits were beginning to show the
normal seasonal decline but savings deposits were up $98 million
over the past three weeks, about the same rate of increase as for
the corresponding period in 1958.
Mr. Mangels suggested that the recent increase in the prime
loan rate and the general stiffening of other interest rates should
provide a modest degree of restraint in the market, while the
improvement in business conditions and the outlook for Treasury
demands should also result in some tightening. However, he felt
that the System should exercise a little more restraint than it had
to date. He had in mind net borrowed reserves in a range from $250
to $300 million, with the thought that the figure might go higher
depending upon conditions in the market. In essence, the System
should put on the brakes but not so tightly as to prevent all
further increase in activity.
Mr. Mangels indicated that he would favor an increase of
1/2 per cent in the discount rate at this time. The San Francisco
Bank was in a position where it probably would follow rather than

5/26/59 -25
lead, because the next meeting of directors was not scheduled until
the tenth of June. Therefore, while there would be an executive
committee meeting tomorrow, the Bank probably would be close to the
end of the line unless a special meeting was called.
With regard to clause (b) of the directive, Mr. Mangels
noted that he had suggested to the Secretary "to fostering conditions
in the money market conducive to sustainable economic growth,
recognizing the necessity, toward this end, of avoiding excessive
credit expansion." On second thought, he said, he would like to
change the word "fostering" to "maintaining" and the word "avoiding"
to "discouraging."
In further comments, Mr. Mangels summarized the results of
a questionnaire distributed by a West Coast newspaper among members
of the California Bankers Association. The replies indicated, among
other things, a preponderance of opinion that new records would be
set in gross national product and industrial output during the
fourth quarter of 1959 and that the trend of consumer prices in
the next twelve months would be higher.
Mr. Deming stated that Ninth District economic activity was
expanding at a rate roughly parallel to, but a shade lower in level
than, that for the nation as a whole. The outlook was somewhat
clouded because of uncertain crop prospects and the current lower
drift of farm prices. The district-wide drought had been broken
by widespread, but not adequate, rains. The soil moisture situation

5/26/59 -26
thus remained spotty, with topsoil moisture good but subsoil
moisture inadequate. Lake Superior ports shipped 3 million tons
of iron ore in April compared with less than 100,000 tons last
April. While this marked a sharp improvement over last year, it
was not particularly favorable relative to previous periods of
high activity, reflecting some basic shifts in iron ore procure
ment. Mining employment was up about 15 per cent from a year ago.
Turning to System policy, Mr. Deming said that certain points
impressed him. A number of financial measuring sticks--the money
supply, the volume of bank borrowing, the three-month bill rate,
and the growth in bank lending--seemed to indicate that credit policy
had not been unduly restrictive. Yet, as some had pointed out,
several measures of bank liquidity might indicate the possibility of
cumulative tightening and point to a banking situation that could be
quite sensitive to further restrictive action. In the Ninth District,
loan-deposit ratios in April were exactly the same as in April 1957
and had been rising this year more steadily and rapidly than they
did two years ago. Ratios of Government securities to deposits
also were about the same as two years ago, but ratios of short se
curities to deposits were lower and those of long terms to deposits
were significantly higher. Banks examined in February and March
this year showed bond account depreciation equivalent to 10 per cent
of capital accounts, against 7 per cent at a comparable group of
banks in 1957. Other evidence of some tightness might be seen in

5/26/59 -27
the rise in the velocity rate, in the volume and number of country
bank borrowings, in interest rates other than on three-month bills,
and in the ratio of the money supply to gross national product.
Mr. Deming said he found it difficult to argue for any
appreciable increase in restrictiveness via open market operations
at this time, a feeling compounded by the long-run Treasury
financing problem. At the same time he felt that the discount rate
might be advanced, not so much as a directly restrictive move as a
signal that the System did not propose to acquiesce meekly in a
further erosion of the dollar, a move to bring the rate into better
alignment with most short-term money market rates, and a matter of
timing now that the System had a free period. He had not thought
in terms of as much as 1 per cent; rather he had thought that a change
of 1/2 or 3/ per cent would do the job. He saw no need to hurry
the action by calling special meetings of directors, and the
Minneapolis Bank would not want to take the lead in this movement.
However, it would be possible to act in Minneapolis this Thursday,
next Thursday, or the following Friday.
As to the directive, Mr. Deming said he would favor an
amendment of Mr. Allen's suggestion (shown in the Secretary's
memorandum of May 25) by inserting "restraining inflationary
tendencies and" before "maintaining conditions in the financial
markets conducive to sustainable economic growth and stability."

5/26/59 -28
Mr. Allen said that although he had been back in the
United States only a few days, it was quite apparent that the
Seventh District was sharing in the rapid improvement in business
conditions noted throughout the country. There was a growing
expectation that sales of domestically produced autos might reach
6.5 million units in 1959, including 500,000 of exports, while
truck production and sales might reach 1.2 million. In both cases
these figures would be the largest since 1955. Employment in
durable goods manufacturing had continued to rise; increases over
last year in March were 4 per cent for the United States, 2 per cent
for Illinois, 4 per cent for Wisconsin, 8 per cent for Iowa, 10 per
cent for Indiana, and 11 per cent for Michigan. As a result, mid-May
figures on labor classifications released last week showed that
four district cities, including Chicago, had been classified upward.
While housing starts were about 40 per cent higher for the United
States in the first four months of this year, permits for residential
construction issued in Chicago and Detroit were up about 50 per cent
for this period, although this reflected in part the greater reduc
tions noted in these areas last year. Farm real estate prices
appeared to be rising less rapidly in the central Corn Belt than in
the nation, reflecting, no doubt, the lower prices for hogs and
prospects for a further decline. Farm loans, both real estate and
nonreal estate, continued to increase in the Seventh District. It
now appeared that farmers would increase corn acreage even more

5/26/59 -29
than the 12 per cent indicated in the March survey of planting
intentions.
Business loans, Mr. Allen said, now appeared to be gaining
strength steadily. District weekly reporting banks accounted for
$66 million of the $350 million growth in the nationwide weekly
reporting member bank total in the first two weeks of May. This
was the largest two-week growth, except during tax periods, that
district banks had experienced since early in 1956, and in Chicago
another increase, though only $5 million, was reported in the week
just ended. Most of the gains reflected increased borrowing by
manufacturing concerns and sales finance companies. Savings deposits
at commercial banks in 32 metropolitan areas in the Seventh District
increased by $63 million in the first quarter of 1958, but declined
by $10 million in the first quarter of 1959, while accounts at
savings and loan associations in five metropolitan areas, which
showed an increase of $168 million for the first quarter of 1958,
increased $176 million in the first quarter of 1959. Reflecting the
pick-up in employment and increases on the rates paid on savings
accounts, savings had increased substantially in Michigan cities;
offsetting this, savings declined somewhat in Illinois and Wisconsin
cities.
Mr. Allen stated that the Chicago directors, who meet
regularly every two weeks, were scheduled to meet this coming

5/26/59 -30.
Thursday. Last week there was some feeling on the part of one
director that a special meeting should be held to consider the
discount rate, and there seemed to be no doubt that the directors
were ready to move on the rate. Mr. Allen said he found Mr. Hayes'
comments most interesting, and persuasive to a degree. On balance,
however, he still felt that a rate of 3-1/2 per cent would be
sufficient at this time. He would like to see more restraint
achieved through open market operations. To the extent that the
use of net borrowed reserve figures was indicative, he would be
inclined to agree with Mr. Erickson that a range of $300 to $350
million would be appropriate.
Mr. Leedy reported that Tenth District conditions largely
followed the national pattern. Prospects for agriculture were not
quite as favorable this year as last year, but there seemed to be
no abatement in the enthusiasm for farm machinery, with reports
indicating that purchases thus far this year were higher than during
the same period a year ago. Unemployment continued to recede; there
had been some substantial employment increases, and there were
further prospective increases, in the area around Kansas City due
to labor force additions in the auto assembly plants and in one
of the principal plants doing defense work. Retail sales were
running at a level about 11 per cent over a year ago.
Mr. Leedy went on to say that the demand for credit, which
had been strong since the first of the year, was now increasing,

5/26/59 -31
with the pressure felt in most loan categories, including consumer,
real estate, and business loans. This demand was being reflected
at the discount window. As he had reported before, borrowings at
the Kansas City Bank were out of proportion to System totals, and
during the past three weeks they had been running as high as 16 per
cent of the total.
With respect to System policy, Mr. Leedy said it seemed to
him that except for the Treasury situation the course would be clear;
that is, to move progressively further in the way of attempting to
apply restraint. He wished to associate himself completely with
what Mr. Hayes had said with respect to policy. Personally, he had
questioned whether it would be feasible to increase the discount
rate by a full percentage point, but he noted that on eight different
occasions in the past an increase of 1 per cent or more had been made.
As he saw it, anything less than 3/4 per cent would amount to doing
nothing at all as far as any signal from the System was concerned,
for a 1/2 per cent increase had been completely discounted. The
market reaction suggested that the increase of like amount in the
prime rate also had been discounted. Therefore, if the Treasury
was willing to go along, he felt that the thinking should not be
in terms of an increase of less than 3/4 per cent. He would sub
scribe to the thought of exploring a 1 per cent increase in the

5/26/59 -32
hope that such an adjustment might in the longer run be more
effective from the standpoint of both the System and the Treasury.
As to the directive, he rather liked the New York suggestion
although he would go along with the suggestions submitted by Mr.
Irons or Mr. Leach. They all referred to restraint of inflationary
pressures, which he thought should be included in the wording of
any directive that might be adopted.
As to open market operations, Mr. Leedy said he would be
inclined to move further in the direction of restraint. He noted
that the action taken on the discount rate might have some influence
on how far open market operations should go. As to timing, if the
move on the discount rate was only 1/2 per cent, some delay would not
appear to be of great consequence for the move had been generally
expected and discounted. However, he hoped that the Banks might
move in concert to the extent of at least 3/ per cent, and he felt
that, as Mr. Hayes had suggested, it would be desirable to explore
an increase of 1 per cent.
Mr. Leach reported that each month brought new evidence of a
strong and continuing expansion of economic activity in the Fifth
District. Seasonally adjusted nonfarm employment rose in April to
continue a virtually uninterrupted year-long rise and manufacturing
man-hours rang up yet another healthy increase. In the textile
industries, markets continued to improve, production had increased,
order backlogs had expanded, and mill inventories were down.

5/26/59 -33
Statistics now confirmed the earlier reports of a good spring
furniture market. Bituminous coal output showed a modest gain,
and the inventory situation gave promise of further increases.
One of the Richmond Bank's directors, in reporting last week on
improved conditions in nonresidential construction, commented that
architects were now writing letters to contractors to invite their
bids on projects, whereas a short time ago contractors were seeking
out the jobs. Fewer contractors were now bidding on each job and
current bids were higher relative to costs.
Since the first of May, Mr. Leach said, borrowings from the
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond had averaged $62 million a day and
the daily average number of banks borrowing was 43. Both figures
were substantially larger than those of any other month in the last
six years. The use of discount facilities recently was discussed
with 15 country member banks that had been borrowing rather con
tinuously. Some had sold or intended to sell securities and two
had sold loans, while many said they were experiencing an un
expectedly strong loan demand. Available statistical information
likewise pointed to an unusual demand for loans. Since March 4,
total loans of weekly reporting banks in the Fifth District had
increased 6 per cent, a much higher percentage than in the
comparable period of any of the preceding four years. Over half
of the recent increase was in business loans, but there were also
substantial increases in consumer and real estate loans. The

5/26/59 -34
member bank with the largest correspondent business in the district
reported increased pressure to participate in loans, while another
large member bank had instructed the officers of its State-wide
branch network to hold down loans and seek larger deposit balances
from borrowers. Other bankers reported that present and prospective
pressures had caused them to become more selective in making loans
and to request larger balances from loan applicants.
Comments of this kind, heavy borrowings from the Reserve
Bank, and depreciation in securities portfolios all led Mr. Leach
to think that reserve pressures were increasingly affecting the
lending attitudes of officers of member banks. Nevertheless, he
felt that inflationary dangers called for further restraint. He
had been thinking in terms of an increase in the discount rate to
3-1/2 per cent and still thought that was probably what ought to
be done, even though such an increase certainly had been discounted
to a large extent. A 1 per cent increase would be a little extreme,
and he doubted whether the Treasury would welcome it. In any event,
however, he believed the discount rate should be increased before
the middle of June. At the Richmond Bank, it would be rather dif
ficult to arrange for action before June 11, which was also the
next regularly scheduled meeting date of the directors of several
of the Reserve Banks. In his opinion, pressure on reserves should
be increased and banks should be forced to borrow some of the
additional reserves they would need. He made this comment even

5/26/59 -35
though Fifth District banks were already under pressure and the
distribution of reserves was such that to speak of $250 or $300
million of net borrowed reserves was equivalent in some respects
to speaking of $500 or $600 million in 1957. If the distribution
of reserves should stay the same as at present, any large increase
in net borrowed reserves would result in a substantial increase in
pressure on banks outside of New York and Chicago. The directive
should certainly be changed at this meeting, and he would like to
include the word "inflation." Aside from that, any one of several
of the suggested wordings would be satisfactory to him.
Mr. Mills made substantially the following comments:
My forebodings have not diminished with respect to the
delayed and violent financial and economic reactions that I
believe are in the offing when the cumulative pressures
inherent in the Federal Reserve System's present monetary
and credit policy have their full effect. I take no comfort
from the sense of today's discussion, which leans toward a
further intensification of the pressure on reserves. As
my views on current policy matters have been presented on
earlier occasions, they won't be repeated today, but I hope
that future economic historians will not have to look back
on this period as one in which the Federal Reserve System
took alarm and panicked about anticipated events wnich had
not as yet come into palpable and clear perspective.
Mr. Robertson presented a statement substantially as follows:
We are often unhappy when reports on the economic
situation are "mixed." Such reports give us no clear
guidance as to policy, and leave us uncertain as to
whether the policy of ease or restraint we are following at
the time is just right--too much or too little.
We do not have that problem today. I can think of
very few occasions when reports on the economic situation
and outlook have all pointed so strongly in one direction.

5/26/59 -36-
We can be sure that much the same information is being
presented to--and considered by--boards of directors, presi
dents, and senior partners across the length and breadth of
the land, but with one difference. Most of the economic
presentations made to others include, as an important element,
an estimate of what we--the Federal Reserve System--are likely
to do in the circumstances. These estimates may vary in
detail, but I venture they all sound pretty much the same-
that the Federal Reserve will increase restraint as the
situation continues to strengthen, and that interest rates
will continue to move upward over the weeks and months ahead.
In order for monetary policy to be effective there must
be uncertainty in the market place as to the future trend of
interest rates. When people are unanimous in expecting
interest rates to rise (as they are today), they will hesitate
to put funds into interest-bearing securities, and funds will
flow excessively into the stock market or into other hedges
against inflation. When the general expectation is for rates
to move down, the flow will be reversed, resulting in exces
sive and even speculative demand for fixed-interest securities
and a drying up of the flow into equities.
The aim of the Federal Reserve, therefore, should be to
foster such a level of interest rates that there can be no
certainty whether, over the foreseeable future, interest levels
will trend up, trend down, or remain relatively stationary.
Such desirable uncertainty does not exist today. The
nearly universal expectation is that rates will move upward
from their present levels as the boom progresses. Nor will
there be uncertainty if we pursue a cautious policy of
tightening reserve positions gradually and follow the upward
trend of short-term rates with modest changes in the discount
rate. This will confirm everyone's short-term expectations,
and reinforce their longer-term expectation of rising rates.
There is only one thing we can do to introduce into the money
market the uncertainty that is essential to the effective
functioning of a market economy. We must move quickly and
unhesitatingly to a rate which is sufficiently high to leave
reasonable men uncertain as to whether the future course of
rates will be up or down.
I do not need to remind you that such a course of action
has been pursued by central banks in the past with salutary
results--most resently by the Bank of England. My own judg
ment would be that it would take at least a 1 per cent increase
in the discount rate--this would raise it to the highest level
in 30 years--to put us "on top" of the situation. Of course,

5/26/59 -37
this increase should be accompanied by an appropriate
policy of more stringent restraint with respect to
reserve availability.
Decisive action at this time may temporarily in
convenience the Treasury in its financing operations,
but in the long run it would ease its problem by
enlarging the volume of funds flowing into Government
securities. A forthright policy designed to place the
world on notice that the Federal Reserve stands adamantly
opposed to inflation, which will result in a cheapening
of the dollar, will inevitably facilitate the financing
of the Government and lower the long-run cost of
servicing the national debt.
In further comments, Mr. Robertson said that his view regard
ing what should be done in the way of open market operations would
depend to some extent on whether decisive action was taken on the
discount rate. If the action was to increase the rate by only 1/2
per cent, open market policy should be moving restrictively to be
tween $400 and $500 million of net borrowed reserves. If, on the
other hand, decisive action were taken on the discount rate, an
increase in net borrowed reserves to between $300 and $350 million,
or perhaps $400 million, would appear to be as much as necessary.
As to the directive, Mr. Robertson said he could do no better than
accept the language suggested by Mr. Allen, as amended by Mr. Deming,
or the wording suggested by Mr. Bopp as presented in the Secretary's
memorandum. All of the suggestions submitted were pretty much in
line and it was difficult to choose among them, but personally he
would prefer one of the two he had mentioned.
With respect to the comments made by Mr. Hayes, Mr. Robertson
felt that it would be unwise for the System to seek to have the

5/26/59 -.38
executive branch of the Government "hold its hand." He was firmly
opposed to an open-mouth policy either on the part of the System
or the executive branch, for in the long run he believed it did
little good. The System should not complain about what others did
unless it had done everything within its power to meet the issues
at hand. Therefore, while he would consult with the Treasury, he
would not want System action to depend on action taken by the
President or the Treasury. Instead, it was incumbent upon the
System to take firm action.
Mr. Shepardson stated that during the last three weeks he
had attended meetings in New Orleans, St. Louis, and Chicago where
he had an opportunity to discuss the agricultural situation with
quite a range of people. The comment was made rather frequently
that prospects were not quite as bright as last year, and there
was some feeling of uncertainty in a number of places. However,
it is often said that "the crop is lost three times before making
a record harvest." Actually, the prospect was for a large cotton
crop, and the wheat crop, while it would not be as large as last
year, nevertheless would still add to the wheat surplus. Herds of
cattle were still being expanded and calf prices were up. The
cattle situation appeared to be heading for severe trouble but
cattlemen apparently hoped there were still a couple of good years
ahead. In 46 States, farm land prices were reported to be rising,

5/26/59 -39
and the level was now 8 per cent higher than a year ago, which was
hard to reconcile with talk of an agricultural depression and the
pressure was placed on farmers. As a matter of fact, commercial
farms were not losing money at present.
Mr. Shepardson expressed agreement with what Mr. Robertson
had said, adding that he did not recall any time since he became a
member of the Board of Governors when such a generally favorable
outlook for business expansion existed. He was also much impressed
by the comments of Mr. Marget. The balance-of-payments situation
was a matter that had been of concern to him for some time, and the
current figures seemed to offer clear support for what many people
had feared with respect to the position of the United States in
international trade. All of these things, Mr. Shepardson said,
pointed to the need for definite and positive action at this time.
While he had expressed himself in similar vein at the last Committee
meeting, it was not possible to do much at that time because of the
Treasury's financing. Now, however, he felt that the System should
take definite action. On the discount rate, it seemed desirable to
make enough of a move clearly to indicate the position of the System;
System actions should not lag as they did in 1956. Therefore, he
would definitely favor a discount rate increase of 1 per cent. He
would also favor some increase in restraint on reserves, and he
agreed with Mr. Robertson that a less decisive rate action would

5/26/59 -40
call for more vigorous restraint through open market operations.
Personally, he would favor giving a clear signal through the dis
count rate and then making a moderate move in the direction of
further restraint on reserves.
As to the directive, Mr. Shepardson said that he liked Mr.
Bopp's suggestion for clause (b) with one modification. Instead
of referring to "inflationary developments," he would prefer
"inflationary credit expansion" as indicating more particularly
the System's sphere of responsibility. He would like to include
the phrase suggested by Mr. Bopp with respect to expanding employ
ment opportunities because it seemed appropriate for the System to
show its interest in that area. Thus the directive would read:
"to restraining inflationary credit expansion in order to foster
sustainable economic growth and expanding employment opportunities."
Mr. King made substantially the following comments:
There are increasing signs that the present monetary
and credit policy is having a restrictive effect on the
economy. Present signs of tightness in the mortgage money
market suggest that the current level of activity in con
struction will diminish during the last half of the year.
Recent postponement of issuance of some securities-as an
example, the $50 million New York Turnpike Bonds-because
of interest rates indicates that the credit and monetary
policy of the last several months is having a retarding
effect on expansion along this line.
These indications do raise the possibility that the
cumulative effect of the present policy might ultimately
constitute more restriction than has been obvious up to
this time. However, there are so many other factors
indicating a discount rate increase is appropriate that

5/26/59 -41
I would vote to approve an increase of 1/2 per cent
if requested by a majority of the Reserve Banks.
Concerning open market operations, I would agree
to additional restraint but would leave the amount and
the words of the directive to the other members of the
Committee. I agree with Messrs. Robertson and Shepardson
that if only a 1/2 per cent discount rate increase is
effected, somewhat greater restraint in open market
operations would be desirable.
Mr. Fulton reported that Fourth District steel mills were
working practically at capacity, with increased orders from certain
customers indicating that the inventories those customers had hoped
to accumulate in anticipation of a possible steel strike were being
cut into quite rapidly. At the same time, with the opening of the
St. Lawrence Seaway quite a volume of foreign steel was being un
loaded at the docks in Cleveland. It was announced recently, however,
that one Fourth District steel company intended to spend around $300
million in an expansion program over the next several years. The
foundries, in bad shape a relatively short time ago, now were working
practically full time, and there were demands that deliveries be
advanced. The railroads were now buying rather extensively for the
first time in some period, and more orders were coming into the
machine tool industry. While the orders were not in great volume,
some of them were for expensive machines that would take a long time
to turn out. Thus, in the whole manufacturing process there was
quite an upturn, seemingly a sustained upturn. By the same token,
unemployment had been going down and additional cities had been

5/26/59 -42
removed from the excessive unemployment category. The remaining
cities were largely in heavy industry or coal regions.
Mr. Fulton said that district department store sales were
up from a year ago but that the agricultural outlook was not
particularly good. The wheat crop apparently would be the worst
since 1930 and this would have its effect upon farm banks. Some
of those banks had loans carried over from last year, and in view
of the poor wheat and hay prospects they apparently would have to
carry over more this year. Therefore, they appeared likely to
come to the discount window. Thus far, however, district banks
had not been borrowing heavily, which might be due in part to the
fact that the Reserve Bank had held conversations with some of
the more frequent customers. Business loan demand was fairly strong
but not excessive, while in mortgage loans there had been a rather
heavy demand. However, it continued to be the expectation that in
the second half of the year there would be a substantial decline in
the amount of housing to be built and consequently the financing of
it.
With respect to the discount rate, r. Fulton said he had
mixed feelings, not as to the desirability of a rate change but as
to the timing of it. One of the reasons for his uncertainty was
the probability of a steel strike which, if it occurred and con
tinued for some time, would affect the employment situation in the

5/26/59 -43
Fourth District and production outside the steel industry. He was
inclined to feel that a decisive rate change at this time might
prejudge the effect of the steel settlement, and at present there
was no definite indication whether the settlement would or would not
be inflationary. Accordingly, his preference would be to wait until
a clearer indication was available and then, if it seemed appropriate,
to make a change in the discount rate that would be more than merely
an adjustment to the market. This would constitute the System' s
signal that there had been an inflationary wage increase and that
the System intended to do whatever it could by way of offset. It would
be a clear and definite signal of System intentions, both from the
standpoint of timing and the extent of the increase.
Mr. Fulton noted that his suggested language for the directive
was set forth in the memorandum from the Secretary. He would be will
ing to go along with the language suggested by Mr. Bopp, modified in
the manner suggested by Mr. Shepardson.
Mr. Bopp reported that Third District developments were similar
to those described for the nation as a whole except that, as usual, the
pace of the district was a little slower. Even in details, however,
the pattern of district developments was close to the national picture.
Mr. Bopp said that although he could see some virtue in a
discount rate increase of 1 per cent, his conclusion was that an
increase of 1/2 per cent would be appropriate. He added that he
doubted seriously whether the Philadelphia directors would be

5/26/59 -44
inclined to go along with a full 1 per cent adjustment. The next
regular directors' meeting was scheduled for June 4 and it might
be difficult to assemble the directors for a meeting this Thursday.
In any event, those who did come probably would hesitate to move
on the discount rate in the absence of the other directors.
Mr. Bopp felt it was of some importance that the directive
recognize the interest of the System in expanding employment
opportunities, although his thoughts along this line might reflect
to some extent conditions in the Third District. With that proviso,
he would consider any of the suggestions listed in the Secretary's
memorandum appropriate. In his opinion, open market operations
should be somewhat more restrictive, with the extent of restrictive
ness depending on the effect of a change in the discount rate.
Mr. Bryan commented that he had heretofore reported on the
strength of the economy of the Sixth District and the extent of
change. Statistics available since the preceding Committee meeting
all pointed to developments of the kind Mr. Young had outlined in
presenting the national picture. District insured unemployment
figures were down dramatically as compared with 1958 and apparently
would soon drop below the level of 1957. With reference to a comment
made by Mr. Shepardson, Mr. Bryan said he could see no explanation
except speculation for the increase in land prices in the Sixth
District. Furthermore, he was not making reference to Florida and
the other coastal resort areas, where there was obviously a vast

5/26/59 -45
speculation in land, but to other essentially farming areas.
As to the discount rate, Mr. Bryan said he had not given
particular consideration prior to this meeting to a 1 per cent
increase but felt that the comments made by Messrs. Hayes and
Robertson deserved a great deal of thought. Should there be an
increase of 1 per cent, he agreed with Mr. Robertson that it should
be possible to be less restraining by way of open market operations
than the Committee would have to be if the discount rate increase
were only 1/2 per cent. The directive undoubtedly should be changed,
and several of the suggestions with respect to clause (b) would be
agreeable to him. On the whole, he would prefer the language
suggested by Mr. Bopp with the modification suggested by Mr.
Shepardson. As an alternative, he would favor the suggestion of
Mr. Irons with the addition of Mr. Bopp's phrase about expanding
employment opportunities, a reference that he thought it would be
well to include in the directive at this time.
In response to a question from the Chair, Mr. Freutel said
that he had no comment.
Mr. Szymczak said that he felt the language for the directive
submitted by Mr. Bopp, with the change suggested by Mr. Shepardson,
would constitute a proper expression of Committee policy at this time.
As to the discount rate, he would favor a change now and felt on
balance that it would be better to increase the rate by 1/2 per cent

5/26/59 -46
at this time and take another look later. In open market operations,
he would move in the direction of net borrowed reserves in a range
between $300 and $350 million.
At Mr. Balderston's request, there were distributed copies
of a chart prepared by Mr. Keir showing the actual timing of Treasury
financings thus far in 1959 and the probable timing of such financings
during the remainder of the calendar year. This chart also showed
periods in which it might be assumed that the Committee would be
maintaining an even keel, the presumption being that the even keel
periods would run from one week prior to the announcement of a
Treasury financing to one week following the payment or settlement
date.
Mr. Balderston stated that, as indicated by the chart, the
System was now entering one of the few periods during the remainder
of the year when it could take vigorous action without creating added
difficulties for the Treasury. However, it must be borne in mind that
in the forthcoming period the Treasury would probably have some
delicate negotiations regarding the debt limit, which would involve
discussions in the Congress regarding interest rates and their
impact upon the economy and social problems.
Mr. Balderston went on to say that his greatest concern had
to do with what he felt to be an excessive increase in the money
supply since January 28. The increase in the active money supply of
over $2.5 billion had stemmed from a rapid growth in loan expansion

5/26/59 -47
and had been accompanied, at least until the past three weeks, by
an increase in time deposits. In a period of ebullience like the
present it was his feeling that money substitutes could not be dis
regarded and must be taken into account in the Committee's delibera
tions. He also noted that deposit turnover outside New York City
had risen 8 per cent from a year ago and was now at a rate of 24.5
annually. Further, the ratio of commercial bank loans to deposits
was now nearly 51 per cent, and this was only 13 months after the
turnaround of the economy in April 1958. This compared with a
ratio at the comparable period in 1955 of only 44 per cent. The
inference he drew was that the banks were not only likely to attempt
to borrow money heavily at the discount window but might develop to
be increasingly complacent about such borrowings. He made that
comment because the ratio of loans to deposits was high for this
stage of the recovery and because he suspected the banks had made
term loans or commitments to a point where they now had less head
room to meet loan demand for the accumulation of inventories or for
seasonal purposes. This would mean trouble ahead in the administra
tion of the discount window from the standpoint of maintaining a
delicate balance between sufficient restraint on the use of the
bank of last resort and avoidance of rumors that credit was not
available.
With respect to the directive, Mr. Balderston said that he
would favor Mr. Bopp's language as modified by Mr. Shepardson's

5/26/59 -.48
suggestion. On the discount rate, he would prefer an increase of
1/2 per cent, but he could agree to an increase of 3/4 per cent.
In any event, he differed from some of those who had spoken in that
he would increase the level of net borrowed reserves to approximately
$500 million with all deliberate haste. He would let natural forces
in the market operate to produce such a result. More specifically,
he would propose to move to $350 to $500 million of net borrowed
reserves in a week and to $500 million in two weeks. If the discount
rate were not increased a full percentage point, he felt that any
net borrowed reserve target of less than $500 million would cause a
repetition of the mistakes of early 1956. In short, he did not
believe that the System had its foot on the brake hard enough. As
between a discount rate change of dramatic force and one less dramatic,
which would perhaps create less trouble for the Treasury in its
negotiations and would appear more on the financial pages than the
front page, he thought that he would favor the second of those
alternatives at this juncture. He would move in accordance with
normal practices and tighten the degree of restraint just as rapidly
as possible without attempting to be so dramatic as to indicate fear
of the future or to indicate that the System knew something the
country did not know. The country was aware that the money supply
had expanded rapidly and would expect the System to redress the
balance. In summary, he had the feeling that the markets would
not be shocked unduly if the System increased negative free reserves

5/26/59 -49.
as fast as possible in such a manner as not to incite fear.
Chairman Martin said that, in his opinion and, he believed,
in the opinion of the majority, the manner in which things had been
moving clearly indicated that the System had not been as restrictive
as it desired to be. However, that was hindsight and now it was
necessary to move with the ball. In his view, the uncertainty that
would be desirable in the markets should not be injected by Govern
ment agencies; it should come from natural forces and normal business
questions rather than activities of the Federal Reserve or the Treasury.
In his opinion, the System should not be too concerned about the fact
that the prime rate went up ahead of the discount rate or that every
one now expected an increase in the discount rate. The current
situation did not appear to him comparable to the British situation
in 1957 at the time the Bank Rate was raised from 5 per cent to 7 per
cent, and he did not think that the System would want to go to the
President or to the Treasury to invoke their solicitude at this time,
for that would be over-dramatizing a situation that seemed not yet
out of hand. In substance, he felt that market conditions should
be set up that would produce a higher discount rate and that there
had not yet been those conditions. Neither would he want to give
foreigners who were enjoying the plight of Americans at the present
time any feeling that there was a chance of panic in the United
States or that the Government was going all out to preserve the
dollar. Instead, the thing to do at the present time was to move
in a perfectly normal way.

5/26/59 -50
The Chairman commented that a good many around the table
would have liked to move faster at an earlier stage, but in fact
this had not been done. At this time the perfectly normal thing,
and the thing the market expected, was a change in the discount
rate to 3-1/2 per cent. The market, however, apparently did not
expect too much tightening of the reserve position. That tightening,
he felt, should come before an increase in the discount rate to 4
per cent or 4-1/2 per cent. Open market policy should have some
bite in it, and it did not have that bite today. While some might
disagree with the money supply figures, by and large it could be
said that the money supply had been more than adequate for some
time. Now that velocity as well as quantity was beginning to pick
up, it seemed perfectly right that pressure should develop through
open market operations. He was not sure that he would want to be
as drastic as Mr. Balderston and move necessarily to $500 million
of net borrowed reserves by a fixed date, but the matter of pro
gression was important. In substance, his thinking ran along the
line that the Reserve Banks should move as rapidly as possible
to a 3-1/2 per cent discount rate and that at the same time pressure
should be exerted on the money market through open market operations.
That was the move that seemed to be called for. Before making a
dramatic move, he felt that the System must be in a much worse
position than it was at present. Furthermore, when everyone was as
optimistic as around the table today, he began to worry. By the

5/26/59 -51
same token, when comments were as uniformly pessimistic as they
had been on a few occasions, he would have liked to buy a few stocks.
On neither occasion was the situation probably as open and shut as
might appear.
Chairman Martin commented that he had no doubt about the
trend of the economy or the current position of strength. The
problem of the United States today was one of competition in markets
abroad, which was essentially a pricing problem. He had thought a
great deal about the possibility of a dramatic move of a signal
nature on the part of the System, but he was convinced that the
position of the Federal Reserve was clearly known throughout the
world. The need was not for a signal but for action. A move to a
4 per cent discount rate at this time without accompanying open
market operations would in his judgment accomplish very little and,
although he had not discussed the specific point with the Treasury,
he was inclined to feel that it would complicate the Treasury's
problem greatly. It appeared that by and large the battle on
balancing the Federal budget had been won, and the thing that would
come under serious and critical scrutiny was the role of interest
rates in the economy. A large increase in the discount rate would
not help the Treasury's case if it went to the Congress for a change
in the permissible interest rate ceiling for its bonds.
At this point Chairman Martin interjected that in view of
the nature of the discussion at this meeting each person in the room

5/26/59 -52
had a responsibility, which he realized it was unnecessary to
emphasize to this group, to be very cautious in not revealing
the comments at this meeting or what action might or might not
be taken.
The Chairman then said it was the net of his thinking
that as rapidly as possible the discount rate should be increased
to the level where he thought it ought to be; namely, 3-1/2 per
cent. Then, as fast as possible in an orderly way, the Committee
should make it clear that it was going to increase the pressure
on reserves. He did not know what the actual figure of net
borrowed reserves should be, for the color, tone, and feel of the
market was involved, but there should be no uncertainty that the
Committee was moving in the direction of, to use Mr. Balderston's
phrase, $500 million. While it was difficult to make comparisons
with past periods because of the differences involved, and while
it was difficult to find a satisfactory figure at which to aim,
the System should put more pressure on the reserve position of
the commercial banks.
The Chairman repeated that the course he had outlined
seemed to him the orderly way to proceed. To move along a course
such as Mr. Hayes had mentioned would require considerable
discussion and several weeks of preparation, and he questioned
whether that was called for at the present time. Instead, it

5/26/59 -53
seemed preferable to him to proceed in the normal way by moving
the discount rate to 3-1/2 per cent and putting more pressure on
reserves for the next couple of months. There was likely to be
increasing discussion of interest rates and the cost to the Treasury
of carrying the public debt. By proceeding in the manner he had
suggested, conditions would be established such as to aid the
Treasury in obtaining an increase in the ceiling on the rates for
its securities, and he was not sure that this could be completely
validated today. The Treasury was being validated by the course
of events, but perhaps not in terms of the economic position at
the present time.
The Chairman reiterated that he had thought a great deal
about the possibility of moving the discount rate to 3-3/4 or to
4 per cent. However, with the Treasury in the position under the
present law of having to service its obligations within a statutory
4-1/4 per cent limit, he would not want to do anything more than
necessary to complicate the Treasury's problem.
With respect to clause (b) of the directive, Chairman
Martin expressed the opinion that all of the suggestions listed
in the memorandum from the Secretary of the Committee were good.
The majority seemed to favor Mr. Bopp's suggestion, as amended
by the suggestion of Mr. Shepardson. Therefore, unless someone
felt strongly to the contrary he would suggest that the Committee

5/26/59 -54
agree on "to restraining inflationary credit expansion in order
to foster sustainable economic growth and expanding employment
opportunities .
The Chairman then inquired whether there were any objections
to the use of such wording for the directive, and no comments were
heard.
Turning to the discount rate, Chairman Martin said he would
hope that the majority today clearly felt that it would be desirable
to move the rate promptly to 3-1/2 per cent. He inquired whether
there was anyone who would oppose such a move, and Mr. Mills
responded that he would not favor it.
On the question of moving the discount rate to 3-3/4 per
cent or 4 per cent, Chairman Martin said he believed that such a
proposal represented a minority position around the table, and
there were no comments in response to that statement.
The question of open market operations, the Chairman said,
seemed to be the difficult one. He had stated his own position.
He did not know whether he would want to specify a target of $500
million of net borrowed reserves at any particular time, but he
would want to have operations exert additional pressure as rapidly
as that could be done without creating an untenable market condition.
Mr. Szymczak inquired whether net borrowed reserves in a
range of $300 to $350 would represent more restraint than had

5/26/59 -55
prevailed up to this point, and Mr. Rouse replied in the affirmative.
He added, however, that much would depend upon the distribution of
reserves.
Mr. Hayes then inquired whether, speaking in terms of the
next three weeks, it would satisfy the consensus to instruct the
Manager of the Account to move clearly toward a firmer tone and
leave the amount of net borrowed reserves somewhat indefinite.
Chairman Martin responded that he would be willing not to
set a figure, but that the Committee should have in mind what it
was driving at in terms of restraint. The country bank situation
had changed in relation to the city bank situation, and there were
many other differences, so it was difficult to make a comparison
with any previous period.
Mr. Hayes noted that net borrowed reserves had averaged
around $250 million in recent weeks, which was higher than most
people would have said five weeks ago. However, that range seemed
appropriate and it had not done any harm. Similarly, it might be
possible to go to $400 million or $500 million without hurting
anything. He would not like to have some specific target fixed
if it developed that it was possible to go further.
Mr. Shepardson said that he had given much thought to the
two approaches; namely, emphasis on the discount rate or emphasis
on further pressure in the market. It had seemed to him that

5/26/59 -56
possibly there would be some advantage in placing the major
emphasis on the discount rate at this point, with a movement
in the market to validate the increased rate. At the same time
he recognized the value of going the other way; that is, building
up the pressure clearly to indicate the necessity of a higher
discount rate. He was impressed by Chairman Martin's statement
about the Treasury's position. If the procedure was to be along
lines such as the Chairman had suggested, he felt the Committee
should definitely contemplate a sufficient increase in pressure
to exert a real bite without necessarily fixing a specific target.
It seemed to him that $500 million of net borrowed reserves might
be an appropriate direction and that a range of $300 million to
$350 million would fail to accomplish enough to carry out the
Chairman's suggestion of putting the bite in the market rather
than the discount rate.
Mr. Rouse noted that the tightening would have to be
accomplished, to a large extent, in the next two weeks, for the
next Treasury financing would be decided upon during the last week
of June. Furthermore, in the middle of the preceding week there
would be an expansion of float. Hence, he thought the stage ought
to be set by the middle of June. Tightening operations actually
could be carried out by letting natural factors function in the
next two weeks or a little more. If things seemed to be getting

5/26/59 -57
too extreme, the matter could be considered, but if the distribution
worked out it might be possible to get by all right by doing nothing
in the next two weeks.
Chairman Martin commented that if the projections were cor
rect, that would take net borrowed reserves toward $500 million.
The course mentioned by Mr. Rouse seemed to him a very desirable
way to proceed.
Mr. Thomas commented that there might be quite a lot of
pressure around Memorial Day. This year, however, the pressure
might be less than usual because the holiday would fall on Saturday.
If necessary, the situation could be taken care of by repurchase
agreements.
Mr. Rouse agreed that repurchase agreements over the week
end should be sufficient.
Mr. Balderston commented that he liked Mr. Rouse's suggestion
of allowing natural forces to help the System as much as possible. A
move to $300 million or $350 million of net borrowed reserves did
not seem to him to be the answer to the problem, and Mr. Rouse' s
solution seemed an excellent one.
Chairman Martin inquired whether this would meet the con
sensus as a target for the next few weeks, and there were no comments
to the contrary.
There followed some discussion of the dates on which the
directors of the respective Reserve Banks might meet for consideration

5/26/59 -58
of the discount rate, and it appeared from the comments that as
many as four or five of the Banks would be in a position to hold
directors' meetings this week.
Mr. Allen then referred to the estimating of the money
supply and said he gathered there was quite a bit of feeling that
the information now being obtained was not as up-to-date or as
reliable as it should be. He suggested that improvement might be
effected if country banks, instead of rendering reserve reports
every half month, were to report on an every-other-Wednesday basis,
which would mean 26 reports a year rather than 24. The Chicago
Reserve Bank, he said, was preparing to approach certain larger
country banks and ask them to furnish daily figures on reserves on
an experimental basis, which would provide information comparable
to that now available for central reserve and reserve city banks.
Also, it was planned to seek a sample of the smaller country banks.
Mr. Allen said it would be his suggestion that as many
Reserve Banks as possible try to do something along the lines that
the Chicago Bank proposed, unless there was some feeling on the
part of the Board that the reserve computation period ought to be
changed at an early date. He went on to say that a number of
country banks appeared to be getting restive about Federal Reserve
membership and that he rather doubted the advisability of a change
in the reserve computation period at this time.

5/26/59 -59
After some discussion in the light of Mr. Allen's comments,
Mr. Thomas referred to the technical problems involved in getting
current statistics and also in regard to the reserve period that
should be used. He noted that the System Research Advisory Com
mittee was meeting this afternoon and said that if the Open Market
Committee so desired it would be possible to prepare a memorandum
setting forth the problem and perhaps making some suggestions.
It was agreed that it would be desirable for the System
Research Advisory Committee to discuss the subject at its meeting
this afternoon, and Chairman Martin asked that recommendations be
presented to the Board of Governors with a view to considering how
further to proceed.
In connection with the current study of the Government
securities market, Mr. Young stated that one of the task groups
would like to have access to certain factual material contained
in the report on experience with present operating procedures which
was submitted by the staff committee appointed by the Federal Open
Market Committee on May 23, 1956. He noted that the reports
resulting from the Government securities market study would come
back to the Open Market Committee, as well as the Treasury.
There being no objection, it was understood that the
material in question would be made available to the task group
referred to by Mr. Young.

5/26/59 -60
With reference to the record of policy actions of the
Federal Open Market Committee for 1958, a draft of which had been
distributed for comment to the members of the Committee and the
Presidents not presently serving on the Committee, Mr. Robertson
said it concerned him that the record seemed to indicate almost
complete unanimity of views around the table at the respective
Committee meetings. Also, he felt that one reading the policy
record might wonder what sort of directions were given to the
Manager of the System Account. He suggested, therefore, that it
might be desirable to have a prefatory note to the policy record
which would indicate that there were differing views all through
the period covered by the record. Such a preface might also bring
out that the Manager of the Account sits with the Open Market
Committee and has the benefit of discussion around the table, for
which reason it is not essential to pinpoint specific instructions
to the Manager.
Mr. Szymczak commented that there were certain dangers in a
procedure such as Mr. Robertson had suggested and that it might be
desirable for the staff to prepare a draft of prefatory note and
submit it to the Committee.
Mr. Robertson agreed, adding that he was interested merely
in indicating that what came out of the respective meetings was a
general agreement, underlying which there might have been varying
viewpoints.

5/26/59 -61
The Chairman then stated that the staff would prepare a
draft of prefatory note along the lines Mr. Robertson had suggested
and distribute it for comment.
At this point Chairman Martin inquired of Mr. Mills whether
he wished to be recorded as opposed to the issuance of a policy
directive to the New York Bank in the form he (Chairman Martin) had
mentioned earlier during this meeting.
Mr. Mills responded in terms that he took as strong a view
as Mr. Robertson regarding the policy record. The policy record
showed for every meeting a record vote on the directive to the New
York Bank, whereas his view was that instructions given for open
market operations reflected a consensus.
Chairman Martin commented that Mr. Mills had raised a real
point. He went on to say that whenever any member of the Committee
wished to have his views recorded, that should certainly be done.
Mr. Hayes then stated that this discussion suggested the
desirability of preparing the policy record entries on a more current
basis, and there was general agreement with this comment.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and with Mr. Mills voting
"no", it was voted to direct the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York until otherwise
directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges
(including replacement of maturing securities, and
allowing maturities to run off without replacement) for

5/26/59 -62-
the System Open Market Account in the open market or,
in the case of maturing securities, by direct exchange
with the Treasury, as may be necessary in the light of
current and prospective economic conditions and the
general credit situation of the country, with a view
(a) to relating the supply of funds in the market to
the needs of commerce and business, (b) to restraining
inflationary credit expansion in order to foster
sustainable economic growth and expanding employment
opportunities, and (c) to the practical administration
of the Account; provided that the aggregate amount of
securities held in the System Account (including com
mitments for the purchase or sale of securities for
the Account) at the close of this date, other than
special short-term certificates of indebtedness
purchased from time to time for the temporary accom
modation of the Treasury, shall not be increased or
decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the
account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with
discretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issue
participations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks)
such amounts of special short-term certificates of
indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time for
the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided
that the total amount of such certificates held at any
one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed
in the aggregate $500 million.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, June 16, 1959, at 10:00 a.m.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary