A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, January 27, 1959, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Irons
Mr. Leach
Mr. Mangels
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Messrs. Allen, Johns, and Deming, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee 1/
Messrs. Bopp, Bryan, and Leedy, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Atlanta,
and Kansas City, respectively 1/
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Daane, Hostetler, Marget, Walker, and
Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Molony, Special Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Associate Adviser, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Keir, Acting Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
1/ Messrs. Allen and Leedy joined the meeting at the point indicated
in the minutes. Mr. Baughman also entered the room at that time.

1/27/59 -2
Mr. Latham, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston
Messrs. Roosa, Jones, and Tow, Vice Presi
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
New York, St. Louis, and Kansas City,
respectively
Messrs. Baughman and Einzig, Assistant Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Chicago and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Anderson, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia
Mr. Parsons, Director of Research, Federal Re
serve Bank of Minneapolis
Mr. Brandt, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta
Chairman Martin noted that Messrs. Allen and Leedy had been delayed
because their train was running behind schedule and that Mr. Latham was
attending the meeting in the absence of Mr. Erickson.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on January 6, 1959, were
approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
covering open market operations during the period January 6 through
January 21, 1959, and a supplemental report covering the period January
22 through January 26, 1959. Copies of both reports have been placed
in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Mr. Rouse reported that the money market had been steadily
tight since the last meeting of the Committee. Federal funds had
traded at the discount rate on every day, although some trading at

1/27/59 -3
rates slightly below the discount rate was reported on a few days,
and market rates of interest on Treasury bills had increased sharply.
Three-month bills traded yesterday at 2.9 per cent, and six-month
bills went at an average rate of 3.34 per cent in yesterday's auction.
The reserve figures had not worked out exactly as planned, Mr.
Rouse said, principally because of erratic movements in float. In
spite of average free reserves in one week, however, the average for
the full period since the last meeting had been reasonably close to
what he believed the Committee intended. In any event, the central
money market had been consistently tight; the temporary buildup in
reserves was concentrated at country banks while the New York and
Chicago banks carried large basic deficiencies steadily.
The new securities issued in the Treasury's cash financing
earlier this month had not behaved well in secondary trading. Al
though the new bonds and notes were attractively priced and were
satisfactorily oversubscribed, a volume of offerings reached the
market immediately after the books closed and drove both issues to
discounts from issue price. A principal influence behind this
development was widespread anticipation of higher rates of interest
over the coming months. It was generally anticipated that the
discount rate would be increased in the near future, and the
prospective demands for capital suggested steady pressure on rates.
Mr. Rouse commented that the Treasury was planning to
announce financing terms later this week for the refunding of its

1/27/59 -4
February maturities; meetings with the advisory committees were
scheduled for Wednesday and Thursday. After completing this re
funding, the Treasury probably would not have to return to market
again until late March or early April, when cash financing would
be necessary. Allowing 10 per cent attrition on the February
refunding, it was estimated that the Treasury would find it neces
sary to borrow about $6 billion in April and May. If attrition
should be larger than estimated, however, it might be necessary
for the Treasury to return to market a bit earlier and for larger
amounts. The Treasury was faced with a difficult decision in
pricing its refunding securities. In the present market atmosphere,
it seemed likely that market yields would tend to rise to whatever
level the Treasury set on its new issue, so that attempts to achieve
a successful exchange through attractive pricing might be self
defeating.
Mr. Rouse went on to say that present projections suggested
a need for reserves during the next three weeks, if an even keel were
to be maintained, but that sales from the System Account to absorb
reserves would then be necessary in subsequent weeks.
Mr. Robertson asked if the 10 per cent attrition mentioned by
Mr. Rouse referred to the total of February maturities or to the
publicly-held portion, to which Mr. Rouse replied that he had in mind
that 10 per cent of the total maturities, or $1.5 million, might be

1/27/59 -5
the maximum attrition, while it might be possible to hold attrition
to 10 per cent of public holdings, or $900 million.
In response to an inquiry by Chairman Martin regarding the
market attitude with respect to the possibility of an offering of
10-year bonds in the current refunding, Mr. Rouse said that when
Under Secretary of the Treasury Baird met with the dealers in New
York last week the market atmosphere was quite bad and dealer com
ments did not encourage the idea of an issue in the 10-year range.
While some extremely pessimistic comments suggested that the Treasury
should confine its offering to two issues in the under-one-year range,
it was felt generally that the Treasury could attract as much as $2
billion into a note in the three-to-five-year range. There appeared
to be no interest, however, in anything beyond five years. Mr.
Mangels stated that he had heard reports from banks in San Francisco
to the effect that there was no interest in a longer-term obligation
and that attrition would be quite high unless the Treasury offering
was most attractive.
Chairman Martin then asked what the one-year rate was at
present, and Mr. Rouse responded that although the market rate was
in the neighborhood of 3-5/8 per cent, the Treasury should pay 3.70
to 3.75 per cent on a one-year obligation. He added that beyond
two or three years the rate curve was virtually flat at 4 per cent.
Therefore, if the Treasury offered a security in the three- to five-year

1/27/59
range, it probably would have to carry a 4 per cent coupon and be
priced at par or a small discount.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the open market transactions during
the period January 6 through January
26, 1959, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
In supplementation of the staff memorandum distributed under
date of January 23, 1959, Mr. Young made the following statement with
respect to economic developments:
Major sectors of domestic demand for goods and also
of output have continued to show advance. Given the
momentum of expansive forces, advance seems likely to
proceed in the months ahead, with stimulus emanating
particularly from active consumer buying and home pur
chasing, business inventory reaccumulation, and more
active investment, business and governmental, in fixed
facilities. The most recent information from abroad
for industrial nations of Europe confirms cessation of
decline in activity and the beginning of recovery. While
steel and textile output continue to be depressed, steel
consumption at least appears to exceed output, a condition
not likely long to persist. U. S. exports to Europe
showed significant pickup during fall months, but downward
adjustment in purchases of U. S. goods by the less-developed
economies has continued.
The highlights of recent domestic and foreign develop
ments are well detailed in the staff memorandum. My special
comments will be concerned with recent employment and un
employment trends.
Employment gains have lagged output gains in this
recovery, as they usually do. The lag, however, has been
greater than in preceding postwar recovery periods, and the
level attained by unemployment has been both higher and
somewhat more sluggish in its response to rising activity.
Thus, while real GNP and industrial production are currently
both within striking distance of earlier highs, nonfarm
employment--up 700,000 from its recession low--has regained
less than a third of its recession loss of 2.4 million jobs.

1/27/59
Since September, there has been little evidence of any
extensive general rehiring of workers other than for seasonal
reasons. In the two preceding postwar recession-recoveries,
employment stabilized for a number of months after the reces
sion bottom, but once recovery set in, employment increases
were not halted until a new peak was reached.
What accounts for the slower pickup in employment in this
cycle than in preceding postwar cycles? Several factors may
be mentioned.
(1) Productivity increases in manufacturing industry have
apparently been higher this time than in the earlier recovery
periods, reflecting very high modernization investment in pre
ceding boom as well as the greatly expanded industrial research
and development programs of the boom period. For instance,
automobile output in December, while only 4 per cent lower than
in December 1956, provided one-fifth less in production worker
employment than two years earlier. The railroads, while carry
ing about as much freight as in late 1957, provided 10 per cent
less employment. Similarly, the coal mines have been about
equalling output levels of a year ago with about 15 per cent
fever employees.
The larger productivity gains of this recovery period may
also be a factor in recent stabilizing of average hours of work
per week in all manufacturing industry. Virtually all of the
recession decline in hours worked had been recovered by last
September and there has been no further gain since. In earlier
postwar cycles, hours of work continued to increase long after
this stage of recovery. It is important here to note that,
since 1955, there seems to have been a downward drift in the
length of the workweek.
(2) It may well be that labor cost increases of recent
years have made management more cost conscious than in any
earlier period and that greater efforts are now being applied
to limiting employment and overtime increases in order to keep
costs down. Also, postwar growth in fringe benefits now makes
record-keeping costs and benefit liabilities rise rapidly as
new workers are hired, and this would operate to slow down
additions to work forces.
(3) In machinery and other industries associated with
investment outlays, employment has shown little recovery rise
because expansion in fixed investment has not yet shown marked
revival. In the past, expansion of nonproduction worker
employment, associated especially with research and develop
ment, has been correlated with rising investment. In the
preceding two cycles, business investment had shown much more
revival than has been shown up to the present point in this
cycle.

1/27/59
(4) Nonmanufacturing employment, which had shown strong
growth through the whole postwar period, with only modest
slackening of expansion in the two preceding downturns, de
clined moderately in this recent recession and has shown
little expansive tendency in recovery. Judging by the rise
in nonindustrial GNP since last spring, as sharp or sharper
productivity gains have been experienced in nonmanufacturing
activities as in manufacturing industries during this recovery
period. Presumably these nonmanufacturing activities are
digesting earlier postwar increases in their working force.
(5) The industries in which recession declines in employ
ment have been highest and greater than in preceding recessions
have been durable manufacturing, railroads, and mining. These
industries have been subject to a secular decline in postwar
years in employment of semi-skilled workers, with reductions
in semi-skilled jobs more accentuated in each succeeding
recession-recovery period. This means, of course, a sizable
problem of transfer of employment to other gainful activities,
a problem that can be only resolved slowly.
With the rise in employment opportunities lagging, that
is to say, showing slower advance than in preceding postwar
recoveries, what about the unemployment problen and prospects
over the months ahead?
Unemployment has been higher all through this recession
recovery period than in earlier postwar cycles. It reached a
seasonally adjusted high of 7.5 per cent of the labor force
in the summer and declined to about 6 per cent subsequently.
In numbers of unemployed, the decline has been about 1 million
workers.
While unemployment has been higher than in preceding
cyclical dips, the general pattern of rise and dhnoaetsc line
been dissimilar to that of preceding cycles. The seasonally
adjusted unemployment did not fall below 4.5 per cent of the
labor force in the 1949-50 recovery until about 12 months after
recession ebb, and in the 1953-54 recovery this rate was not
pierced until after 10 months. In the Korean boom, the rate
fell to under 3 per cent, but in the 1955-57 boom, 4 per cent
constituted a floor and most of the time the rate fluctuated
just above 4 per cent.
In the two earlier postwar recoveries, employment rose
and unemployment declined at the same time that sizable addi
tions were being made to the working force. In the recent
recession, part of the rise in unemployment was due to the
large number of secondary earners who entered the working

1/27/59
force when primary earners had their pay reduced or lost
their jobs. The recent decline in unemployment has
reflected in part withdrawal from the work force of many
of these secondary earners as well as withdrawal of some
older and younger workers for want of job opportunities.
Recovery in job opportunities has been uneven for
different groups of workers. Younger workers have faired
better than older workers, and females better than males.
Relatively high rates of unemployment persist for durable
goods workers, semi-skilled and unskilled workers, and for
nonwhite workers. Among those with long duration unemploy
ment, durable goods workers, miners, and railroad workers
are numerous in relation to their role in the labor force.
Recovery re-employment has also been uneven geographically.
In California, unemployment has fallen to reasonably normal
levels. In Michigan, it has fluctuated only seasonally and
unemployment is currently well above last year's rates. At
midsummer, the number of substantial surplus labor markets was
89 out of 149, and by the present month the number of such
markets had declined by only 13. The concentration of sub
stantial surplus markets continues to be in the east and
midwest.
Two observations about current labor market conditions
seem warranted from this review. First, on the supply side,
a conjuncture of secular and cyclical forces seems to have
contributed to the present volume and composition of
unemployment. As we have noted, a high proportion of the
unemployed is concentrated in durable goods and related
industries, making the continuing unemployment problem a
cluster of localized problems rather than a general problem.
But this may also work to make unemployment slack linger on.
We should not be surprised to hear the terms "technological
unemployment" and "labor immobility" used more frequently
again to describe a possibly slower decline in the unemploy
ment rate than featured the earlier cycles.
Second, on the demand side, the labor market in the
recent period has, on the whole, been experiencing a less
vigorous demand for labor than in the comparable phase of
the other postwar cycles. But as consumption expenditures
rise further and as capital expenditures begin actively to
expand, demand for labor will surely strengthen, and
particularly in the durable goods areas where unemployment
is now concentrated. Gains in worker productivity are
typically high in the recovery phase of the cycle and then
slow down in the expansion phase. Gains in output in the
expansion phase increasingly require utilization of older
facilities and these facilities take more manpower per
unit of output.

1/27/59 -10-
How fast available manpower resources will be taken
up in the period ahead depends on the pace of further
expansion in aggregate demand and especially of durable
goods demand and on the strength of competitive responses,
especially price response, in meeting additional growth in
demand. If expansion in money demand is dissipated in price
advance, the employment impact will, of course, be lessened.
Taking into account the relatively larger pool of un
employed manpower at this stage of the precent cycle compared
with earlier postwar cycles, it seems reasonable to observe
that manpower availability will not become a limiting factor
on the further increase in total production nearly so soon
as it did in the two preceding cycles. This is clearly a
bullish factor for the length of the expansion period that
now seems to be beginning.
In our presentation at the last meeting, we suggested
that an increase in the money supply in the period ahead
somewhat above the average of recent years might be appro
priate. This suggestion was on the basis of prospective
manpower and other resource availabilities. If prevailing
inflationary and speculative clouds can be effectively
dispersed by a firm Federal fiscal policy and a firm
monetary policy, this problem of the proper rate of monetary
expansion for a growth period without inflation will become
an urgent matter for the Committee's consideration.
During Mr. Young's statement, Messrs. Allen, Leedy, and Baughman
joined the meeting.
Staff memoranda on the outlook for member bank reserves and on
the outlook for Treasury cash requirements had been distributed under
dates of January 23 and January 26, 1959, respectively. With further
reference to financial developments and credit policy, Mr. Thomas
made the following statement:
In view of current trends and potentials, prospects
point to continued economic expansion for the next year
or more. The monetary basis for such expansion is already
largely established. Forces mostly outside the area of

1/27/59 -11-
bank credit are likely to determine whether demands for
consumption and investment will be of such magnitude
and nature as to reduce the volume of unemployment,
whether there will be sustainable growth, whether per
sistent pressures on prices will produce creeping inflation,
or whether speculative commitments will create a bubble on a
boom that will burst at an early stage.
The principal forces that may determine the course of
events include, first, the decisions of consumers as to the
rate and nature of their expenditures. Consumer incomes,
together with accumulated savings, appear to be adequate to
permit further growth in consumption. Incomes will be sup
ported or enlarged by the high level of Government spending
and by other elements of expansion now in process.
The magnitude and nature of consumer expenditures,
however, will be influenced by the second important set of
forces, namely, the pricing and marketing policies of
business. Will consumers be attracted by the goods and
services offered at the prices established? Will producers,
including labor, continue to endeavor to raise their prices
or will consumers be offered some of the benefits of
productivity increases? Will competitive forces under the
impetus of unutilized resources halt the rising tendencies
in finished goods prices and perhaps bring about some down
ward price adjustments? Unless prices are kept down, can
there be sustained growth in consumption?
Sustained long-term growth in real incomes depends
primarily upon continued improvemeinnt s productivity per
person employed. This requisite for growth cannot be
obtained merely by increasing consumer incomes through
programs of Government spending. Such measures may even
retard productivity increases.
The next element needed for continued growth and to a
considerable extent for productivity improvements is an
appropriate volume of investment in equipment, plants, other
structures, and means of transportation. Pricing can also
be an important factor in encouraging investment, as well as
consumption.
Finally, it must be recognized that investment is not
possible without saving. Saving depends on the decisions of
individuals and businesses. Most savings are channeled into
investment through financial institutions. The commercial
banking system is only one of these channels and by no means
the dominant one, althogh it is of marginal importance. The
creation of money through the expansion of bank credit can at

1/27/59 -12.
times, by stimulating spending and investment, bring about
increased production, but it cannot be a substitute for
saving in real terms or for extended periods. True saving
requires the production of goods that are withheld from
consumption.
This analysis leads to the conclusion that further
recovery to reasonably full utilization of resources and
then continued growth at a sustainable rate will depend
upon individual decisions with respect to pricing and
buying and investment and saving and do not now need any
additional stimulants through fiscal or credit policies.
There is danger that the forces already at work, including
expectations as to the future, may induce commitments of a
speculative or otherwise unsustainable nature or may lead to
pricing policies that will first contribute to inflation but
ultimately discourage buying. Tendencies of this nature
could be aggravated by ready availability of credit to
finance speculative ventures or discouraged by credit
restraints.
Turning to consideration of the present credit situation,
it seems clear that further stimulants to credit expansion are
not necessary. The forces that have been mentioned are not
being held back by inability to obtain financing. Credit
demands and the availability of funds for investment are
adequate--in the aggregate-to support further expansion and
even encourage excessive speculative commitments. Businesses
and individuals already possess a substantial amount of
liquidity.
Banks can meet a considerable volume of short-term credit
needs of business through the shifting of assets or by temporary
borrowing of any needed reserves. This may mean some increase
in aggregate borrowing at the Reserve Banks. A net increase
of less than half a billion dollars, leaving out temporary
variations, could provide all the reserves needed for adequate
growth in the money supply during the next year. Under the
conditions likely to exist, any additions to reserves should
be supplied in this manner, which imposes restraints, rather
than through open market operations.
Financial problems facing this country, however, are not
as simple as this. They are complicated by the existence of
a heavy Government deficit and a formidable task of debt
raising and refunding in a period of incipient boom in the
economy. The prospective requirements of Treasury financing
under the new Budget are described in a separate memorandum.
Although the Treasury will be able to retire debt on balance
between now and the end of June, the timing of receipts and

1/27/59 -13-
expenditures and shortly-spaced maturities will require
frequent and substantial operations to raise new cash, as
well as for refunding. In the latter half of this calendar
year largely for seasonal reasons, there will be a deficit
and further heavy cash borrowing needs, even if the projected
balance is obtained in the budget for fiscal 1960 as a whole.
Treasury borrowing, therefore, will continue to exert
demand pressures on the available supply of lendable funds.
At the same time Treasury expenditures will supply funds that
could help finance economic expansion and reduce needs for
private borrowing. The course of interest rates and of other
economic pressures will depend on how much private borrowing
demands increase.
Developments in the money and Government securities
markets since the turn of the year largely reflect the
pressures and anticipations arising from Treasury financing
operations in process and in prospect. The Treasury has just
raised about $3.5 billion of new cash, much of which has not
yet been distributed to firm holders. A major refunding
operation is imminent. Some new cash borrowing--at least
through increased bill issues--is likely to be needed this
quarter and a considerable amount in April.
It is no wonder that rates on Treasury bills, which did
not show the customary increase in December, have increased
in January, instead of declining as they usually do. Nor is
it surprising that bond yields in general have risen to new
high levels. These changes represent adjustments that were
inevitable sooner or later under current prospects. It is
more helpful than harmful to the attainment of a well balanced
market that they have occurred. Continued strength in the
stock market has also been a source of pressure on the bond
market. There has been a further widening of the margin
between stock and bond yields.
Bank credit trends in general have not been startling
and show no particularly strong private credit demands.
Credit increases in December conformed closely to the usual
seasonal pattern. Currency outside banks showed slightly
less than the usual seasonal increase, while demand deposits
remained unchanged on a seasonally adjusted basis. The
total money supply--seasonally adjusted--was 2 per cent or
more above the peak level of mid-1957, while the turnover
of demand deposits was still below the level of that period.
In addition time deposits were about 12 per cent larger.
In the first two weeks of January, total loans and
investments of city banks declined somewhat more than they

1/27/59 -14-
had in the same period of other recent years except 1958.
In the third week, however, according to preliminary
figures, holdings of Government securities increased by
$1 billion, reflecting payment for the new Treasury notes,
and loans showed little change. A smaller than usual
decline in commercial loans was offset by an increase in
loans on securities. Ordinarily loans and investments
have continued to decline in that week. In addition to
the increase in U. S. Government deposits, there appears
also to have been a substantial increase in private
demand deposits in the third week, following moderate
declines in the two previous weeks.
Reserves released by after-Christmas seasonal factors
have been absorbed by a reduction of nearly $900 million
in System holdings of bills and of repurchase contracts
and a decline in float. Member bank borrowings, on a
weekly average basis, have been as high as $700 million,
although in the past week they have averaged around $450
million, reflecting a larger than usual mid-month float
increase caused by weather conditions. There is no
evidence that the low discount rate is encouraging credit
expansion on the basis of borrowed reserves.
Figures for the current week include the effects of a
large increase in required reserves due to payments for
the new Treasury securities through tax and loan accounts
and of some decline in float, only partly offset by a
continued return flow of currency, and will apparently show
net borrowed reserves of well over $100 million. Indications
are for net borrowed reserves of over $300 million during
the next two weeks, in the absence of System operations. If
the usual seasonal decline in private demand deposits con
tinues, along with the reduction in Treasury accounts from
the present increased level, there will be net free reserves
during the last part of February and the first half of March,
which should be prevented by System operations.
Unless strong demand pressures for bank credit should
develop, the situation will probably be one calling for only
moderate adjustments. It might be advisable to let varying
pressures that develop in the market bring about their own
adjustments with a minimum of System intervention, except
for large changes in required reserves caused by variations
in tax and loan accounts. Under such a procedure, any
credit expansion would bring about a tightened reserve
situation and credit contraction would result in an easier
money market.

1/27/59 -15
Chairman Martin stated that the next meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee would be held on February 10, 1959, with the
annual organizational meeting of the Committee on March 3, 1959.
The views expressed during the discussion today therefore should be
made with that schedule in mind.
Mr. Hayes then made the following statement with regard to
the business outlook and credit policy:
It is encouraging to note that business activity has
continued to expand at a vigorous pace and that this trend
seems likely to be maintained in the coming months. This
gradual recovery, marked by restrained optimism rather than
exuberance, is more likely to bring sustained growth than a
more rapid advance which would tend to generate exaggerated
expectations and speculative tendencies. At present the
stock market is the only area where such tendencies are
clearly in evidence.
Favorable business influences include the likelihood of
some restocking by retailers and wholesalers after the good
Christmas sales experience, the apparent cessation of inven
tory liquidation at the manufacturing level, and the prospect
of well-sustained residential construction. On the other
hand, the vigor of automobile demand is still an open question,
and the accelerated steel purchasing which has already com
menced in anticipation of a possible strike is of course only
a short-run stimulant. One distinctly disturbing feature is
the prospect for seasonal increases in unemployment in
January and February, despite the recovery in output. Per
sistent substantial unemployment is disturbing both because
of the economic losses involved and because of the possibility
that it may give rise to unsound proposals for artificial
remedies. Another fundamentally disturbing element, of course,
is the serious doubt whether a balanced budget can really be
achieved in the next fiscal year.
There is a gratifying degree of price stability in evi
dence at the moment, despite the obvious inflationary dangers
on the horizon. For example, the wholesale price index was
unchanged in December at a figure lower than that recorded at
the bottom of the recession. Declines have been reported for

1/27/59 -16.
most sensitive commodity prices, and the consumer price index
has receded slightly. The case for expecting inflationary
forces to break out must therefore rest essentially on
prospective financial and collective bargaining developments,
rather than on excessive acceleration of business or consumer
spending. The 5 per cent wage increase now being granted by
the oil industry seems overly generous in relation to national
productivity gains and will not help other industries to
"hold the line" in the next few months.
As for credit developments, the preliminary estimates for
all commercial banks in December show an above-average growth
of loans, with real estate loans continuing to expand rapidly
and with business and security loans increasing seasonally.
Fragmentary January data for reporting member banks suggest,
however, that rather heavy seasonal repayments are now oc
curring. Loan demand can still not be labeled ebullient; and
I might add that the New York banks feel under sufficient
pressure to be rather cautious in their lending policies.
Viewing the Treasury's financing program for the rest of
this fiscal year, it appears likely that, after the mid
February refunding, there will be a lull of something over a
month before substantial cash borrowings, totaling around $6
billion, are required in April and May. Presumably the
announcement of the April financing will be made late in
March.
With respect to credit policy, the economic situation
does not call for any change at the present time. Open market
operations, in conjunction with the Treasury's financing
activities, have produced a reasonably tight money market
atmosphere. I think we should aim for about the same degree
of tightness as we have had, as evidenced by the feel of the
market, and there would seem to be no reason to change the
directive.
The only area of doubt concerns the discount rate. With
market rates now well in excess of 2-1/2 per cent, we are
close to the point where a 3 per cent discount rate would seem
desirable on technical grounds alone. However, we are not free
agents for the next few weeks, for the prospective Treasury
announcement due this Thursday strongly indicates the advisabil
ity of maintaining an even keel from now until the refunding is
completed and the market has had a short time to digest the
new issues. Moreover, subscribers to the recent Treasury cash
offerings might look upon a rate increase at this time as a
sign of bad faith. Since the market is expecting a 1/2 per

1/27/59 -17
cent rate rise, and only the timing is really in doubt,
our failure to raise the rate at the present time should
not prevent a realistic pricing of the securities to be
offered in the refunding. And there is always the danger
that an increase now could be interpreted as a signal of
intensified restraint, creating fears of a progressive
rise in interest rates over the coming months, and thus
adding to the Treasury's difficulties and perhaps inviting
political trouble, especially if the prime rate were to
move up as a consequence. Finally, there is some advantage
in letting the dust settle a little longer on the recent
international monetary developments before moving our
discount rate higher. In short, the combination of these
factors points to late February or early March as the
first opportunity for a rate change. Action at that time
is indicated in the absence of unforeseen developments in
the interim.
Mr. Irons said that in the Eleventh District the economy was
moving along at a high level. While not too much higher than it had
been, the strong and favorable level of activity was spread through
the various sectors of production and trade. Unemployment was down
a little in the last month, and generally speaking conditions were
good. A strong demand for bank loans was reported, with the implica
tion that bankers in the district were trying to hold back and could
increase their loans further if they were so inclined. An increase
in activity at the discount window was being noticed, with some of
the larger reserve city banks coming in occasionally, which seemed
to bear out the reports regarding the strength of loan demand.
There appeared to be more confidence with regard to the continuation
of economic and business expansion and also, unfortunately, about the
inevitability of inflation. People seemed doubtful about the

1/27/59 -18
possibility of balancing the Federal budget. It was difficult to
see how this attitude could be dispelled until something actually
was done to convince the public that perhaps there was not going
to be inflation.
As to policy, Mr. Irons said that he was in something of a
quandary. He felt that open market policy should continue to be as
restrictive as it had been, since he saw no argument for any relaxa
tion, and whenever there were doubts he believed that they ought to
be resolved rather deliberately on the side of restraint rather than
ease. In these circumstances, the Manager of the Account must rely
very heavily on his impressions and sensitivity to the market. The
forthcoming Treasury refunding operation might be unusually difficult
and result in a large amount of attrition, with the result that the
Treasury then would be looking for money again rather soon. The
Treasury seemed likely to be in the picture rather continuously,
and it was hard to reconcile the developing economic situation with
the needs of the Treasury. Perhaps the most that could be done in
the next two weeks would be to continue monetary policy about as it
had been, in no event less restrictive and with any deviations on
the more restrictive side whenever there was doubt.
Turning to the discount rate, Mr. Irons said that technically
it should be raised. While he did not think that it made a great
deal of difference, he would lean on the side of acting sooner than

1/27/59 -19
the month of March, particularly because this would not be a
startling change. As he had noted, the Treasury might have to
come to market again early in March if attrition on the forth
coming refunding was very high. In substance, while he did not
feel strongly one way or the other, he had some question whether
the System ought to wait for a considerable time before it gave
confirmation to the prevailing interest rate structure by an in
crease in the discount rate.
Chairman Martin inquired of Mr. Irons whether he thought
it would not be wise to change the rate before the next meeting
of the Open Market Committee, to which Mr. Irons replied that he
had not meant to suggest by his remarks that it necessarily would
be unwise. If in the judgment of the directors of a Reserve Bank
there should be an increase in the discount rate before the meeting
on February 10, he would not object. Meetings of the directors of
several of the Reserve Banks were scheduled shortly after the next
meeting of the Committee on dates when it appeared that the Treasury
refunding would not yet be completed. Consequently, he did not know
whether it would make much difference if discount rate action were
deferred until such time.
Mr. Mangels said that the situation on the West Coast was
somewhat similar to that reported by Mr. Irons for the Eleventh
District. Business conditions continued to show strength and were

1/27/59 -20
at quite a good level. As usual at the end of the year, bankers
and businessmen had engaged in forecasting, and almost without
exception the opinions reflected strong confidence in the progress
of the economy. At the same time, no more than one or two of the
forecasters expressed a feeling that boom conditions were in
prospect for this year. Defense procurement and space programs
of the Government now being developed in the Twelfth District
continued to provide major support to the economy. This tied in
with the increased consumer spending that the district had ex
perienced. Preliminary data for December revealed that employment
reached a new record, while unemployment was down to 5.4 per cent,
about the level of a year ago. Through the first two weeks in
January, unemployment figures were running a little lower than
year-ago levels. The greatest improvement was attributable to
durable goods manufacturing, the sector of business hardest hit
during the recession. Metals and mining activity had now leveled
off, while lumber showed increases in both orders and prices.
Farm income prospects, however, were not as good for this year as
they had appeared to be in the early part of 1958. Automobile
registrations in the State of California in December were up LO
per cent over November, thus producing the highest month since
September 1955, and scattered reports through mid-January indicated
that improvement had continued. Department store sales in the first

1/27/59 -21
two weeks of January continued at the record December levels,
10 per cent over a year ago, and home appliance sales were up
25 to 30 per cent.
Turning to banking developments in the district, Mr. Mangels
said that demand deposits during the three weeks ended January 14
showed an increase larger than the increase during the corresponding
period last year. Time deposits likewise rose, although the rate of
increase had been declining in recent periods. All categories of
bank loans except real estate loans reflected declines, though not
to the extent anticipated; bankers reported that repayments had not
been as heavy as they expected. During this same period district
banks sold about $135 million of Government securities, and their
purchases and sales of Federal funds on January 14 were almost in
balance. The Reserve Bank had been experiencing a slight increase
in member bank borrowing; as of Thursday, January 22, five member
banks, including two reserve city banks, were borrowing a total of
about $30 million.
With respect to policy, Mr. Mangels commented that a principal
factor during the next few weeks would be the heavy Treasury financing,
on which there was likely to be heavy attrition unless the Treasury
priced its offering on a very acceptable basis. Under those condi
tions, he felt that the Desk should be given wide discretion to base
its operations pretty much on day-to-day market conditions, although

1/27/59 -22
he hoped that it might be possible to maintain net borrowed reserves
of around $100 million. The directive seemed satisfactory. As to
the discount rate, he hoped that no action would be taken until
around the end of February or the first part of March. The next
meeting of the San Francisco directors was to be held on February 11,
with the succeeding meeting on March 11, which meant that if discount
rate action were taken prior to the latter date the San Francisco
Bank was likely to lag behind. In his opinion, the San Francisco
directors would be favorable to an increase in the rate at that time.
Mr. Deming said that the upward trend continued in the Ninth
District, although muted by the seasonal laws. After commenting
that he had been impressed by the presentations of Mr. Young and
Mr. Thomas, he went on to say that the Minneapolis Bank had spent
considerable time in the last three weeks looking into longer-run
prospects for the economy and had come to conclusions not appreciably
different from those given or implied by those papers. Therefore,
for the immediate long-run, if that was not too paradoxical an
expression, he believed that appropriate monetary posture should
produce a drag, although not a strong and positive restriction.
This would be similar to the position taken by Mr. Thomas.
For the next two weeks, Mr. Deming felt that there should
be no appreciable change in pressure and no overt action. Following

1/27/59 -23
that period, however, he believed that it would be appropriate to
adjust the discount rate upward to put it in line with the market.
While he did not think the exact timing of such action made a great
deal of difference, it was his view that the rate should be increased
with reasonable promptness after the completion of the refunding
operation. His preference, he thought, would be not to do anything
until the refunding was completed.
Mr. Allen said that with recovery under way for nine months
it was now apparent that a number of Seventh District areas had
lagged behind the nation, partly because of strikes in the automobile,
farm machinery, and construction machinery industries, but more so
because producers' goods are relatively important in the district.
Machinery of all types and construction equipment accounted in 1957
for 43 per cent of manufacturing employment in the district's five
state area, compared with 28 per cent for the nation, and the typical
pattern in a recovery is for the district's type of industry to
improve less rapidly than others. However, reports indicated that
a large backlog of proposed heavy construction work was building
up, mainly in utilities and manufacturing. Engineering News Record
indicated backlogs of proposed projects at the end of 1958 at a
new high, amounting to 10 times the contracts awarded during 1958, a
comparison that held true for both the United States and the Midwest.
If the current business expansion should follow the pattern of earlier

1/27/59 -24
recoveries, the lags in Seventh District recovery would give way to
rapid increases in output and employment later in 1959 and in 1960.
In the three post-Christmas weeks ending January 17, Mr.
Allen said, district department store sales were 3 per cent higher
than a year ago, compared with a 4 per cent increase nationally.
The district's larger banks had experienced tighter money market
conditions since the end of the year, in large degree because
deposits declined more rapidly than loans were paid off. At Chicago
banks, the loan decline had been less than in either 1958 or 1957.
Steel ordering was picking up smartly, doubtless due in part to the
possibility of a strike next summer, but also due to the sharp
decline in inventories in 1958. The district's steel mills were
operating well above the national average, the rate in Chicago being
85 per cent and in Detroit 96 per cent.
Continuing his comments on district developments, Mr. Allen
said that a January survey of country bankers indicated a strengthening
of interest in farm real estate, with over half the bankers in Iowa
and Illinois stating that the current trend of land values was up
and about one-third of the bankers in other farm areas making the
same report. These proportions were larger than in other recent
surveys, and almost no bankers reported a downward trend. The demand
for agricultural loans remained strong through December, especially
in cattle-feeding areas, with the volume of new loans continuing to
exceed year-earlier levels.

1/27/59 -25
With respect to the automobile industry, Mr. Allen commented
that sales of new model cars through the first 10 days in January
were high enough to be a pleasant surprise to the auto manufacturers
and dealers. During December, approximately 490,000 cars were
retailed in the 26 selling days for an average selling rate of better
than 18,800, and for three weeks of that month Chrysler Corporation
was handicapped by strikes that eventually choked off all production.
Studies have indicated a typical seasonal decline in sales between
December and January of 10 per cent, so when January opened at a
lower sales rate than December it was not a surprise. In fact, sales
during the first 10 days of January were a slightly less than seasonal
9 per cent below sales during the similar period in December and a
significant 5.5 per cent above sales during the opening period in
1958. While some industry observers believed there was no question
about public acceptance of the new models, a survey made last week
by the Wall Street Journal mentioned that the dealers felt it would
be necessary to wait until spring for the real market test. However,
even those who thought that only March and April would tell the story
were optimistic about 1959 bettering the dismal showing of 1958. As
of January 10, the stock of unsold new cars totaled 614,000, more
than 100,000 below the figure at the same time last year. When based
on the selling rate of early January, this represented a 39.6 days'
supply, but a calculation based on the average selling rate of the

1/27/59 -26
last three periods and the January 10 stocks would indicate a more
acceptable 33.5 days' supply. Since early October, Mr. Allen noted,
automobile men had had one obstacle after another placed in the way
of production plans. When strikes within the industry were settled,
those at plants of suppliers of strategic parts remained a problem,
Chrysler being particularly vulnerable because of its greater
dependence on outside suppliers. With Chrysler now faced by a
shortage of windshield glass, the pattern of January production was
not entirely clear, but a conservative estimate of 570,000 would
represent a 16.5 per cent improvement over 1958.
Mr. Allen also stated that in early January the Chicago
Business Economists Group was polled concerning expectations for
1959. Whereas in the past there had always been at least a few
members who took a relatively gloomy view of the outlook, this year
there was unanimous agreement on steady improvement during 1959,
differences of opinion relating only to the speed of the advance.
Turning to policy, Mr. Allen expressed the view that open
market operations should continue with the same goals in mind as
in the recent past and any doubts resolved on the side of restraint.
With reference to the discount rate, the view held by all of the
Chicago Bank's directors, as well as by the Bank's economists and
himself, was that economic considerations, including the pace of
industry, the structure of money market rates, and fears of
inflationary pressures, made a case for increasing the rate to

1/27/59 -27
3 per cent. As a matter of fact, the Bank's economists had urged
him to recommend such a change at the directors' meeting last week,
it being their view that an increase was a technical necessity and
that it would be unfair to purchasers of Government bonds if the
change were not made. His answer, Mr. Allen said, was in terms
that the economists were worrying about the fellow in the plugged
hat rather than the fellow who shines shoes, for if the Federal
Reserve should contribute in any way to the failure of the Treasury
financing it would be doing a disservice to the majority of the
people. For that reason, he felt that the discount rate should not
be changed before the next meeting of the Committee. Although the
directors of the Chicago Bank were in his opinion ready to act, it
was not his present intention to recommend a rate change before
the meeting scheduled for February 19. In the meantime there would
be another meeting of the Open Market Committee, and the Chicago
Bank could be guided in the light of conditions as they might develop.
Mr. Leedy reported continued ample evidence of the expansive
forces at work in the Tenth District. There had been a severe winter,
with record-breaking cold spells in December and thus far in January
and quite a bit of snow in recent weeks. While the weather had been
quite favorable for the wheat areas, the indications for winter wheat
pointed to a much smaller crop than last year. Feeding of livestock
showed startling increases; in New Mexico, the number of cattle on

1/27/59 -28
feed this year was 58 per cent higher than last year, and there were
smaller but significant increases in the other States of the district.
While insured unemployment in the district increased in December, the
rate continued more favorable than in the nation as a whole, ranging
downward from a high of 4.7 per cent in Oklahoma. Department store
sales continued strong, with sales in the week ending January 17
running 11 per cent higher than in the comparable week of 1958 and
a 13 per cent increase above the year-ago level indicated for the
four-week period ending on that date. There had been a continued
demand for credit; in the four weeks ended January 14, business loans
increased contrary to the seasonal pattern.
Mr. Leedy said he would continue to apply about the same degree
of pressure that the Committee had been undertaking to apply in recent
weeks. He would move as quickly as possible on the discount rate.
Considering the problem of the Treasury, he would not want to move
until after the books for the exchange offering were closed, but after
that he saw no reason to delay. An adjustment of the rate was expected
generally, and everyone seemed to agree that it was overdue.
Mr. Leach said that Fifth District economic developments
during January appeared to have followed the pattern of the preceding
few months, with continued but by no means booming advance. The
cotton gray goods business was limited by the customary lull in the
first half of January, but mills had substantial orders on hand for
immediate and nearby deliveries. While new orders for later delivery

1/27/59 -29
of apparel fabrics were a bit slow, new orders for industrial fabrics
reflected the steady improvement that had taken place in this end of
the textile business in recent weeks. Representatives of the furni
ture industry reported a rising volume of new orders, and with the
exception of the export trade the demand for bituminous coal appeared
to be improving. Seasonally adjusted department store sales in
January were estimated to have held very close to the near-record
volume of December, and available reports on general business condi
tions indicated expectations of gradual increases in production,
employment, and wage and salary payments during the first half of
this year.
Mr. Leach expressed the opinion that the System's policy of
keeping a gradually tightening rein on bank reserves had appropriately
contributed to the continuing, moderate, widely-based expansion of
production and consumption experienced since last spring. However, he
was concerned about inflationary dangers and felt that the objective
of stability in the value of the dollar should be kept foremost in
mind. Except for periods of Treasury financing, he had thought in
recent weeks that appropriate policy called for a gradual tightening
through open market operations, followed by an increase in the
discount rate for the purpose of rate alignment. In his judgment,
short-term rates had now reached the point where an increase in
the discount rate to 3 per cent would be appropriate if it were
not for other considerations. Such a change had probably been

1/27/59 -30
discounted to a large extent and would not be interpreted as a
move to aggressive restraint, as it might have been three weeks
ago when the longest Treasury bill was trading under 2.70, For the
time being, however, the condition of the Government securities
market and the size of the forthcoming Treasury refunding clearly
called for an even keel policy. In such circumstances it would not
be feasible, practicable, or advisable to change the discount rate,
and he hoped that during this period any doubts would not be resolved
on the side of restraint.
Mr. Mills said that during the two-week period between now
and the next Committee meeting a continuation of the present type
of System policy and policy actions seemed to be in order. In his
judgment, last week would have been the appropriate time, and the
latest practical time, to increase the discount rate. However,
since action was not taken, there was now no appropriate way of
moving until after the Treasury had completed its financing operation.
As Mr. Rouse reported, the Treasury was now engaged in consultation
with the various financial groups. Since the advice it receives
would very definitely be based on the prevailing discount rate and
the pride of recommendation would attach to those consultations, he
believed strongly that it would be a serious mistake to consider an
increase in the discount rate immediately and run the risk of up
setting the basis of the discussions now in progress.

1/27/59 -31
Mr. Robertson said that he saw no alternative to maintaining
an even keel policy between now and the date of the next Committee
meeting. This would be in accord with the position taken by the
Committee consistently. His only suggestion would be that all
parties keep their eyes peeled with a view to increasing the dis
count rate whenever such action was possible without interfering
with Treasury operations. At such time, he felt that the rate ought
to be increased more than the amount already discounted in order to
establish a proper posture to combat what he considered the real
danger of inflationary pressures.
Mr. Shepardson said it seemed to him that the national economy
as a whole was in a healthy state of growth. He considered it fortu
nate, in fact,that activity was not booming too fast. As to System
policy, he thought it desirable to continue to exert some degree of
pressure in order to prevent unduly exuberant economic growth. To
reap the full benefit of the increased productivity that had been
mentioned, it appeared that a little more time must elapse, and in
his opinion it was all to the good that the country was not experienc
ing too rapid an expansion. In view of the Treasury's problem and
the budgetary situation, it seemed to him that inflationary pressures
were still definitely in the ascendancy, which suggested that the
System should try to maintain, as far as possible, a degree of
restraint that would inhibit further accumulation of inflationary
attitudes. While he doubted that System policy could do a great

1/27/59 -32
deal to influence the thinking on Capitol Hill with respect to the
Federal budget, the System should endeavor to exert such force as
possible at all times on the side of correcting the unbalanced
budget situation. In the period immediately ahead, there was little
that could be done so far as any change in System policy was con
cerned, but he urged maintaining fully the degree of pressure that
had prevailed recently, with any deviations on the side of a little
greater restraint rather than the reverse. Regrettably, it had not
been possible to work in a discount rate adjustment, and it would
be unwise to contemplate a change in the immediate future. However,
he would hope that a change might be made shortly after the next
Committee meeting.
In his summary of developments in the Fourth District, Mr.
Fulton reported on a recent series of disastrous floods that pro
duced considerable human suffering and interrupted manufacturing
processes. As to the steel industry, he reported a situation
similar to that described by Mr. Allen in the Seventh District,
with the average rate of operations running above the national
average. Users of steel were endeavoring to build up inventory
of all types in contemplation of a strike, which did not augur
well for the third quarter. Department store sales had been very
large during the Christmas season, with the result that sales for
the year ran only about 2 per cent below 1957, but since the

1/27/59 -33
Christmas season trade had slackened a little. Persistent unemploy
ment continued of concern despite the record upturn in activity in
many areas of business and service throughout the district. Member
banks had been borrowing at the discount window in rather large
volume, perhaps because the district had not gotten its proportionate
share of the increase in the money supply. Requirements for business
loans were comparatively small, but the outflow of payments had caused
a diminution in the availability of reserves and banks had been
borrowing to replenish their reserves.
Mr. Fulton said that he would not favor an increase in the
discount rate at this time in view of the Treasury situation and also
because the rates on long-term issues had been rather stable. Whether
that would persist in the light of additional Treasury offerings he
did not know, but he would like to wait a little longer to see if the
recent levels would hold. In March a rate adjustment probably would
be appropriate if all other factors were equal. The Cleveland
directors, he felt, would be favorable to a technical rate adjustment
which would not be interpreted as overt action signalling a change in
policy. In the meantime, he would favor continuing the degree of
restraint that had been exerted recently, with no relaxation of
pressure in any way. In his opinion, the Desk had been doing a good
job in a period of erratic float fluctuations.
Mr. Bopp said that business activity in the Third District
continued to rise slowly. Department store sales were by all odds the

1/27/59 -34
strongest sector, continuing to run well above a year ago.
Comparatively, sales for the latest week were 12 per cent higher
and sales for the past four weeks were 16 per cent higher. On
the other hand, automobile registrations were faring more poorly
than reported from other areas. After being about 10 per cent
above a year ago in December, registrations in Philadelphia turned
downward and were considerably below year-ago levels in the first
three weeks of January. Manufacturing employment rose slightly in
December, in contrast to a small decrease nationally, but employment
was 4.4 per cent below a year ago compared with a drop of 3.6 per
cent for the United States as a whole.
Mr. Bopp went on to say that at the meeting of the Philadelphia
Board of Directors last week a number of the directors expressed the
view that business sentiment was not quite as optimistic as a few weeks
ago. Also, the rise in business activity was expected to be somewhat
slower than earlier anticipated. Regarding the recent wage settlement
in the oil industry, it was reported that although the industry wanted
to hold the line on wage rates, most companies preferred to grant an
increase up to 5 per cent rather than to risk a strike. There had
been no increase in wage rates in that industry last year, so the 5
per cent increase was really a two-year adjustment, and it was hoped
that the industry could pass the year 1960 without another adjustment.
In the early postwar period the oil industry was a comparatively low
cost industry because wage costs were a relatively small fraction of

1/27/59 -35
total costs. Now, however, the percentage of total costs attributable
to labor had grown considerably.
Mr. Bopp said it seemed to him the System should maintain an
even-keel policy at this time because of conditions in the Government
securities market. There had been some discussion by the Philadelphia
directors concerning the discount rate at their meeting last week, and
he felt that the directors would not be unwilling to go along with a
discount rate increase following the Treasury refunding operation.
Mr. Bryan said there was nothing of particular note to report
from the Sixth District. The recovery had a hard core and was proceed
ing satisfactorily. There could well be virtue in the fact that the
country was not experiencing a spectacular boom; even without such a
boom, most of the statistics were at or approaching previous peaks.
Recovery thus far had been characterized by relatively stable price
levels, with perhaps some underlying difficulties in the industrial
price component. It was also characterized, however, by the unsatis
factory nature of the employment figures, which tended to cause a
great deal of dismay on the part of the public. Another thing he saw
in the situation was that the Government securities market was very
sick indeed, and he believed that if anything it would grow weaker.
If the Federal Reserve held to its reserve position without doing
anything overt, he felt that money rates were destined to go higher
because of normal pressures incident to economic recovery and because

1/27/59 -36.
the public was beginning to get apprehensive about inflation and
fiscal affairs and Federal finance. Therefore, whether or not the
budget for fiscal 1960 was balanced, he felt that the Government
bond market was going to be in difficulty. After allowing for the
reduction in reserve requirements, figures seemed to indicate that
as against a year ago there had been about a 7 per cent increase in
reserves, with a lesser percentage increase in the money supply. It
seemed to him that the 7 per cent increase in reserves available to
support the recovery was altogether ample and that no increase in
total reserves of the banking system was called for in the near
future. Accordingly, it was his view that the Federal Reserve ought
to discard day-to-day or week-to-week adjustments based on reserve
projections and come out for the foreseeable future with no net
addition to total reserves. Believing as he did that reserve avail
ability was ample for the time being and that there would be a
tightening in money rates incident to further recovery of the economy,
he felt that a natural and normal restraint would be developing.
When it came to the discount rate, Mr. Bryan said, one must
face up to the fact that the System, on the basis of strict logic,
probably ought to conform the rate more closely to short-term rates
in the market. However, that would be very difficult because of the
necessity of maintaining an even keel during the period of Treasury
financing. Moreover, he questioned the advisability of moving on the

1/27/59 -37
discount rate for some time because, even though such a move would
have elements of logic, he doubted whether it would accomplish much
more than could be accomplished by keeping a tight rein on the reserve
position. As he saw it, about all that would be accomplished by an
increase in the rate would be that the System would step forward and
accept responsibility for events that probably were going to occur
anyway, and he did not see the necessity or desirability for taking
such a step. Also, as he had said before at Committee meetings, he
disagreed with the idea of increasing the rate promptly after a
Treasury financing. Even without a discount rate increase, the rug
was likely to be pulled from under the financing by virtue of a
progressive upward tendency of money market rates, and action on
the discount rate would simply give the Federal Reserve the credit
for the rug-pulling. Accordingly, he would advocate no change in
the discount rate for some time. On the other hand, he would favor
keeping an extremely tight rein on the growth of reserves. If an
even-keel policy--which he interpreted as meaning an even keel in
terms of short-term rates--forced putting in some reserves, he felt
that they should be removed promptly. In summary, he would avoid
any overt actions that merely would gain for the System public
responsibility for events that were in the cards anyway.
Mr. Johns recalled that he had argued heretofore for a change
in policy, both through announcement of a change in the discount rate

1/27/59 -38
and through open market operations, prior to the period of the
Treasury financing. At present, he was resigned to, but not happy
about, waiting until an even-keel policy was no longer applicable.
After referring to the problems dealt with in the statements
presented by Messrs. Young and Thomas, Mr. Szymczak expressed the
view that in the current situation monetary policy quite obviously
should assume a posture of restraint, tempered only by considerations
relating to the management of the public debt and the unemployment
statistics. He used the word "tempered" advisedly, he said, because,
like it or not, monetary policy cannot be administered in a vacuum.
The System would be expected to make a contribution in the areas
dealing with the management of the public debt and with unemployment,
which suggested careful study of the papers of Messrs. Young and
Thomas. If it were not for those two factors, it would be relatively
easy to see the proper course of monetary policy in the period ahead.
Until the date of the next Committee meeting, Mr. Szymczak
said, it seemed necessary to stay about as at present as far as open
market operations were concerned. As soon as practicable, however,
consideration should be given to increasing the discount rate.
Mr. Balderston said that the most significant policy con
siderations today seemed to be financial ones. The high rate at
which the active money supply increased between February and August
last year--about 8 per cent annual rate--had now decelerated to the

1/27/59 -39
point where the rate of growth for the full year 1958 was only
about 3-1/4 per cent. This seemed quite a satisfactory outcome
for a year which began with a short recession and ended with eight
months of recovery. He was not entirely sure what change in the
money supply should be planned for the remainder of the current
year, but he thought it probably should be less than 3-1/4 per
cent despite residual unemployment in places like Detroit resulting,
in part at least, from technical changes in agriculture, manufacturing,
and even the service industries. Other financial considerations that
impressed him as relevant at this time were, first, the fact that
total credit and total loans at city banks during the first two weeks
of January declined more than anticipated and, second, the fact that
the differential between the Treasury bill rate and the discount rate
did not seem as yet to have brought about misuse of the member bank
borrowing privilege. Of course, that situation might change quickly
and put some strain on the administration of the discount window.
Since no action was taken on the discount rate at the beginning of
January, it seemed to him that the System now had an obligation to
the Treasury not to alter the present rate until the completion of
the February refunding, for reasons set forth by Mr. Hayes and others.
Further, he hoped that the System would not pull the rug from under
the Treasury immediately after the refunding, for the reasons Mr.
Bryan had indicated. When a change was made, however, he felt that

1/27/59 -40.
Mr. Robertson was correct. It must be remembered that the "open
hunting season" for the System would not be a very long one; the
times when it could act during the remainder of this year would
be lessened due to the plight of the Treasury. Consequently, when
the System did act, the action should be decisive. This time it
would not be feasible to move, as in 1955, in small steps of 1/4 per
cent. Current policy, Mr. Balderston said, should be continued
until the next meeting of the Committee.
Chairman Martin said he could add nothing to today's discus
sion and that he would reserve any comments until the February 10
meeting. Opinion, he noted, seemed virtually unanimous. There was
no call for a change in the directive and it was felt that the
System should endeavor to maintain an even keel during the forth
coming period, recognizing that the Manager of the Open Market Account
must determine the meaning of "even keel" in the light of the comments
around the table.
The Chairman then asked whether there was any disagreement
with this summary.
Mr. Hayes said he had no disagreement but would like to make
one observation. He was glad that Messrs. Bryan and Balderston had
commented about the undesirability of "immediately pulling the rug,"
for he had been somewhat concerned about earlier references to a
change in the discount rate as soon as the books on the Treasury

1/27/59
refunding were closed. Deliveries were scheduled to be made on the
16th of February, and he felt that a decent interval ought to be
observed before any change in the rate was made.
Mr. Mangels stated that he concurred in the view expressed
by Mr. Hayes, and Mr. Szymczak observed that this whole subject
could be discussed further at the next meeting of the Committee.
Mr. Deming referred to comments by Messrs. Robertson and
Balderston regarding a stronger than normal action on the discount
rate and asked for interpretation.
Mr. Robertson replied that he had had in mind something more
than 1/2 per cent, for he felt that a 1/2 per cent increase had
already been discounted.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted unani
mously to direct the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York until otherwise directed
by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (in
cluding replacement of maturing securities, and allowing
maturities to run off without replacement) for the System
Open Market Account in the open market or, in the case of
maturing securities, by direct exchange with the Treasury,
as may be necessary in the light of current and prospective
economic conditions and the general credit situation of the
country, with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in
the market to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to
fostering conditions in the money market conducive to
sustainable economic growth and stability, and (c) to the
practical administration of the Account; provided that the
aggregate amount of securities held in the System Account
(including commitments for the purchase or sale of securi
ties for the Account) at the close of this date, other

1/27/59
than special short-term certificates of indebtedness
purchased from time to time for the temporary accom
modation of the Treasury, shall not be increased or
decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for
the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
(with discretion, in cases where it seems desirable,
to issue participations to one or more Federal Reserve
Banks) such amounts of special short-term certificates
of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time
for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such certificates
held at any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall
not exceed in the aggregate $500 million.
It was stated that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, February 10, 1959, at 10:00 a.m.
and that the next succeeding meeting would be on Tuesday, March 3,
1959.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary