A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, May 5, 1959, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Balderston, Chairman pro tem
Mr. Deming
Mr. Erickson
Mr. King
Mr. M ills
Mr.
Mr. R obertson
Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Bryan, Alternate for Mr. Johns
Mr. Fulton, Alternate for Mr. Allen
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Bopp and Leedy, Alternate Members of the
Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Leach and Irons, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and Dallas,
respectively
Mr. Riefler, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Jones, Marget, Mitchell, Parsons, Roosa,
Willis, and Young, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Special Assistant to the Board of
Governors
Mr. Koch, Associate Adviser, Division of Re
search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Keir, Acting Chief, Government Finance
Section, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Freutel and Swan, First Vice Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis
and San Francisco, respectively

5/5/59 -2
Messrs. Balles, Daane, and Tow, Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of Cleveland, Richmond, and
Kansas City, respectively
Mr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Anderson, Economic Adviser, Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Mr. Coldwell, Director of Research, Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas
Mr. Brandt, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta
The Secretary stated that, since neither the Chairman nor
the Vice Chairman of the Committee was able to be present at this
meeting, it would be necessary to elect a chairman pro tem.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, Mr. Balderston was
elected to act as Chairman at this meeting.
It was noted that Mr. Freutel, First Vice President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, and Mr. Swan, First Vice President
of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, were in the Board's
building today, and they were invited to attend this meeting in the
absence of Mr. Johns and Mr. Mangels.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on April 14, 1959, were
approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report of open market operations covering the
period April 14 through April 29, 1959, and a supplementary report
covering the period April 30 through May 4, 1959. Copies of both
reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.

-3-
Mr. Rouse stated that the money market had remained tight
since the preceding Committee meeting. The effective rate on
Federal funds dropped below 3 per cent on only one day-last
Tuesday--and that drop reflected a sizeable month-end inflow of
funds from country banks to the money centers. On Friday that flow
was abruptly reversed and the market tightened substantially further.
In dealing with this persistently tight situation, the System
supplied a total of about $173 million reserves net during the
period since the last meeting. Treasury bill holdings were up by
$257 million, while repurchase agreements were down by about $82
million net. As of last night, however, $163 million repurchase
agreements were on the books as a result of agreements made on
Thursday and Monday.
Announcement of the Treasury financing last Thursday
occurred against a background of several weeks of deterioration
in the market for Government securities. At the time of the
announcement, over thirty issues of notes and bonds were priced
to yield more than 4 per cent, and three of these were selling at
a 4.30 per cent basis or higher. Treasury bill rates moved higher
early in the period since the last meeting, then moved down in
response to the reappearance of some demand, and by the time of
the Treasury announcement rates had again risen in response to a
tapering off of demand. With this kind of market situation as a
background, the Treasury's financing program was generally regarded

5/5/59 -4
as the best available solution to a difficult problem. The market
was particularly surprised to learn that the amount of new cash to
be raised was considerably less than had been anticipated and that
the lesser amount was expected to last the Treasury for the balance
of the current fiscal year. Preliminary market guesses as to the
rates that would be set on the new April and December Treasury bills
to be auctioned tomorrow and Thursday were in the neighborhood of
3-3/4 - 3-7/8 per cent on the April bill and 3.60 - 3.65 per cent
on the December bill. The market was probably very pleasantly
surprised this morning to learn that the holders of only $473 million
of the 4 per cent notes of August 1961 (18 per cent of the issue)
had elected to obtain payment of the notes on August 1, 1959. A few
days ago the market was guessing that between $750 million and $1.5
billion of the issue would be presented; most observers thought that
the minimum would be about $1 billion.
Mr. Rouse then mentioned, as a matter of interest to the
Committee, that the Canadian Government, which was faced this year
with a large cash deficit-estimated at $850 million--and a sharply
rising economy, had announced during the past week two steps to
cover the deficit. The first was to add $20 million of 182-day
bills to the current bill offering. If this step should be accepted
by the market, the Government proposed to place an additional $20
million of six-month bills over seven additional weeks, which would

5/5/59 -5
provide a total of $160 million cash. The second step was the
offering of $150 million of Canadian National Railway bonds,
which are fully guaranteed by the Canadian Government. Since
this issue of bonds broke through the 5 per cent interest rate
level, it was understandable that the decision to make the offer
ing was a difficult one. Subscribers were given the choice of a
nine-year bond or an eighteen-year bond at yields of 5.18 and 5.17
per cent, respectively. These offerings were being made in the
face of a sharp demand for loans and commercial bank selling of
Government securities which, over the past thirty days, had been
proceeding at a rate of $50 million per week.
Mr. Rouse also reported that Home Loan Bank sources
anticipated a large loan demand for the balance of the year in
view of the current and prospective level of home building and
the slowing down of cash savings at building and loan associations.
This slowing down, in turn, was attributed primarily to the
prospect for increased prosperity and, to a lesser degree, activity
in the stock market. A sidelight mentioned by the Home Loan Bank
people was that banks covering the areas of New England, New York,
New Jersey, Indiana, Michigan, and Ohio did not need new money at
this time, while the West Coast banks had such needs.
Mr. Rouse concluded by noting that apparently the low point
of System Account holdings for the year had now been reached and
holdings would move higher over the coming months as normal seasonal

5/5/59 -6
movements in market factors absorbed reserves. The rate at which
such holdings rose would, of course, depend not only on the pace
of economic advance but also on the future course of Committee
policy. The reserve projections presented with the supplementary
report of open market operations were indicative of the situation
over the balance of the current month, and the projections were
close to those prepared by the Board's staff.
Mr. Mills referred to Mr. Rouse's comments, and those
contained in the latest weekly report of open market operations
and the supplementary report distributed this morning, regarding
an inflow of funds from the country banks to the money centers
early last week, followed on Friday by an abrupt reversal of that
flow. He inquired whether, when a flow occurred from the money
centers to the country banks, the Manager felt that allowance
could appropriately be made to relieve the resultant tightness.
While this was only a temporary phenomenon, it was a repetitive
occurrence and the impact of the recent shift appeared to have
been quite severe. It seemed to him that relief could be provided
for that kind of situation, without disturbing the direction of
System policy, by putting reserves into the market at the point
where the pinch was felt.
Mr. Rouse replied that, as indicated by the report, the
Account Management had met the situation primarily by the use of

5/5/59 -7
repurchase agreements with dealers, which put funds into the
market immediately. Last Thursday the Desk made $80 million
of repurchase agreements and yesterday it made about the same
amount. Later in the day the Desk made about $30 million more
repurchase agreements to deal with the situation.
Mr. Mills then asked Mr. Rouse whether he felt any
compunctions if the result was a return of temporary ease and
perhaps a reduction of net borrowed reserves below the levels
indicated by Committee objectives.
Mr. Rouse responded that he tended to be guided principally
by the feel of the market within the limits of a fairly broad range
of net borrowed reserves. He would have no hesitation about making
repurchase agreements, if necessary, nor would he refrain from
dealing in bills. He noted that the inflow and outflow of funds,
while it took place regularly twice a month, did not necessarily
take place on the same days.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the open market
transactions during the period April 14
through May 4, 1959, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Young made a statement on the economic situation,
supplementary to the staff memorandum distributed under date of
May 1, 1959, substantially as follows

5/5/59
On the domestic side, today's report is again one of
strongly expanding demands, rising productive activity,
advancing prices at wholesale, and strongly optimistic
business and financial expectations. Internationally,
with activity in key industrial countries showing pickup
and the balance of payments positions of material
supplying areas improving, it seems reasonable to infer
that a general upturn in world output and trade is now
setting in. U. S. exports, however, have not as yet
given sign of recovery, so that U. S. balance of payments
forces still favor accumulation of foreign dollar assets.
As to key facts,
GNP for the first quarter is estimated to have reached
an annual rate of $465 billion. Increases were widespread,
embracing durable, nondurable and service lines; only net
exports of goods and services declined.
Industrial production in April rose at least one index
point further. Considering the wide spread of increases, an
index advance of two points is quite within the range of
possibilities.
Auto markets recently have been quite strong, at a 6
million annual rate for domestic and imported new cars
together. Prices for late model used cars were about 15 per
cent higher than a year ago, and used car sales were also
this percentage greater. Sales of household durables remained
close to a record rate. With demands for consumer durables at
high levels or expanding during the first quarter, outstanding
consumer instalment credit rose sharply-by the largest
quarterly amount since 1955.
New orders for manufactured durables in March, seasonally
adjusted, were the highest for any month since the end of 1956.
The gain over the preceding month was 1 per cent, which
followed a rise of 7 per cent in February. Gains were made by
all industries except steel, and the total of gains more than
offset a substantial percentage decline in steel orders.
Unfilled orders of durable manufacturers have now risen
impressively for three successive months.
Higher new orders in durable lines were accompanied by a
sizeable 2 per cent rise in sales to all manufacturers. The
sales gain, of course, was largest for durables.
Construction activity in April continued strong, though
dipping a little from February. Commercial activity rose,
but other types of construction were off a little. Residential
housing markets and financing continue active at very high
levels, with mortgage interest levels firm.

-9-
Labor market data, though limited for the recent
interim, point to further strengthening of demands for
manpower. The principal evidence consists of a fairly
striking April decline in new claims for unemployment
benefits, to levels about the same as in corresponding
weeks of 1957 and 1955. The total of insured unemploy
ment also declined significantly.
Industrial commodity markets have continued to show
an upward tilt. The April rise for the industrial price
average was at an annual rate of about 3 per cent. Since
mid-1958 the rise has been about 2.5 per cent. Recent
price advances have been numerous among the more demand
sensitive raw materials, but price markups of finished
industrial products have also been gaining in frequency.
Wholesale prices of farm products increased a little
in April, reflecting mainly seasonal contraction in livestock
marketing. Expanding consumer demand for meats and other
foods has also been a factor in firmer prices in farm product
markets.
Altogether, the economic expansion in process appears
thoroughly robust, with many earmarks of developing infla
tionary boom. At an earlier meeting this spring, we observed
that the economy might soon enter a phase of strongly
inflationary price trends. Recent news, international as
well as domestic, confirms that such a phase has probably
now been entered. Accordingly, the risk that inflationary
trends may get ahead of System policy is no longer a future
threat; on the contrary, it is a present danger.
Supplementary to the staff memoranda on the outlook for Treasury
cash requirements and the outlook for member bank reserve positions
distributed under date of May 1, 1959, Mr. Thomas made a statement on
financial developments substantially as follows:
Pressures on financial markets increased during April.
This trend seems to reflect expanding monetary and credit
demands incident to the continuing advance in business
activity rather than limitations on the supply of credit.
Demands on long-term capital markets have been moderate,
but bank loans have increased more than seasonally and banks

-10-
have also been endeavoring to distribute U. S. Government
securities taken on in the April 1 financing.
Loans to business by city banks showed little change in
April following a sharp increase in March. Consumer instal
ment credit has increased more rapidly this year than in any
year since 1955. Mortgage demands continue large and real
estate loans at banks also have increased more than at any
time since 1955. The stock market has risen to new high
levels and stock market credit continues to increase.
Under the circumstances, interest rates have tended to
rise further. Yields on outstanding corporate bonds rose
during April and new issues have generally sold in the market
at yields above original offering rates. U. S. Treasury
bonds have risen, with several issues yielding around 4-1/4
per cent. Treasury bill yields increased in the first half
of April and that on the 3-month bill rose above 3 per cent for
a few days. Subsequently they declined somewhat, as nonbank
demand for bills appeared, and dealers, as well as banks,
were able to reduce their positions. The 6-month bills
showed similar movements, reaching a peak of around 3-3/8 per
cent. The new January bill continued close to a 3.60 per
cent yield or higher.
Available data clearly indicate that the money supply
has shown a seasonally adjusted expansion during the past
two or three months. This is shown not only by single date
figures but also by available half-monthly daily averages.
Figures for demand deposits adjusted at all member banks for
the first half of April show a seasonally adjusted increase
of somewhat more than $1 billion since the latter part of
February. Wednesday figures for city banks indicate a
further increase during the last half of April. Currency
in circulation this year has declined by fully $200 million
less than usual. The growth in the money supply has been
accompanied by an increase in the turnover of deposits--a
combination that occurred also in the early part of 1955.
In addition to the growth in private deposits, Treasury
balances are close to a billion dollars larger than had
previously been projected for this period. After increasing
in the next two weeks, Treasury balances will decline sharply
in the first half of June and then increase again in the last
half as a result of quarterly tax receipts, which will more
than offset retirement of tax bills.
The improved Treasury cash position and prospects for
future tax receipts above earlier estimates are reducing
Treasury borrowing needs, as explained in a memorandum

-11-
previously distributed. The present operation may take
little over $500 million net after allowing for attrition.
After the current financing operations have been completed,
the Treasury will not have to return to the market for new
cash until early July. In late June the Treasury will
retire a $3 billion tax anticipation issue and July borrow
ing will be only a little larger than that. Some additional
borrowing may be needed in August to cover attrition, and
another tax anticipation issue of $1.5 billion will be retired
in September. For the five months May to September, inclusive,
there is likely to be only a small net increase in the public
debt of around half a billion dollars.
Banks' reserve positions have tightened in the past
month because of the larger than expected increase in required
reserves, the failure of currency in circulation to decline,
and a resumption of the gold outflow. Float, on the other
hand, has continued larger than was expected. Some reserves
have been supplied on balance by System open market operations.
Member bank borrowings have remained close to $700 million on
the average and excess reserves have averaged about $450 mil
lion, after revision for a higher level of required reserves
at country banks than was originally estimated.
Country member banks' reserve positions have shown a
tendency to tighten, with excess reserves averaging around
$400 million and borrowings about $200 million. This tighten
ing has apparently resulted from an expansion in their credit,
on a seasonally adjusted basis, rather than from a loss of
reserves. Reserve city banks as a group have been persistent
borrowers of over $300 million, although there have been
relatively few individual banks that might be classified as
continuous borrowers.
Projections based on customary seasonal changes, to
gether with a continuing moderate gold outflow, indicate a
further substantial tightening of bank reserve positions in
the absence of System operations. It would seem appropriate
to provide reserves to cover customary seasonal needs, as was
done Friday and yesterday. Some question may be raised about
offsetting the gold outflow, which reflects influences with
respect to competitive pricing of goods and to money market
developments that might call for a tightening of credit
restraints.
Evidence that there has been monetary expansion, after
adjustment for seasonal variations, at a rate which should
not be continued, would indicate that System restraints
have not been adequate. Member banks probably should be
required to obtain some of the additional reserves desired
through an increase in their borrowings at the Reserve Banks.

5/5/59 -12
Since the current Treasury financing will result in
little net increase in outstanding debt, if banks do
initially increase their holdings, they should be kept
under pressure to reduce them as Treasury deposits are
drawn down. If loan expansion continues, banks should
offset the increase by sales of Government securities.
If net expansion occurs, banks should be required to
borrow the reserves needed to support it and discount
rates should be increased. The discount rate ought to
be kept above yields on 90-day Treasury bills, particularly
since the latter are low relative to other rates in the
money market.
Mr. Balderston made reference to the outflow of gold from the
United States and then called upon Mr. Marget, who said one might take
the position that the outflow was still a balance of payments phenom
enon. During the first quarter of this year there had been a rather
substantial accumulation of dollar balances by foreigners, and the
United States balance of payments showed a sizeable deficit. The
recent resumption of the gold outflow possibly could be explained by
the fact that the foreign countries obtaining dollars happened to be
countries that preferred to take the additions to their reserves in
the form of gold rather than dollar holdings. The United States was
still faced with the problem of adjustment of its balance of payments
and until equilibrium was restored it must be expected that some
outflow of gold would continue. In these circumstances, the things
called for by the domestic situation were the same as those called
for by the international situation.
Mr. Mills suggested that the increasing level of activity
in the United States had had the effect of fostering a higher rate

5/5/59 -13
of imports. At the same time, as economic activity in Western
Europe--and the United Kingdom in particular-gained momentum,
it would seem reasonable to expect that the pressures on the
facilities of those countries would be such as to necessitate
increasing their imports in order to replenish inventories and
supplies. A reason for the improvement in United Kingdom gold
reserves might be found in the tendency of prices of raw materials
to rise in the dominions and colonies, which would produce an in
flow of hard currencies to the United Kingdom. At some point this
would produce an improvement in the reserves of the colonies and
dominions such as to enable them to relax their import restrictions.
Mr. Mills concluded by saying that he had been rather alarmed at
the piecemeal character of much of the recent discussion relating
to the international position of the United States.
Mr. Marget agreed and said that the processes outlined by
Mr. Mills created hope that adjustment of the United States balance
of payments would come about through an increase in exports,
Nevertheless, the latest figures showed that there was as yet no
upswing. While there always tend to be lags, it was important
that the United States be in a position to take advantage of the
anticipated demand for exports from foreign sources. He trusted
Mr. Mills was right about foreign countries removing their remaining
import restrictions on durable goods. The United States must be

5/5/59 -14
competitive, and it would be hoped that other countries might
give the United States a chance to show that it was competitive.
With the growing strength abroad and the hoped-for relaxation of
import restrictions, there seemed no reason to be pessimistic
about the United States balance of payments, although it would
take some time for adjustment to come about.
Mr. Thomas commented that he thought there might be reason
to be pessimistic. The net result of attempts in this country to
validate our wage and price policies through monetary expansion
could succeed only if we could inflate the whole world. Germany
and the Netherlands and some other countries had indicated that
they were not going to be inflated. If the United States con
tinued to try to maintain employment and high prices by increasing
the money supply, expanding credit, and extending fiscal operations,
the result might be to price United States goods out of world markets.
If countries such as Germany and the Netherlands and others neutralize
the reserves they obtain and do not permit them to be reflected in
their own price levels, the United States might fail to obtain the
adjustments that would be necessary to maintain its exports.
Mr. Treiber then made a statement of his views on the busi
ness outlook and credit policy substantially as follows:
As Mr. Young pointed out in his report, business
activity has continued its steady forward progress,
marked by peak housing and other consumer demand, by
peak industrial production, and by high performance
of a variety of other indices. Commercial bankers

-15-
expect a growing demand for loans. It is good news to
hear these reports of gaining business strength. While
there has been some increase in inventories, particularly
in steel and automobiles, a rebuilding of inventories is
necessary to support the rising level of activity at a
time when inventory-sales ratios are near record lows.
Unemployment is still high, although probably declining.
Rising production should increase employment.
Plant and equipment expenditures constitute perhaps
the area of greatest potential expansion. Recent data are
optimistic. The latest McGraw-Hill survey, issued in mid
April and based on opinions obtained in March, indicates a
7 per cent rise between 1958 and 1959. This compares with
a 4 per cent increase projected by the Commerce-SEC survey
issued in mid-March and based on opinions obtained in
January and February. Two-thirds of the expansion projected
for 1959 is for modernization rather than for additional
capacity. The good reports of corporate income that have
been coming through for the first quarter of 1959 may
stimulate capital expenditures.
Over-all price indices have been relatively stable, yet
the underlying price situation is not entirely serene. There
are warning signals in the movement of some of the components
of the indices. A decline in farm prices and a general world
wide weakness of raw material prices have kept the leading
indices in check. The consumer price index continued without
change in March only because food prices declined. In April
and May food prices normally rise for seasonal reasons, and
during the spring months we cannot count on the offsetting
effect of food prices. Prices of manufactured articles have
been rising slowly despite the existence of a fair amount of
unused industrial capacity.
We are entering a critical period in wage negotiations.
Wage settlements in basic industries, such as steel, set a
pattern for wage adjustments in other businesses. If wage
increases on average exceed average increases in productivity,
there will be a resultant pressure on costs which is likely
to have an adverse effect on the price structure. The
cost-price push is an important threat to price stability.
Once this push gets snowballing, the effectiveness of
monetary policy is impaired.
The Treasury deficit is another area of potential
inflationary pressure. The banks are expected to buy new
issues of Government securities as part of the underwriting
process. It is important also that the banks dispose of
the securities they thus acquire, or other securities, so

-16-
as to avoid an increase in the money supply (as commonly
defined) arising out of Government deficit financing. So
far this year the banks have been able to sell to nonbank
purchasers more Government securities than the banks have
acquired. We will want to watch carefully the trend of
bank security holdings from here on. We are particularly
concerned over the risk that nonfinancial corporations may
become net sellers of Government securities during the
fall and winter months.
While there are inflationary possibilities lurking in
the shadows, they are not sufficiently imminent, in our
opinion, to call for an immediate increase in monetary re
straint.
The Treasury is now in the midst of a large refunding
and cash operation, with the new securities to be issued
next week. Market stability is called for not only through
the issue date but for a reasonable period thereafter. Thus,
Treasury operations call for the continuation of an even-keel
policy during the period between now and the next meeting of
the Federal Open Market Committee.
It appears now that the Treasury will not have to come
to the market again until the last week of June. This will
afford an opportunity for Federal Reserve action following
the next meeting of the Committee, if action then seems
appropriate. Assuming a further gathering of momentum in
business activity and a further development of potential
inflationary pressures, it would be well between now and
the next meeting of the Committee to consider the kind of
directive suggested by the developing situation, the extent
to which a more restrictive credit policy may be in order,
and the methods of implementing such a policy if it appears
to be called for.
At the present time we would favor (a) no change in the
formal directive; (b) no change in the discount rate; and (c)
the conduct of open market operations so as to continue to
maintain about the present degree of restraint, giving
primary attention to the behavior of the money market and
the rates of interest in the market.
Mr. Freutel reported that the economic status of the Eighth
District, as measured by employment data and other indicators of
industrial activity, continued to show improvement. Employment was
up, especially in durable goods occupations in the metropolitan areas.

5/5/59 -17
Steel production reached 97 per cent of capacity in April, up one
per cent from March, and most other indicators of economic activity
also rose, only crude oil and coal output showing slight declines.
Farm operations throughout the district were generally on schedule
for the season; for the most important crops, prospective acreage
was greater than last year but below the average for the preceding
ten years. Cash receipts from farm commodity marketings were some
what higher the first two months of this year than last, principally
because of the greater carry-over in tobacco marketings. Average
prices for major farm commodities were approximately 5 per cent
below year-ago prices.
Total deposits at weekly reporting banks fell about 5 per
cent over the past month, Mr. Freutel said. Time and savings
accounts rose slightly, but demand balances of individuals and
businesses, government, and banks were down. In the face of this
drain, reporting banks lowered their cash balances and increased
their borrowings, both from the Reserve Bank and in the Federal
funds market. A moderate contraseasonal rise in loans was more
than offset by a substantial net reduction in security portfolios.
Business loans contracted about seasonally, but consumer and real
estate loans rose. In recent weeks, both member bank borrowing and
the reserve deficiency reports indicated somewhat greater pressure
on country banks than had obtained over the past year. Country

5/5/59 -18
member bank borrowing showed a significant increase for this
period of the year, both in terms of total advances and number
of banks borrowing. Similarly, there had been a notable increase
in the number of reserve deficiencies at country member banks.
Mr. Bryan stated that the Sixth District economic picture
was almost identical with the composite national picture, although
perhaps a little stronger. Nonfarm employment and manufacturing
employment both were up and retail trade was strong. Bank debits,
demand deposits adjusted, and currency likewise were up on a
month-to-month basis, and construction contract awards had spurted.
Manufacturing payrolls and average weekly work hours were up, while
insured unemployment was down.
Mr. Bryan said he agreed with the economic presentation
made by Mr. Young and the financial presentation made by Mr. Thomas.
He had little to add except to say that he thought there was grave
danger of allowing the money supply to increase at a rate that could
not be sustained without inflation. He did not believe that System
policy had been particularly restraining.
Mr. Bopp reported continued improvement in Third District
business. Manufacturing employment rose contraseasonally in March,
with virtually all of the 1 per cent gain over February in the
durable goods industries, principally primary metals and transporta
tion equipment. Average weekly earnings in the durable goods

5/5/59 -19
industries were nearly 3 per cent above February, reflecting
increases in hours worked and in hourly earnings. New unemploy
ment claims in Pennsylvania had moved irregularly and were close
to the 1957 level; continued claims, although still above 1957,
were declining steadily and were well below the level of a year
ago. Unemployment remained high--8.8 per cent of the district's
labor force being out of work in March compared with 6.4 per cent
nationally and 9.6 per cent in March of last year. Construction
activity was especially strong, total contract awards in March
being 47 per cent above a year ago compared to 23 per cent nationally.
The March increase was accounted for primarily by residential and
public works construction. For the first quarter, total contract
awards were about one-third above a year ago, reflecting principally
a sharp rise in residential construction.
Mr. Bopp went on to say that steel mills in the Philadelphia
region were operating at 96.5 per cent of capacity in the latest
week; however, the rate in the past three weeks was somewhat lower
than in the previous three weeks. Department store sales for the
four weeks ended April 25 were unchanged from a year ago but were
7 per cent higher for the year to date.
Total loans and investments of Third District weekly
reporting banks had declined substantially in the past three weeks.
Loans were up slightly, increases in real estate and "other" loans
being only partly offset by a small decline in business loans.

5/5/59 -20
Securities holdings dropped nearly $80 million, all types of
securities being included in the decline. The substantial increase
in holdings of Governments in the week ending April 1, presumably
reflecting allotments of the new Treasury issues of that date, had
been more than wiped out by reductions in the following four weeks.
There was little change in deposits.
Reserve pressures on the large Philadelphia banks had
moderated significantly in the past three weeks; the daily average
basic reserve deficiency dropped from $72 million to less than $10
million in the latest week. Borrowing by these banks from the
Reserve Bank dropped from a daily average of $63 million to $18
million in the latest week. Purchases of Federal funds by
Philadelphia banks were relatively small throughout the period,
and in the latest week those banks were net sellers on balance
for the first time since mid-January. Country bank borrowing
from the Reserve Bank increased moderately to a daily average of
$12 million in the latest week.
Mr. Bopp expressed the opinion that, in view of the current
Treasury financing, the Committee should aim at maintaining an even
keel in the next three weeks. He would give more consideration to
sensitive rates, such as the Federal funds and bill rates, and to
other indicators of the tone of the market than to the level of
net borrowed reserve figures. He would like to see the Federal
funds rate at the discount rate, and the market rate on three
month bills a little higher than at present, if that could be

5/5/59 -21
accomplished without upsetting the Government securities market.
While he would not favor a change in the discount rate or the
directive at this time, he would want to give consideration to
changes after the Treasury financing was completed.
Mr. Fulton commented that today marked the opening of
wage negotiations in the steel industry and reported in some
detail on union demands and company attitudes which led to the
conclusion that a prolonged strike might occur this summer. The
timing of any strike was conjectural, however, because the workers
might elect to work for some time without a contract and then strike
later in the year when such a move would have greater economic impact.
Although inventories had been built up, it appeared that they were
still somewhat slim, particularly at smaller users. In any event,
orders for delivery after July 1 were small, indicating relatively
poor third quarter operations whether or not a strike developed.
The steel companies looked for about a 60-day strike at the outside
and seemed determined, at least at present, to hold out for a wage
agreement that would not result in a substantial price increase
for steel. The industry was also finding concern in shipments of
foreign steel into the United States at prices favorable to those
for the domestic product.
In the machine tool industry, Mr. Fulton said that new
orders were now coming in, but at only about half the pre-recession
level. Residential building contracts for the first quarter were

5/5/59 -22
up 20 per cent over a year ago, and nonresidential construction
was up 7 per cent, but heavy engineering contracts were down 8
per cent. Department store sales were up 6 per cent from year-ago
levels. Unemployment was gradually decreasing but was still sub
stantial, with the concentration largely among unskilled workers.
The mills and heavy industries had been moving into an overtime
basis rather than take on new employees.
Mr. Fulton went on to say that there had been a considerable
drop in total deposits of Fourth District weekly reporting banks for
the year to date. A shifting from savings to demand deposits served
to give the money supply a boost. Actually, however, the conversion
of time deposits, which accumulated quite rapidly last year, would
indicate that they were not truly time deposits and that they really
should never have been deducted from the money supply. Therefore,
he was not sure the money supply had increased to the extent indi
cated statistically under a definition that excluded time deposits.
Mr. Fulton said he would like to see about the same feel in
the market continue for the next three-week period. He would prefer
to see what was happening in the wage negotiations in the steel
industry before making any move toward further tightening. He would
not favor a change in the discount rate or in the policy directive
at this time, and in his opinion the Desk had done a good job in
maintaining a feel of tightness in the market.
Mr. King indicated that he did not wish to comment at this
meeting.

5/5/59 -23
Mr. Shepardson commented that current reports from
economists, as well as reports generally, were indicative of
an upturn in business throughout the country. The nation
seemed to have passed the point of recovery and to be on the
verge of substantial expansion. The divergent trends within
the over-all price index gave him real concern, for the country
had come through a recession with a continual upward trend in
basic nonfood prices and it appeared that the forthcoming wage
negotiations were apt to set the stage for further acceleration.
He was also concerned about the line of thinking which held that
as long as wage increases did not exceed productivity the situa
tion might be all right. This, he felt, was a fallacy, and he
saw no basis for agreement with the idea that wages should take
all of the increased productivity. As he saw it, to accept such
a view would mean automatically accepting the idea of inflation.
With respect to foreign competition, he noted that there had been
a period when business seemed receptive to the building up of
international trade. Recently, however, there seemed to have
been almost a reversal of that position, as suggested by resolu
tions adopted at the recent meeting of the United States Chamber
of Commerce which envisaged such things as quotas and higher
tariffs. This was particularly disturbing when one thought of
the gold movement discussed earlier in this meeting. Unless

5/5/59 -24
United States industry got on a competitive basis and stayed
there, the international trade picture might become worse.
All of these things, Mr. Shepardson said, led him to
the conclusion that the System must begin to think about a
policy of more drastic restraint. In saying this, he realized the
difficulty of doing very much in the immediate future in view of
the Treasury financing. At the same time, it seemed to him that
the System should be keenly aware of the situation that loomed
ahead and be making preparations for early action. Even during
the period immediately ahead, pressure should be kept fully as
great as it had been recently; to use an oft-repeated phrase,
errors, if any, should be made on the side of tightness. He
would like to see such further tightness applied as could be
applied within the framework of avoiding a disturbance to the
Treasury financing, looking to development of further restraint
as soon as feasible.
Mr. Robertson said he agreed with Messrs. Shepardson and
Bryan that the dangers of inflation today were much greater than
generally realized. He did not think that System policy had been
sufficiently restrictive, and he saw grave danger, not only in
the near future but in the longer run, that United States industries
would price themselves out of the market. However, he agreed with
Mr. Treiber that little could be done during the period immediately
ahead. It was regrettable, he thought, that the Open Market

5/5/59 -25
Committee had its hands tied by Treasury financing operations
for such a large part of the year. In his opinion, one of the
major problems facing the Committee was to work out some method
whereby the Committee would have a freer swing. While he did
not have the solution, this was something that would have to be
worked out or inflationary developments would get ahead of the
System.
Mr. Robertson stated that he would continue to maintain
pressure as fully as possible without disturbing the Treasury
financing. The Committee should keep its thoughts focused on
the need for further restriction, and by this he meant real
restriction. At its next meeting the Committee should work toward
much greater restriction despite Treasury financing problems that
might come up after the middle of June. The System must set the
tone and try to work in keeping with that tone, which, in turn,
must be in keeping with the inflationary dangers now present.
Mr. Mills said that the money supply, as a quantitative
economic factor and indicator, had come to be bandied around
more and more frequently in the discussions of the Committee
without deciding, perhaps, in what perspective the money supply
should be viewed. Mr. Thomas had pointed out that the absolute
level of the money supply at any particular date was not necessarily
a guide to its influence on the economic situation. What had not
been discussed was the rate of increase in the money supply

5/5/59 -26
relative to the increase in gross national product, stated in
terms of constant dollars. As he recalled, the staff economic
review submitted to the Committee in advance of this meeting
mentioned a 2-1/2 per cent increase in the money supply during
1959 to date, and a 2-1/2 per cent increase, when considered in
relation to the level of current economic activity, might or
might not be a matter of serious concern. Personally, he doubted
that it was a matter of serious concern or that it would be wise
for the System so to strain monetary policy as to attempt to
defeat and finally counteract what was probably a normal growth.
As might be surmised, Mr. Mills said, his position with
regard to System policy was in serious contradiction to the positions
taken in the comments around the table thus far at this meeting. To
submit his own views in as concise a form as possible, he then read
the following statement
My objections to a Federal Reserve System monetary
and credit policy that, in my judgment, is unnecessarily
and unwisely restrictive still stand. Inasmuch, however,
as it will be necessary to supply new reserves about May
12 in support of commercial bank subscriptions through
their Tax and Loan Accounts to the Treasury's April 15,
1960 special bill, and as reserves may also be supplied
through the process of attrition on maturing Treasury
issues, a ready-made means is available for unobtrustively
relaxing reserve pressures, but not to the degree that
would impede a prompt redistribution of the new issues
of U. S. Treasury securities that the commercial banking
system is now expected to acquire. If an orderly trans
ference of commercial bank holdings of old and new
purchases of U. S. Government securities into other forms
of loans and investments is to be accomplished in order

-27-
that the legitimate demand for commercial bank loans
may be serviced, the Federal Reserve System must
cease and desist from a policy which, by maintaining
a constantly rising level of negative free reserves,
is touching off a spiral of contractive credit forces,
the results of which would only come to light in their
true state after the effects of the injection of new
reserves attendant upon the Treasury's financing
operation had worn off. Avoidance of excessive pressure
on the supply of reserves can accomplish a desirable
redistribution of U. S. Government securities out of
the commercial banking system within a reasonable
length of time while also allowing room for the com
mercial banks to absorb the seasonal demand for credit
that is now a tangible prospect. If, on the contrary,
in order needlessly to restrain any growth in the
money supply, Federal Reserve System policy denies
elbowroom to the commercial banking system in which
to expand their loans and investments, harmful con
sequences to the U. S. Government securities market
can be anticipated when the commercial banks are forced
to liquidate U. S. Government securities so as to make
good their lending obligations to their customers.
Under such circumstances, the destructive influence of
constantly falling prices for U. S. Government securi
ties can lead to disorderly market conditions whose
correction might defeat the very policy purposes that
have been sought after.
I would oppose an increase in the discount rate
at the present time, in that the logic for such an
increase would have to derive from market reactions
to a Federal Reserve System monetary and credit policy
that I cannot approve.
Mr. Leach reported that the economy of the Fifth District,
paced by its leading manufacturing industry, textiles, continued
to expand through April. Total nonfarm employment had now passed
pre-recession peaks in two States, though for the district as a
whole it was still 1 per cent short of that level. Recent gains

5/5/59 -28
in manufacturing manhours continued in March, to bring the
seasonally adjusted first quarter increase to 3 per cent.
The textile industry was demonstrating impressive contra
seasonal strength in orders, production, and shipments in
practically all of its divisions. Furniture makers apparently
had a good spring market, and the lumber industry continued to
expand employment and output. The darkest spot continued to be
in West Virginia, which showed little or no progress in over
coming its severe problem of coal mining unemployment.
At the last meeting of the Committee, Mr. Leach recalled,
he reported data on borrowings of Fifth District banks which
seemed to indicate that monetary policy was having a more wide
spread tightening effect in the first quarter of 1959 than in
the first quarter of 1957. April data showed that this continued
to be true and that the difference was widening. In April 1959
the average number of banks borrowing from the Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond was 36, compared with 23 in April 1957, and the
daily average amount of their outstanding borrowings was $52
million, compared with $34 million in April 1957. District banks
that participate in the Federal funds market purchased almost
three times as much Federal funds in April 1959 as in April 1957.
Further evidence of the tightness now prevailing among
Fifth District member banks could be found in the extent of

5/5/59 -29
security depreciation in the portfolios of member banks examined
since the first of the year. Of 1953 banks examined, 117 had
depreciation as of the date of examination exceeding 5 per cent
of their total capital accounts, 70 had depreciation in excess
of 10 per cent, and 13 had depreciation over 20 per cent. Pre
sumably, depreciation was now even larger because of the recent
decline in markets for fixed obligations, A test check indicated
that most banks had more depreciation now than at the corresponding
time in 1957.
While completely comparable figures were not available for
the United States, Mr. Leach noted that national figures showed
average daily borrowings of all reserve city and country banks
from the Reserve Banks as high in April 1959 as in April 1957 even
though the net borrowed reserve figure in April 1959 averaged about
$240 million compared with $505 million in April 1957. All of this
led him to believe that the lending decisions of member banks out
side of New York and Chicago were currently subject to as much or
more pressure than at this time in 1957, when the Committee's
directive was aimed at restraining inflation and aggregate net
borrowed reserves were much greater.
This pointed up the wide range of possible effects that
might stem from a given level of net borrowed reserves, Mr. Leach
said, but it did not mean that he would advocate any change in

5/5/59 -30
over-all restraint. He agreed substantially with the appraisal
by Mr. Young and Mr. Thomas of the condition of the economy and
the danger of inflation. However, he thought the Committee should
bear in mind the danger that sizable additions to the total amount
of net borrowed reserves under the existing distribution pattern
might cause more pressure at reserve city and country banks than
desired. For the period immediately ahead, an even-keel policy
was clearly called for by the current Treasury financing. The
policy directive was getting out of date, if it was not already,
and if the present trend should continue the Committee might want
to consider a change in the directive at the next meeting.
Mr. Leedy stated that Tenth District agricultural conditions
remained favorable except in southwestern Oklahoma and parts of New
Mexico, where severe drought conditions prevailed. Cold weather
had retarded the development of pasture, necessitating supplemental
feeding of livestock in some areas, but cattle slaughter remained
relatively low, which indicated that the producers were continuing
to expand livestock numbers rapidly. Nonfarm employment in March
was 3 per cent above the year-ago level and the current district
employment level, allowing for seasonal factors, appeared to be
at least as high as at the mid-1957 peak. Construction showed
considerable strength, with awards for the first quarter 11 per
cent higher than in the comparable period last year, and residential

5/5/59 -31
construction awards were 50 per cent higher. Through April 25,
department store sales increased 10 per cent over last year, a
higher rate of increase than in any district except the Twelfth.
Continuing the district summary, Mr. Leedy said that thus
far this year there had been an actual growth in business loans,
in other loan categories there was considerable strength, and in
investment portfolios, also, there had recently been some increase.
Apparently, some bank purchases in connection with the April 1
financing had not yet been liquidated. In the past few days member
bank borrowing reached a level a little higher than $100 million,
far more than the district's proportionate share of total borrow
ings. Thus, it seemed that System policy had been operating in
the Tenth District with greater force than in most other districts.
As to policy for the period immediately ahead, Mr. Leedy
subscribed to what had been said many times around the table this
morning, that is, that the Committee could do no more than maintain
an even keel in view of the Treasury financing. Except for that
circumstance, it seemed to him the statistics showed every reason
for the System to be moving further in the direction of restraint.
The thinking beyond the period immediately ahead should be in terms
of more restraint on reserves and possibly an increase in the
discount rate at a time not far in the future. In view of the
changes that had occurred since the policy directive was first
adopted, he felt that a revision would be indicated at the time
of the next Committee meeting.

5/5/59 -32
Mr. Mitchell stated that both statistical evidence and
opinions pointed to a rather steady rise in the trend of activity
in the Seventh District. A number of cases were noted where
cautious optimism had changed into confident assurance of moving
into a high level of activity. Furthermore, the improvement was
not confined to sections badly hit a year ago. For example, bank
debits in Iowa communities this year were running about 14 per
cent higher than last year. Department store sales in eastern
Michigan had been especially strong, considering the bad showing
a year ago, and sales in Chicago were up though not so favorably
on a comparative basis. The unemployment situation continued to
improve throughout the district, and it appeared that Chicago
might move into a higher labor classification at the time of the
next announcement by the Department of Labor.
On the financial side, Mr. Mitchell said that the expansion
of business loans since last summer continued to be a little more
vigorous than in the comparable 1954-55 period. During the period
August 1958 through April 1959, business loans increased about
7-1/2 per cent, compared with a 5 per cent increase in 1954-55.
At Chicago banks, the expansion was more than 6 per cent and
elsewhere in the district the increase was even greater. The
growth of time deposits in the first quarter of this year was
less than in any quarter of 1958, and the rate of growth of

5/5/59 -33
savings account balances in the major cities had declined
steadily since last October. Detroit banks had announced
an increase in rates on time deposits and there was speculation
that Chicago banks would go to a 3 per cent rate on savings
accounts.
Mr. Deming reported that business activity in the Ninth
District continued to exhibit a stronger than seasonal upturn.
Construction was particularly strong and iron ore production was
going along at a fast pace. While total nonagricultural employ
ment was improving rather slowly, employment in construction and
mining in March was up 5 per cent and 9 per cent, respectively,
from year-ago levels. It was anticipated that April figures would
show further sharp improvement, especially in iron ore mining
Other indications of economic vitality were an upsurge in department
store sales and in bank debits, the latter being up 15 per cent in
March. Farm income, too, continued to run higher than a year ago.
While it seemed likely to stay on the plus side during the first
half of this year, the longer-range farm outlook was not too good
at the moment due to a severe spring drought over much of the
district. Unless there was lots of rain soon, 1959 small grain
production would be much less than last year.
Current loan demand was strong, Mr. Deming said, particularly
for commercial and industrial loans. The rise in business loans at

5/5/59 -34
city banks from mid-February (the seasonal low) to mid-April was
twice as large as in 1958 and one-third more than in 1957. In
general, the recovery in the Ninth District was proceeding on a
satisfactory basis. Little evidence of speculative activity was
seen locally and if it were not for the drought, the district
would feel quite comfortable at the moment.
With respect to monetary policy, Mr. Deming said that he
had no reason to disagree with the analyses presented by Mr. Young
and Mr. Thomas and tended to concur in Mr. Thomas' feeling about
the international competitive situation. Generally, then, he felt
that the course of monetary policy should be moving toward a more
restrictive posture. At the same time, he was quite concerned
about the rate picture in the Government securities market and the
problems facing the Treasury in the future. He found it difficult
to press for action that would seem to force the Treasury to con
fine its financings even more to very short-term securities, for
such a policy would be self-defeating from the System's point of
view. This dilemma did not bother him greatly for the next three
week period, since an even-keel policy seemed called for during
that period. Beyond that time, however, it bothered him very much.
He agreed with Mr. Robertson that some kind of solution to this
problem had to be worked out, but he did not see the solution at
this moment.

5/5/59 -35
Mr. Swan reported that Twelfth District business activity
continued to move forward at a rapid pace, with particularly high
rates of activity in construction, trade, and services. Employ
ment was up in March, with manufacturing and construction leading
the way, and a further rise in April was indicated. In the air
craft industry a slight declining trend in employment continued
in the State of Washington in March, but that was offset by an
increase in California. The rate of unemployment in the Coastal
States declined in March to 4.6 per cent, retail sales continued
strong, and automobile sales were continuing to rise. In recent
weeks the district's steel mills had been operating at close to
capacity, and many of the mills appeared to be booked virtually
to capacity through the month of June. With the mounting demand
for lumber, the March cut in Douglas fir prices proved to be
short-lived and was succeeded recently by another price increase.
Construction activity advanced sharply in March, with residential
construction reflecting a particularly marked increase. It
appeared as though this trend would continue, for FHA applications
were heavy in March. The recent McGraw-Hill survey of plant and
equipment spending plans indicated a somewhat greater increase in
the Twelfth District for 1959 than for the country as a whole.
In further comments, Mr. Swan said that district weekly
reporting banks had recently experienced a sharp loan increase,
substantially more than for the corresponding weeks last year and

5/5/59 -36
three times the rate of increase reflected by the national series.
In previous months, real estate loans had been the major source
of strengh, but in the most recent period gains in business and
consumer loans became increasingly important. At the same time,
there was only a nominal decline in holdings of Government securi
ties. Demand and time deposits rose, but by a somewhat smaller
amount than a year ago. As to Federal funds, the major district
banks showed a slight excess of sales over purchases last week and
about the same position was anticipated this week. However, almost
all of the offerings were accounted for by one large San Francisco
bank.
MrI. rons stated that Eleventh District conditions reflected
the trend indicated nationally. He agreed with Messrs. Young and
Thomas that growing and broadening strength was to be seen in
national activity, with expansion reflected in aggregate demand,
consumer expenditures, inventory accumulation, revised plans for
capital goods expenditures, and surprisingly large corporate profits.
Growing confidence had been particularly noticeable in the Eleventh
District. No longer were businessmen, bankers, and others expressing
concern about recovery and the possibility of a slackening; they
were now confident that business was going to expand substantially
and that their problems would be those associated with expansion
rather than recovery or regaining lost ground. In the district,

5/5/59 -37
most segments of activity were at record or near-record levels,
including department store trade, construction, housing, employ
ment, and industrial production. One area with some uncertainties
was agriculture, where prospects were affected by adverse weather
in some sections. However, planting was now coming along and
agricultural activity was increasing. Another uncertain area was
the petroleum industry, which still had problems, particularly in
refining. Final product stocks were building up, probably to an
excessive amount, but refining was continuing at a high level.
Allowables in Texas for May had been increased by one day to a
total of 12 days, which meant a further increase in crude production.
On the financial side, Mr. Irons said that credit demands
were strengthening in the district, with particular strength in
consumer loans, business-type loans, and loans to sales finance
companies. Some liquidation of Government security holdings was
taking place and a strong increase was noted in deposits of indi
viduals, partnerships, and corporations. All bankers with whom he
had talked were referring to a very strong loan demand, and it was
expected to be even stronger in the last quarter of the year. The
banks, particularly the city institutions, were moving into the
period of seasonal upturn in loan demand with loan ratios that
already were high. Demand for Reserve Bank discounts had not been
unusually heavy, although some large city banks were borrowing on

5/5/59 -38
a one-day basis. The impression was gained that some of the city
banks that had not borrowed for a long time might be feeling out
the Reserve Bank in view of the prospect of heavier loan demand.
Mr. Irons said that both the national and Eleventh District
economic picture pointed toward an increase in the degree of re
straint now being maintained rather than any relaxation. He
realized the problem posed by the Treasury financing and the im
practicability of doing anything overt in the next three weeks.
However, he hoped that the Account Management would not be con
cerned too much by the level of net borrowed reserves. The key
was in the distribution and allocation of reserves and the total
picture might be more confusing than meaningful. He hoped that
the Federal funds rate would be at the discount rate and felt
that the Account Manager should be governed in his operations by
his sensitivity to the market and the feel of the market. He would
attempt to maintain at least the present degree of restrictiveness
and would consciously and actively avoid any lessening. Since the
policy directive appeared to be getting out of date, it might be
in order to review the directive for possible change at the next
Committee meeting. If the present trend should continue and the
outlook three weeks from today was the same as at present, he
felt that it would be appropriate to give consideration to taking
overt action to move toward greater restraint.

5/5/59 -39
Mr. Erickson reported that business continued to improve
in the First District and that the New England production index
showed increases in textiles, paper, leather, and primary metals.
While construction awards in March were 9 per cent below a year
ago, the first time a year-to-year comparison had been on the
minus side since May of last year, there was a $28 million utility
award in March 1958 and no award of comparable size in March of
this year. Residential construction contracts were 14 per cent
ahead of last year. As compared with a year ago, nonagricultural
employment was up, but not as much as for the country as a whole.
Employment recovery had been most pronounced in the durable goods
field, but a number of other industries were still employing fewer
people than a year ago. Department store sales continued at a rate
5 per cent above last year. An end-of-March survey showed deposits
at mutual savings banks 6-1/2 per cent higher than a year ago and
real estate balances 10 per cent higher. Last year's record ski
business was exceeded in the season just concluded.
The Boston Reserve Bank last week held its semi-annual
Business Outlook Conference, with economists from universities,
business, and financial institutions participating, and as usual
the participants were asked to make certain predictions. As to
gross national product in the last quarter of this year, the
estimates ranged from $475t o $493 billion, annual rate, with a

5/5/59 -40
median of $483 billion, while the predictions for the industrial
production index in December ranged from 148 to 155, with a median
of 151. By and large, the economists were optimistic, but they
were concerned about the stock market, competition of foreign
producers, the position of the Treasury, and money rates.
In view of the Treasury financing, Mr. Erickson saw no
option for the next three weeks except to maintain the prevailing
degree of restraint, leaving it to the Manager of the Account to
judge the feel of the market. While he was concerned about the
facts pointed out by Mr. Thomas and others, at the same time one
could not overlook the views presented by Mr. Mills. It was his
feeling that the next meeting of the Committee might be one of
the most important for a long time.
Mr. Szymczak said it was obvious that the System could not
do anything different from what it is doing at present during the
next three weeks. In view of the developments in the economy, it
was quite natural that one would like to step up the degree of
restraint. However, it was not possible to exercise monetary
policy in a vacuum, for other considerations must be taken into
account whether one liked them or not. As Mr. Mills had indicated,
one of the most important and vital parts of the picture at the
present time was the condition of the Government securities market,
and the condition of that market was a part of the System's

5/5/59 -41
responsibility. The fact that the Government securities market
was in the doldrums must be of immediate concern to the System.
Another consideration in the picture at present, and a vital one,
was the Federal Government deficit, and the question whether or
not there would be another deficit made the problem even more
difficult. Likewise, the balance of payments situation was of
vital concern. Whether or not United States industries had priced
themselves out of the market, the fact remained that a lot of
dollars were going out of the country and this contributed to the
difficulty in formulating monetary policy. Furthermore, unemploy
ment was still high and that was a matter of concern whatever the
causes might be. Whether or not monetary policy could do anything
about that situation, it was still a factor to be reckoned with.
Thus, although the System did not have a clean sheet upon which to
write, it must continue to try to do the best job possible with
monetary policy. Under present circumstances, Mr. Mills' statement
presented a problem that must be considered because the Government
securities market was an immediate problem and one which was
difficult of solution, as attested by some of the statements made
in connection with the current Treasury-Federal Reserve study.
As indicated by the comments of Messrs. Leach and Leedy,
Mr. Szymczak said, the System could hardly hope to deal with the
distribution of reserves. With the instruments available, the

5/5/59 -42
best it could do was to proceed in a manner that would lead
toward stability and offset tendencies toward inflation. At
the next Committee meeting, he would suggest discussion of the
discount rate, the policy directive, and a study of possible
alternative methods of dealing with inflationary trends, especially
at times when Treasury operations preclude System action. The last
mentioned problem would, of course, require much study in order to
come forth with an answer.
Mr. Balderston summarized the views expressed at this meet
ing by saying that the consensus appeared to favor (1) continuing
the present degree of restraint in order to preserve an even keel
until an appropriate date following the current Treasury financing,
(2) moving toward greater restraint as soon as possible thereafter,
and (3) continuing the present policy directive until the next
Committee meeting and at that time considering a possible revision.
In order to facilitate discussion, Mr. Balderston suggested that
the members of the Committee who favored a revision of the directive
at the next meeting submit draft wording to the Secretary of the
Committee, so that the latter might present alternative proposals
at that time. It had been his feeling on previous occasions that
the drafting of language at a Committee meeting was difficult and
time-consuming.
Mr. Balderston then said that he would now depart from his
effort to state the consensus and present his own view, which was

5/5/59 -43
that the System ought to move toward greater restraint during the
third week of the period between now and the next Committee meeting.
If the payment date for the current Treasury financing was May 15,
he would not think it unfair to tighten in the week ending May 27.
As he saw it, that would not pull the rug from under those who
acquired securities in the present financing operation because
they would have a few days in which to distribute their inventories.
At the same time, the System would not lose that week in moving
toward a tighter position. Consequently, his own thinking departed
somewhat from the consensus of those who had spoken previously at
this meeting. He would not wait until the next meeting for the
Desk to tighten appreciably.
Mr. Balderston noted from the reserve projections that in
the week ending June 3 it was anticipated that net borrowed reserves
would increase by some $200 million. This meant that there would
be some tightening of an automatic nature of which the Committee
could take advantage. Personally, he would be inclined to nudge
nature a little and try to anticipate that effect. He then turned
to Mr. Rouse and asked whether the latter saw an imperfection in
his suggestion.
Mr. Rouse responded that the Committee would be pulling
the rug from under the money market if it did not provide enough
time for distribution of the Treasury securities. With the

5/5/59 -44
financing operation to be completed only on May 15, he felt that
this would mean maintenance of the even keel policy possibly until
the next Committee meeting.
Mr. Thomas inquired what reason there was to think that the
banks would have a large amount of securities to distribute. In
view of cash redemption of maturing bills and certificates, the net
addition probably would be not over $500 million. In the circum
stances, he suggested that the distribution might largely take care
of itself.
Mr. Rouse agreed that there was a chance of this but added
that he would hope not to have a positive instruction to do what
Mr. Balderston had suggested.
Mr. Balderston said this was the reason he had stated the
consensus before presenting his own view, and Mr. Rouse responded
that perhaps what Mr. Balderston had suggested would be possible.
If it were, he felt sure the Committee would like to see it done.
However, he (Mr. Rouse) would not care to have a positive instruc
tion to start tightening at a fixed time regardless of what might
develop. Mr. Balderston said he agreed with that completely.
Mr. Rouse then commented that one payment date would be
May 11, while the second payment date (May 15) would be for $1.5
billion of tax anticipation bills. The latter, presumably, would
be sought after at first by business corporations. At this time,

5/5/59 -45
it was hard to offer an opinion on the distribution of whatever
might be offered for the 1-1/4 per cent certificates.
In response to a question by Mr. Balderston, Mr. Rouse
said he considered the policy directive adequate in its present
form.
Mr. Robertson said that, as he understood the exchange
between Messrs. Balderston and Rouse, there was no instruction
to Mr. Rouse to begin tightening on May 21. However, if things
should just happen to work out right, it would be possible to
tighten during the week beginning on that date.
Mr. Rouse replied that this was his understanding.
Mr. Bryan said he agreed fully with Mr. Balderston's state
ment of the consensus of the meeting. Certainly, it was the
unanimous view that an even keel policy should be maintained until
the Treasury financing was out of the way. However, he did not
know precisely what was meant by an even keel policy. Should it
be measured by net free reserves, net borrowed reserves, the feel
of the market, or the intuition of the Account Manager?
Mr. Rouse replied that he thought it was a mixture of the
things mentioned by Mr. Bryan.
Mr. Robertson said that the matter should not be left on
a basis which suggested that the exact figure of net borrowed
reserves was the criterion. In the present instance, certainly,

the criterion had to be the feel of the market. If there was any
difference of opinion on that score, he felt Mr. Rouse should under
stand it.
Mr. Rouse said he understood the instruction to be to carry
on as during the past three weeks. There were no exact figures in
dicated, although he would take into consideration a band of figures.
If net borrowed reserves got as high as $300 million, or much under
$100 million, he would wonder whether the Desk was doing its job
properly, but he would be guided primarily by the feel of the market.
Therefore, he felt that he had been correct in saying to Mr. Bryan
that an even keel involved a mixture of the things Mr. Bryan had
mentioned, all within the scope of the general instruction given
by the Committee.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted
unanimously to direct the Federal Re
serve Bank of New York, until otherwise
directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges
(including replacement of maturing securities, and
allowing maturities to run off without replacement) for
the System Open Market Account in the open market or,
in the case of maturing securities, by direct exchange
with the Treasury, as may be necessary in the light of
current and prospective economic conditions and the
general credit situation of the country, with a view
(a) to relating the supply of funds in the market to
the needs of commerce and business, (b) to fostering
conditions in the money market conducive to sustainable
economic growth and stability, and (c) to the practical

-47-
administration of the Account; provided that the
aggregate amount of securities held in the System
Account (including commitments for the purchase or
sale of securities for the Account) at the close of
this date, other than special short-term certificates
of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not
be increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for
the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
(with discretion, in cases where it seems desirable,
to issue participations to one or more Federal Re
serve Banks) such amounts of special short-term
certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the
Treasury; provided that the total amount of such
certificates held at any one time by the Federal Re
serve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate $500
million.
With reference to the comments that had been made suggesting
discussion of the possibility of some overt action at the time of
the next Committee meeting, Mr. Balderston said he supposed that
the Presidents would not wish to discuss that possibility with
their directors in the meantime. However, if such a discussion
took place three weeks from today and an overt action was favored,
he felt that the System ought to be prepared to move rather deci
sively and expeditiously, and as a unit to the extent possible.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Mar
ket Committee would be held on Tuesday, May 26, 1959, at 1000 a.m.
SecretarTyhe meeting then adjourned.