A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Wednesday, July 6, 1960, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman 1/
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Fulton
Mr. King
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Leach, Alternate for Mr. Bopp
Messrs. Allen, Irons, and Mangels, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Mr. Johns, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Brandt, Eastburn, Marget, and Tow,
Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Koch, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Keir, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
1/ Entered at point indicated in minutes.

7/6/60 -2-
Mr. Hilkert, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia
Mr. Hickman, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland
Messrs. Mitchell, Daane, and Einzig, Vice Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago,
Minneapolis, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Willis, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston
Messrs. Gaines and Black, Assistant Vice Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and
Richmond, respectively
Mr. Holmes, Manager, Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Meigs, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
held on June 14, 1960, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report of open market operations covering the period
June 14 through June 29, 1960, and a supplementary report covering the
period June 30 through July 5, 1960. Copies of both reports have been
placed in the files of the Committee.
With further reference to developments since the Committee meeting
on June 14, 1960, Mr. Rouse made the following comments:
Since the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on
June 14, open market operations have been mixed, as the Manage
ment first tried to offset the easing effects of the mid-month
float expansion and then sharply reversed direction to provide
funds to ease a tightening money market. The tightening ini
tially resulted from the concentration of reserve pressures on
the New York City banks following the June 15 tax date when there
were sizable flows of funds to and from New York, and especially
a quick shift of the burden of financing Government security

7/6/60
dealers to the New York banks as corporation repurchase agree
ments expired on the tax date. Later in the period, funds were
needed to meet the reserve drains associated with the July 4th
holiday. The net effect of these reserve gyrations and off
setting System actions was to maintain a generally easy tone
in the money market.
In the earlier phase, the Desk was able to withdraw funds
readily without resort to the market through sales of Treasury
bills to foreign accounts and bill redemptions; but the later
efforts to supply funds through purchases of bills were more
difficult and aggravated the trend toward lower bill rates.
With this meeting scheduled today and the Treasury auction
tomorrow, it was a most unpleasant surprise to have the weekend
statistics greet us yesterday morning. Instead of free reserves
of over $100 million for the week, we faced negative free
reserves of $75 million and an enormous accumulated reserve
deficit in New York and a moderate one in Chicago and only two
days left in the statement week in which to repair the damage.
Treasury balance, required reserves, and float were the principal
offenders. Fortunately the securities markets were strong enough
to stand it and in the end we were able to make some amends, but
this morning's first estimate indicates only small free reserves,
if any, for the statement week on average.
The Treasury's offering of $3.5 billion of tax bills for
auction today may eventually relieve some of the downward push
on bill rates. The prospects are for a successful auction with
substantial bidding by commercial banks interested in the Tax
and Loan credit, with rates mentioned in a wide range of 2.55
per cent to 2.80 per cent.
In another move which will affect the bill rate structure,
the Treasury in last week's bill auction changed the relation
ship of three- and six-month bills, increasing the proportion of
six-month bills in the total. As a result, the spread between
the three- and six-month bill rates in Friday's auction widened
to about 50 basis points.
An interesting new event in the Government securities mar
ket is the offering tomorrow of $19.8 million of District of
Columbia Stadium Bonds, due in 1979, callable in 1970 and after,
which are fully guaranteed as to interest and principal by the
United States Government. Originally these bonds were estimated
at about $6 million and were to have been fully exempt from
Federal income tax, and several syndicates of municipal dealers
were therefore organized for underwriting purposes. The underlying
statute was subsequently changed to make the bonds fully taxable,
but the same municipal syndicates are apparently preparing to bid.

7/6/60 -4
Some of these syndicates include Government securities dealers.
Had it been set up originally as it turned out, some of the
Government securities dealers would have submitted individual
bids. Yields around 4.40 per cent to 4.45 per cent are mentioned.
We believe the bonds will be traded in the secondary market as
distinct from other Treasury issues, in the same way as Merchant
Marine bonds which are not widely traded or quoted by Government
securities dealers because of their relatively small size.
Mr. Leach referred to a statement on page 2 of the report of open
market operations for the period June 14 through June 29, 1960, which
indicated that by the end of the period under review strong investor
demand, augmented by System purchases, had brought rates on the 91-day
and 182-day bills to 2.14 and 2.58 per cent, respectively. He also noted
from page 6 of the report that on June 24, with foreign accounts buying
heavily, it was decided that a go-around would have an undue impact on
rates and hence System Account purchases were limited to bills offered by
dealers on their own initiative during the day. He noted further that
Mr. Rouse, in his oral comments this morning, had stated that efforts in
the latter part of this period to supply funds through purchases of bills
were rather difficult and aggravated the trend toward lower bill rates.
This seemed to indicate, Mr. Leach said, that the buying of bills had an
unusually strong effect on rates, more so than it had had in the past. He
inquired of Mr. Rouse whether it would seem advisable at some times to buy
other short-term securities.
Mr. Rouse replied that without question System Account purchases
in the size required had aggravated the downward push on bill rates, although
the Desk had tried to conduct its operations so that they would have as

7/6/60 -5
small an effect on such rates as possible. He vent on to point out that
the commercial banks held only about $2.5 billion of such securities at
the present time, approximately the same amount as held in the Account
portfolio. Therefore, banks were now adjusting their reserve positions
through the use of other short-term securities to a considerable extent.
In such circumstances, he felt that it would be helpful to deal in short
term securities other than bills on certain occasions.
Vice Chairman Hayes said that Mr. Leach's question was an appro
priate one and that if the members of the Committee should see fit to
bring it up during the discussion of policy, it would seem quite reasonable
to do so.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded and by unanimous vote, the open
market transactions during the period June
14 through July 5, 1960, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Koch presented the following statement with regard to economic
developments:
Since the chart show presented at the last meeting of this
Committee focused on the course of economic developments over a
somewhat longer period, I shall concentrate my remarks today on
more recent developments and what they suggest about the current
state of the economy. In brief, recent facts confirm our earlier
judgment that economic activity is continuing at a high, probably
a record level, although currently showing little upward momentum.
I think I detect a little firmer tone in the staff economic memoran
dum prepared for this meeting.
Thus, our industrial production index in June will probably
show little change from the May level of 110 per cent, which was 1
per cent above April. In addition, the leading indicators of
cyclical change, which were weak early in the year, have strengthened

7/6/60 -6
somewhat since March. In this connection, however, it should
be stressed that recent changes in these indicators have been
small, and they have been shifting erratically from month to
month. Finally, the gross national product in the second
quarter apparently showed a slightly larger advance over the
first quarter than had been expected.
This modest raising of our sights on the second quarter
gross national product is due mainly to a somewhat greater
seasonally adjusted annual rate of inventory accumulation than
had been anticipated. Earlier we had been thinking that the
rate of accumulation might be about $3 billion in the second
quarter, as contrasted with the nearly $11 billion in the first
quarter. Now it looks as if the second quarter rate might have
been in the neighborhood of $5 billion.
Also on the favorable side, retail sales of automobiles
and consumer goods in general rose in June, following declines
in May. New orders received by durable goods producers increased
slightly in May, owing mainly to a fairly large gain for aircraft.
Average hours of work also firmed somewhat.
An important recent development observable in the labor
field is that the increase in industrial wages has slowed down
markedly to a pace significantly slower than in earlier periods
of high level activity. This tendency toward smaller wage in
creases is illustrated by the recent settlement for operating
employees in the railroad industry. This settlement involved
a wage increase of 4 per cent over a two-year period and a
discontinuance of the esclator clause.
In the price field, wholesale prices declined slightly in
May and early June, as lower prices of industrial items and some
farm products more than offset higher prices for processed foods.
Consumer prices, on the other hand, increased slightly further in
May following a somewhat larger rise in April. In May, they were
1.9 per cent higher than a year ago. The recent rise in consumer
prices has reflected the continuing upward trend in prices for
services and a somewhat more than seasonal increase in food prices.
It is of interest to note that increasing tensions in the
international situation as a result of the collapse of the summit
talks and anti-U. S. feelings being expressed in several foreign
countries have thus far apparently not had any appreciable effect
on price and inventory developments. This conclusion is supported
not only by statistics but also by recent views expressed by pur
chasing agents.
Turning to the less favorable side of the economic picture,
in June initial claims for unemployment compensation, a leading
labor market indicator, rose slightly on a seasonally adjusted

7/6/60 -7
basis. The level of unemployment, around 5 per cent, continues
high for the current phase of the business cycle. Steel mill
operations have declined further, falling from 71 per cent of
capacity in May to an average of 60 per cent in June and to
53 per cent last week.
The seasonally adjusted rate of total construction outlays
declined in June and was 7 per cent below the all-time high
reached in May last year. Although private housing starts held
steady in May, additional reports have appeared of surplus housing
in scattered areas. Defaults on home loans and foreclosures on
nonfarm real estate have also been rising but, it should be noted,
both still represent a small proportion of new mortgage lending or
debt outstanding.
Finally, the latest National Industrial Conference Board-
Newsweek quarterly survey of appropriations for plant and equipment
spending by major manufacturing companies has been interpreted as
indicating that although outlays will continue strong throughout
this year, some softening may develop early next year.
Thus, although economic activity continues fairly high, un
certainty about its future course is widespread. Some observers
talk of the imminence of cyclical contraction; others of what Mr.
Fulton so graphically characterized as "deteriorating stagnation"
a meeting or so ago. On the other hand, still other observers
take heart in at least certain aspects of the reduced current
rate of increase in economic activity. They feel that the generally
orderly adjustment from the unsustainably high rate of inventory
accumulation early in the year and the avoidance of speculative
imbalances and excesses generally associated with the culmination
of a boom have strengthened the chances for a more sustained period
of prosperity.
During the course of Mr. Koch's remarks Chairman Martin entered the
meeting and assumed the Chair.
In response to a question by Mr. Balderston, Mr. Koch said that the
volume of inventory accumulation was still relatively moderate in comparison
with sales, and that the increase had been somewhat less than during the
comparable period of the previous business cycle. Recent increases had been
concentrated in finished goods inventories, but the inventory situation was
in better shape than in the similar phase of other postwar cycles.

7/6/60 -8
Mr. Thomas then made the following statement with respect to
financial developments:
The past four weeks have been a period of large and
varied seasonal pressures on money and credit markets.
These were due at first to usual June tax, dividend, and
other settlements and then to holiday currency demands.
Treasury financing operations and rather large shifts of
foreign funds added to the complications.
Viewing the period as a whole in perspective, bank
reserve positions were kept relatively easy by large-scale
Federal Reserve operations and money rates remained low.
Yet pressures were felt in the market. Around the middle
of the month when temporary liquidity demands were at their
maximum, Treasury bill rates increased somewhat. Dealers
took on a very large volume of Government securities, mostly
bills, and increased their borrowings. Banks had to supply
much of these credit needs and at the same time meet loan
demands of businesses and finance companies customarily
heavy at that time. Required reserves increased substantially.
Reserves were supplied temporarily by a sharp increase in float.
System operations--mostly runoff of maturing bills-
actually absorbed reserves in that week. Member bank borrowings
increased, although on balance the banks continued to show net
free reserves. Most of the excess, however, was at country
banks, while city banks, where the credit demands centered,
had to increase their borrowings at the Reserve Banks. Federal
funds were less readily available than they had been.
In the last two weeks of June, loans and investments at
city banks were reduced. In the latest week banks sharply re
duced their borrowings--both from the Federal Reserve and from
others. This easing was aided by a resumption of Federal
Reserve purchases, which have continued on a large scale this
week. Treasury bill rates again turned down,
The month of June was characterized by a sharp drop in
interest rates to the lowest levels since early 1959. Except
for the summer of 1958, Treasury bill rates are lower than at
any time since early 1956. Yields on medium- and long-term
issues also declined in June but not as much as short-term
rates, and they generally continue above any levels reached
before 1959.
This decline in interest rates reflects the easing reserve
position of banks and the reduction in Federal Reserve discount
rates that occurred in June, as well as the more fundamental

7/6/60 -9
forces that had been in process earlier. These include
principally the changed position of the Federal budget
from large deficit to small surplus, moderation of private
credit demands, the lessened fear of inflation, and the
shift of the public's liquid asset holdings from cash to
securities.
Credit demands in June were moderately large. New
capital issues both by corporations and by State and local
governments--totaling $1 billion or more each--were larger
than in any other month of 1959 and 1960. The aggregate
for the first half of the year, however, was less than in
the two previous years. Offerings by finance companies,
however, have been much larger this year than in those
years. Borrowings at banks by finance companies, though
somewhat less than last year, appear to have exceeded those
of most other recent years, both in June and for the year
to date. Loans to other businesses by city banks, although
moderately large in June, were not as great as in most other
recent years. The same may be said of total loans at city
banks. These banks showed a further small decrease in their
holdings of U. S. Government securities during June. Total
loans and investments increased more than in June of 1959,
1956, and 1955, though much less than in 1957 and 1958.
It appears that both demand and time deposits increased
somewhat more than seasonally during June. It is unlikely,
however, that the rise was sufficient to offset the sharp
drop in the money supply during May. Treasury balances at
banks continued at a high level and are expected to be main
tained in the weeks ahead generally above the levels of last
year. The Treasury's borrowing needs in the next half year
will be much smaller, with less frequent financing operations,
than in the same period of 1959 and 1958.
System operations in the past few days should be more
than sufficient to cover any normal seasonal reserve needs
for the next three months, except for temporary variations.
The question to be considered is how much additional stimulus
should be provided. It is doubtful whether banks will be called
upon, will be willing, or should be encouraged to expand loans
by much more than customary seasonal amounts in the months
ahead. In view of the current level of business inventories
and the liquidity position of businesses, loan demands may not
be particularly heavy. Loans have already increased at a
fairly good rate and bank loan-deposit ratios are such as to
serve as some restraint on banks in seeking new loans. Encourage
ment for greater loan expansion might lead to speculative or

7/6/60 -10
unsustainable commitments, although in the present economic
climate this does not seem likely to be a serious threat.
Supplying banks with additional reserves in excess of
usual seasonal needs or likely loan demands would enable
them to reduce borrowings or increase their holdings of
Government securities--or at least cease their liquidation
of such holdings. Since the Treasury will be a seasonal
net borrower in the months ahead and bank deposits should
expand seasonally, some increase in total bank credit is to
be expected.
One question is whether the public generally will want to
discontinue or reduce its recent proclivities for economizing
on cash and increasing holdings of securities. Unless this
trend changes, additions to bank reserves and attempts by banks
to expand their holdings of securities may result in further
declines in short-term interest rates. Unless credit demands
strengthen, it may be difficult to effect a greater than seasonal
expansion in the money supply without some further reduction in
interest rates.
Mr. Marget made the following statement with regard to the United
States balance of payments:
In the six weeks that have elapsed since I last reported
to this Committee on developments in our trade position, we
have received the full trade figures for April and the pre
liminary figures for May. These figures--to borrow the adjective
used in one of the newspaper comments on them--are "heartening."
First, there is our export performance: the critical area,
certainly, for all of us who wish to see a solution of our bal
ance-of-payments on expansionist, rather than contractionist,
lines. On a seasonally adjusted basis, exports in April and May
averaged an annual rate of more than $19 billion. This rate was
about 4 per cent above the average for the first quarter of this
year and 23 per cent above the low of a year earlier; indeed, it
was the highest rate since the middle of 1957, a year in which we
ran an over-all surplus in our balance of payments. Moreover, al
though we still lack details on exports for May, the breakdown for
April showed that the rise in exports was spread widely over major
commodity groups. Thus, although the largest increase over the
past year has been in agricultural products, mainly reflecting
higher cotton shipments, the falling off in cotton exports since
early this year has been more than made up by the increased
foreign demand for U. S. nonagricultural products. In April,

7/6/60 -11
for example, the largest increases were in the very area
in which most concern had been expressed about our ability
to maintain a competitive position--in machinery and equip
ment (particularly transport equipment) and in metals (par
ticularly steel). Indeed, the exports of machinery and
equipment were well above even the peak rates recorded in
the peak-export year 1957.
Secondly, our import performance has been such as to
contradict the expectations of those who have suggested that
any gain in our exports was likely to be offset, or more than
offset, by a corresponding increase in our imports, so that
we were not in fact likely to achieve the sizable surplus in
our current accounts which we need in order to keep our over
all balance of payments in equilibrium if we are to continue
to maintain a large program of foreign aid and foreign invest
ment. Actually, our imports, while they have been fluctuating
erratically from month to month since last December, have, if
anything, fallen somewhat since that time. In April and May,
for example, they averaged $15 billion at an annual rate:
about the same as in the first quarter of this year, but 3 per
cent below the average for the fourth quarter of last year.
And again the distribution of imports has been such as to en
courage the hope that some success is attending our efforts to
face up to the new competitive situation in the world which some
of us feel is the basic reason for the existence of our balance
of-payments problem altogether. Certainly cyclical factors, and
special factors such as last year's steel strike, as well as
longer-term "competitive" factors lie behind the heavy concentration
of the decline, in our imports, of steel and other metals, with
steel imports down about one-third below last year's fourth-quarter
average. But it is surely evidence of an improvement in our com
petitive position that the imports of new automobiles should also
be significantly down from the fourth quarter, and that in May
they should have been as much as one-fourth below the level of a
year earlier.
With exports slowly, but steadily, increasing, and with im
ports showing, if anything, a slight decline, the result can only
have been an increase in our trade balance; and in fact the figures
for April and May do show an improvement in that trade balance by
more than $1/2 billion at an annual rate. But there has not been
a comparable improvement in the figure which we take as a measure
of movements in our over-all balance of payments: namely, the
figure for the international movement of gold and dollars. On
the contrary, it would appear--though the data for May are still

7/6/60 -12-
incomplete--that, despite the increase in our export
surplus of $1/2 billion, annual rate, in our trade
account, we were still running an over-all balance
of-payments deficit close to the first-quarter seasonally
adjusted annual rate of $2.8 billion.
The explanation, quite obviously, lies in capital
movements--including, of course, such movements as have
been induced by the widening of the spread between the
interest rates prevailing in the respective monetary
centers. But the rest of the evidence, surely, is such
as to indicate that, if matters continue to go as they
have been going, this is something that we can take easily
in stride. Gold movements, for example, while they amounted
in the second quarter of this year, at $85 million, to
somewhat more than they were in the first quarter, were
$300 million less than the purchases of foreign countries in
the second quarter of 1959; and these, in turn, were con
siderably lover than they had been in 1958, the year of
massive gold-outflow ($2.3 billion) which first awakened
the country to the existence of its balance-of-payments
problem. What will be decisive, in fact, for the future
will be the extent to which we can continue to provide
evidence of adjustment in the most intractable part of our
balance-of-payments problem: namely, the trade part. It
was in the trade sector that our balance of payments showed
its greatest deterioration; it is in the trade sector that
we find the most encouraging evidence of movement in the
direction of adjustment. It has been the improvement in the
trade sector that has offset the otherwise "unfavorable"
movements in the capital sector; it will be to further improve
ment in the trade sector that observers, including the foreign
holders of dollar balances, will look for evidence that the
policies being followed in the United States, including its
monetary policy, are consistent with that attainment of balance
in our international accounts to which we stand committed.
Mr. Hayes presented the following statement of his view, on the
business outlook and credit policy:
It seems to me that we are on the right track with respect
to monetary policy and that for the time being patience and
steady nerves are called for above all else.
There is nothing in the business situation to suggest that
the recent discount rate action was premature or that it is

7/6/60 -13-
likely to need to be reversed in the near future. On the
other hand, while recent business statistics are only mildly
encouraging, they do point to the likelihood of some modest
expansion in the second half of the year.
Consumer spending is the most hopeful source of this
second-half improvement, and in this connection it is encourag
ing that the disappointing May performance of retail sales
now seems attributable mainly to the late date of Easter
rether than to a weakening of demand.
In the construction area, easier availability of mortgage
funds suggests that an upturn in residential construction may
be in the making--although this stimulus may be less effective
than it has been in similar situations since World War II be
cause the demand for and supply of housing are now clearly in
closer balance than in many years. With the prospect of con
tinued strength in private nonresidential construction and an
improved outlook for the highway building program, total
construction should be an element of strength in the second
half.
Nonfarm wholesale prices experienced an unusually sharp
drop in May, and the wholesale price index as a whole may
show a decline for June. The recent small rise in consumer
prices appears of relatively minor significance, attributable
as it is very largely to seasonal food price changes.
As for bank credit developments, the growth of business
loans slackened somewhat in June after a performance in the
earlier months of the year roughly comparable with the experience
of earlier expansion years. However, while the tax period failed
to bring forth any particularly sharp rise in business loans,
there was a very marked gain in both security loans and loans
to finance companies. The inference is that corporations have
been turning less to their banks for tax funds than to the dis
position of short-term government securities, including those
held under repurchase agreements, and finance company paper.
Total loans at weekly reporting banks showed a strong increase
in the first three weeks of June, and with security holdings
changing very little, total bank credit scored a sizable gain.
During the same period required reserves have risen by about
$350 million, or substantially more than in any recent year of
business expansion,
New municipal financing has been exceptionally heavy in the
past three weeks. While this has caused some indigestion in
underwriting circles, there has been no basic weakening of bond
prices. The corporate new issue market has been relatively quiet.
Stock prices are somewhat higher than three weeks ago.

7/6/60 -14-
The outstanding economic characteristics of the period
ahead are likely to be ample productive capacity, an unemploy
ment ratio of around 5 per cent, and better balance between
the supply of and the demand for investment funds. Resumption
of inflationary pressures in the current period of expansion
has become a steadily less likely prospect. On the other hand,
we cannot overlook the sharp divergence of business conditions
here and in Europe, and the difficult question as to what extent
European monetary policy measures and financial developments may
require review and adjustment of our own domestic credit policy.
All in all, it would seem appropriate to continue the
relatively easy policy we have been following for the past month
or so. As brought out in Mr. Gainest memorandum already distrib
uted to the members of the Committee, recent data suggest that we
are now getting the growth in the reserve base that we have wanted,
and it appears likely that the money supply also turned upward in
June. This is all to the good. However, I feel strongly that at
a time like the present, when the evidence does not clearly support
the need for easier money and lower interest rates, the possibility
that there may be adverse effects on the balance of payments from
lower domestic short-term interest rates should be given some
weight. In addition to movements of funds to Germany for other
reasons, some short-term funds are moving out of the United States
in response to present rate differentials--and while these move
ments have not resulted thus far in an appreciable outflow of gold,
we must keep in mind possible effects both here and abroad if such
a flow were to develop on a substantial scale.
I am concerned over the prospect that the sizable open mar
ket operations needed to supply reserves through the remainder of
the year are likely to drive bill rates even lower than they now
are if operations continue to be restricted to bills.
Perhaps the next few months represent a period when the
Manager might appropriately be given greater leeway in the selection
of securities than the Committee has usually accorded him. It
seems to me that if he were permitted to operate freely throughout
the short-term area, instead of confining his attention to bills,
he could acquire those maturities which happened to be available
and might minimize the impact on short-term rates of any actions
aimed at the reserve base. I might add that since commercial banks
have been relying to a considerable extent on short-term securities
other than bills for their money market adjustments, there is a
very logical basis for our broadening the scope of our operations
in this direction. It would help us to adjust our operations in
order to deal with the paradox of a relatively tight commercial
banking system side by side with relative ease in the nonbank sector.

7/6/60 -15
I think the discount rate and the directive should be
left unchanged.
Mr. Irons said that conditions in the Eleventh District were not too
much different from three weeks ago, although perhaps the shading was toward
a little more strength. The situation was relatively favorable, taking into
consideration the drag of the petroleum situation and some cutting back in
defense expenditures at aircraft plants. Department store sales improved
in June and retail sales generally were a little better, although cumulatively
they were running somewhat below the figures of 1959. New car registrations
were 3 or 4 per cent above a year ago. Production of crude oil was still
running about 8 per cent below a year ago, and this was having an effect
on drilling, which was off 15 or 20 per cent, but refining was up. Employ
ment was above last year, and unemployment was around 4.5 per cent in Texas.
Construction was a little above a year ago. Upon adding up all of these
factors, one came out somewhere within 2 to 3 per cent of the record high
levels. The agricultural outlook had improved lately. While the rainfall
was excessively heavy in some parts of the District, on the whole the
situation was quite favorable.
Mr. Irons said that in the past three weeks District banks had a
fairly substantial increase in deposits and a fairly sizable increase in
loans. He thought there was some tendency on the part of bankers to feel
that their positions were easing a bit. Federal funds were not being pur
chased in as large amounts as had been the case. Borrowing from the Reserve

7/6/60 -16
Bank, relatively high on some days, on average was fluctuating around $25
to $28 million. A number of smaller banks in the agricultural sections
were borrowing for seasonal purposes and probably would be borrowing for
another couple of months.
Mr. Irons went on to say that, on the basis of his contacts, the
attitude of businessmen seemed neither highly optimistic nor highly
pessimistic. They were looking for a little more improvement in the last
half of the year, but not much difference. On the other hand, they were
not anticipating any sharp decline, even in the oil industry. On the
whole, the District showed relatively favorable conditions at this time.
There would be the summer doldrums, as always, but that could not be avoided
and should not be a cause for panic.
Mr. Irons said that in view of current uncertainties and the state
of business activity, he would maintain about the same degree of ease that
had been the Committee's objective. He would favor a moderate amount of
free reserves, somewhere around $50 million. While he would lean toward
providing reserves to meet seasonal requirements, he would not force ease
on the market aggressively through open market operations. He would avoid
tightening and, as he had said, provide for seasonal requirements, but
avoid pushing up the amount of free reserves.
In the process of maintaining a given amount of free reserves, Mr.
Irons noted, there was the possibility of providing additional ease con
tinually; if the free reserves made available were used, the provision of

7/6/60 -17
more to maintain a given amount of free reserves might mean a continuous
easing. This he would avoid. He would take no overt action, no definite
action that would point one way or the other, and instead would try to
continue to fluctuate around a neutral position. He would not favor
changing the discount rate or the directive.
Mr. Mangels said that latest available figures showed Twelfth
District employment down .2 per cent, while unemployment, which had been
running a little less than 5 per cent, increased to 5.5 per cent. Employ
ment had declined in the lumber and aircraft industries as well as in food
processing plants in California and the Northwest. Also, there had been
a cutback in Government employment of about 10,000 persons upon the com
pletion of the census-taking. Construction in May was up 5 per cent from
April, but was down 17 per cent from a year ago; total construction contracts
for the year to date were 6 per cent below the 1959 period. Steel production
was at 66 per cent of capacity for the month of June but was down to 63 per
cent in the latest week. The industry seemed to think that in the next
month or two there might perhaps be some upswing in production, because
final use was in excess of shipments from the mills. The lumber industry
was still in the doldrums, with production below new orders and shipments
being made from inventories. Prices had stabilized, but at a low level,
in some cases virtually at the break-even point. In agriculture, there
had been too much rain and cold weather in Washington, Oregon, Idaho, and
Utah, while in Nevada there was a shortage of irrigation water and some

7/6/60 -18
reservoirs were already depleted. Dry weather in California was holding
down yields of wheat and barley, although in the irrigated areas there
was still a sufficient water supply. In California the farm labor
situation was still uncertain, with the unions continuing their efforts
to organize the farm workers. This might have a detrimental effect on
the peach and tomato canning crops. Department store sales for the four
weeks ended June 27 were about 5 per cent below a year ago, while auto
sales in California for the first two weeks in June were below May, which
in turn was 15 per cent below April.
Mr. Mangels said that loans of District banks increased somewhat
in the four weeks ended June 22, although real estate loans were down $41
million. Demand deposits increased slightly, and time deposits were up
nominally. There was an $85 million increase in savings deposits, but
bankers in California were much concerned about what might happen in the
first ten or fifteen days of July following the crediting of interest at
the end of June. With savings and loan associations advertising 4-1/2 per
cent and 4-3/4 per cent dividends on share accounts, the banks were antici
pating quite a substantial drop in savings deposits. Borrowing from the
Reserve Bank was nominal, mostly borrowing by country banks. City banks
were quite active in the Federal funds market, with transactions in rather
large amounts.
Mr. Mangels said that the observation in the Twelfth District was
one of a pattern of increasing weakness in economic activity, although there

7/6/60 -19
were no clear signs of a general turndown. At the recent business out
look conference, it was the consensus of the 18 participants that there
probably would be little change from the present level of business
activity in the near future. They did not expect that present areas of
weakness would be expanded, but they saw nothing in the picture that
would increase the over-all pace of business activity in the Twelfth
District area. Banks were still being selective in reviewing applications
for credit and felt that their positions were tight. They were concerned
about loan-deposit ratios.
Mr. Mangels felt it would be helpful if the System were to supply
reserves in excess of seasonal needs. In doing so, he would go along with
the suggestion of Mr. Hayes that the Desk try to stay away somewhat from
Treasury bills because of the present low bill rates. Mr. Mangels also
suggested that the Board might give further consideration to the release
of additional vault cash. He would like to see net free reserves some
where above $100 million, perhaps as high as $200 million. He saw no
occasion to change the discount rate or the directive.
Mr. Allen said that developments of the past three weeks had not
been helpful to him in trying to make out the underlying business trend.
All things considered, particularly the low rate of activity in steel,
the economy seemed to be doing pretty well on the whole, but with summer
here it appeared that it might be necessary to wait for several weeks to
determine whether business was moving decidedly one way or the other.

7/6/60 -20
Retail trade in the Seventh District area was on the whole
satisfactory but spotty, Mr. Allen said. Cash receipts from farm
marketings in the first five months were about 2 per cent below the
same period of 1959. However, hog prices had increased recently to the
highest level in a year and a half, and a further rise was expected by
the end of the summer because the spring pig crop was 16 per cent below
that of last year. Mortgage lending terms in the Chicago area had shown
no signs of easing, and that appeared to have been the case nationally.
However, an analysis of the supply and demand for long-term funds suggested
that rate cuts might be in prospect. Savings had been running about as
large as last year, but the demand for long-term money was substantially
lower. Nevertheless, spokesmen for the savings and loan associations
were insisting that mortgage rates would hold firm, just as commercial
bankers were denying that there was any likelihood of an early reduction
in the prime rate.
Mr. Allen went on to say that automobile sales for the last ten
days of June were estimated at around 26,000 per day, which would be very
good, but a little below the same period of 1959, and would mark the first
time this year that daily sales had fallen below year-ago levels. Pro
duction for the first six months was approximately 3,800,000 and sales
about 3,200,000, accounting for the high inventory of more than 1,000,000
cars on June 30. Production was currently being reduced, and August was
expected to be the low month. Estimates were that 1,140,000 cars would

7/6/60 -21
be made in the third quarter and 1,600,000 in the fourth. Adding those
figures to the first half, the year's production would be 6,540,000, or
17 per cent more than the 5,594,000 total for 1959. It seemed important
to note, however, that the forecasts called for less auto production in
each of the remaining quarters than was achieved in either the first or
the second quarter of the year.
In the field of monetary policy, Mr. Allen said he concluded that
it would be advisable to mark time for the present. For one thing, the
trend of business activity was not clear. Furthermore, Treasury financing
was in process. He would not favor changing the discount rate or the
directive.
Mr. Leedy said that conditions in the Tenth District on balance
tended to be favorable. The winter wheat harvest was nearing completion
and it now appeared that production this year would be even higher than
was estimated by the Department of Agriculture as of the first of June.
During the first four months of this year cash receipts of farmers were
lower than last year. However, with the improvement in the wheat situation,
better pasture and range conditions, and a volume of cattle marketings
sufficiently large to offset the lower level of prices, it appeared that
during the second half of this year cash receipts would be larger than
during the last half of 1959.
Mr. Leedy went on to say that the District employment situation
was better than at this time last year, notwithstanding a strike against

7/6/60 -22
construction contractors in the Kansas City area that had resulted in
about 17,000 unemployed. Except for Kansas, each State in the District
showed a higher level of employment than last year. Department store
sales during the latest reporting period were about 5 per cent above the
corresponding period of last year, although the cumulative figure for the
year to date was about 2 per cent under last year.
District banks had experienced an increase in demand and time
deposits, Mr. Leedy said. There had also been an increase in business
loans recently, although the rate of growth in those loans this year was
somewhat lower than last year.
Mr. Leedy said that in view of the Treasury financing he assumed
that an even-keel policy would be followed in the period immediately
ahead. He assumed there would be some need for supplying additional
reserves incident to the financing, but beyond that, and beyond supplying
what might be needed in the way of seasonal requirements, it seemed to
him that the System should not be pushing funds into the market. The
bill rate, and the way it had been trending, was something that should be
watched carefully, and the fact that the Federal funds rate during the
recent period got to such a low level was another factor that should be
taken into account. In brief, it seemed to him that the Committee had
about accomplished what it desired to bring about at this time. In the
period immediately ahead, it was his view that the Committee need not
attempt to supply additional funds other than those required to see that
the Treasury financing was accomplished and seasonal needs were met.

7/6/60 -23
Mr. Leach reported that there had been ups and downs in recent
business developments in various industries and areas of the Fifth
District but no indications of any fundamental departure from the high
levels that had prevailed since April. Indicative of aggregate strength
in May was the slight rise in manufacturing man-hours, seasonally adjusted,
to the highest total in 12 months and the maintenance of non-agricultural
employment, also seasonally adjusted, at the record level reached in the
preceding month. The prosperous cotton textile industry had lately gained
strength in one of its weaker areas--industrial fabrics. On the other
hand, the furniture industry, which did a record business during the first
five months of the year, had suffered a definite slowdown marked by shrink
ing retail sales and a slow pace in factory orders. The widespread lumber
industry faced slow summer prospects after a spring which lacked the usual
seasonal liveliness. Cigarette consumption continued its upward trend, and
contract awards for new construction were holding up well. Projects in
process for expanding and modernizing business and public facilities were
contributing significantly to employment and income in the District.
Positions of the larger District banks seemed to have eased some
what since the June 14 Committee meeting, Mr. Leach said. The rate of
investment liquidation had slowed a little, borrowings at the discount
window had dropped, and money market banks had been net sellers of Federal
funds. The less rapid decline in country bank borrowings from the Reserve
Bank suggested, however, that the slight easing at reserve city banks had
not yet spread to country banks.

7/6/60 -24
With respect to policy, Mr. Leach said the easing actions that
had been taken seemed to be having desirable effects, and he thought it
would be advisable to mark time for the next three weeks. It was hardly
possible that the System could add to reserve availability without
affecting interest rates, and he saw nothing to be gained through forcing
short-term rates even lower. Moreover, the Treasury financings that had
been announced called for an "even keel" during the major part of the
period. He would not recommend a change in the directive or in the
discount rate. The question he asked Mr. Rouse at the conclusion of the
latter's report this morning indicated that he had been thinking about
the advisability of buying short-term securities other than bills. The
reasons for such a change had been given by Mr. Hayes. Mr. Leach knew
of no convincing reason why the Committee should not modify its practice
in the light of changed conditions.
Mr. Mills said that in weighing the reports presented to the
Committee at this meeting he had tried to strike a balance sheet of the
plus (favorable) and minus (unfavorable) factors that were working through
the economy. In doing so, he added a postscript to the balance sheet to
give effect to the personal attitudes of those who believed that the economy
was moving sideways through an intermediate business cycle and those--if
there were those like himself--who believed the economy was commencing to
move downward from the peak of a major business cycle. In striking that
balance sheet, he found the most generally accepted position would be that

7/6/60 -25
the economy was idling in neutral, without any forward thrust, which raised
a question as to what the function of monetary and credit policy should be
in such a situation. Personally, he believed that the System should stay
about where it was, supplying reserves to a degree that would allow a
comfortable working of the commercial banking mechanism by way of a
modest volume of free reserves. While it would be desirable to accomplish
that purpose without unduly disturbing the interest rate structure on the
downside, he could find in his thinking no reason to liberalize the authority
of the Desk to operate in other than bills. In the immediate offing there
would be a substantial addition to the supply of bills in the market, and
the Board of Governors had available to it the means for influencing
directly the supply of reserves if it saw occasion to do so.
As to policy in the immediate future, Mr. Mills said that looking
at the projections of the movement of reserves and being conscious that,
as Mr. Rouse had put it, they could and had in the recent past gone awry,
he felt that the reserves necessary to support the commercial banks in
their acquisition of the tax bills being auctioned today might well be left
at their disposal. A mechanism was afforded for providing reserves for a
definite purpose that could be permitted to remain in the banking structure,
in support of the money supply, without having to take further overt moves
to sustain the supply of reserves. He saw no occasion to change the dis
count rate or the directive.

7/6/60 -26
Mr. Robertson said he saw nothing in the economic picture to
warrant any change in present policy which, in his opinion, was as
nearly on the right mark as one could get it. He agreed with the sug
gestion of Mr. Irons that the Committee should not permit its policy
to result in forcing reserves into the picture, but he saw nothing in
the next three weeks that would bring about such a situation. Conse
quently, he would adhere to present policy. He would not change the
directive, nor would he take any overt actions.
Mr. Shepardson said that, since he was just back from a trip
to Europe, his view of the domestic situation was confined largely to
the staff reports. He felt, however, that the System was in a fortunate
position at the moment in the light of the general state of the economy
and the level of activity, current and prospective. System policy had
been effective, and he saw no reason to change at the moment. He agreed
with the suggestion that the System limit its supplying of reserves to
those needed to meet seasonal requirements. Also, particularly in the
light of recent contacts overseas, he would agree wholeheartedly with
the idea of avoiding action that would push short-term market rates
down further, for he saw no particular purpose to be served by that
at this time. He would recommend no change in present policy or in
the directive.
Mr. King said he agreed with those who foresaw little or no
improvement in general economic activity during the last half of the
year. The business community was preoccupied with the coming elections

7/6/60 -27
and the direction in which the country might go as a result, and in his
opinion the economy was likely to stay during this period in the kind of
stagnation to which Mr. Fulton had referred at a recent meeting. The
economy was not quite stagnant, but it had been in the doldrums pretty
much throughout the year.
Mr. King also said that he did not think any purpose would be
served by pushing short-term rates lover. The comments about supplying
additional reserves puzzled him somewhat; he did not think the question
was so much one of supplying reserves as whether, if ease should develop,
it ould be mopped up through open market operations. Personally, he
would favor free reserves from $100 million up to $300 million, and
allowing the free reserve figure to fluctuate to a considerable extent.
If there was any mopping up, he felt that it should be modest. As he
saw it, the question for the next three weeks was principally whether
the System should sell securities. He would cast his own vote on the
side of disposing of relatively little from the Account protfolio and
permitting free reserves in the $100 to $300 million category, for he
felt that this would contribute most to not upsetting the precarious
balance of the economy.
Mr. Fulton reported a widespread feeling of uneasiness in the
Fourth District, even among those businesses operating at fairly high
rates. The fact that the steel industry was operating at depression
levels at present had an effect on other industries and also an effect

7/6/60 -28
on the employment and unemployment situation. This week, in view of the
holiday, the mills elected in many instances to close and give paid
vacations to their workers. The order books in both the steel industry
and the machine tool industry were reported to be disappointing, and
shipments were larger than new orders. A principal question was how
long the auto industry could manufacture cars out of inventories that
were supposed to be limited a little while back. If the auto industry
did not order metal this month, any improvement was going to be delayed
substantially because the mills must pour steel this month to make
delivery in August. Tin plate was still going well, but the canning
companies were requiring the mills to carry inventories. One heartening
factor was that some cold-rolled strip and some sheet steel was being
exported to Europe; some English and German auto manufacturers were
buying limited quantities, Appliances were in more than adequate
supply and some plants had closed down to work off inventories of
consumer goods. The employment situation was not good, particularly
in the steel centers. The mills reported many workers on a four-day
week, and consideration was being given to cutbacks in supervision,
which was almost a last resort action.
Mr. Fulton said that retail sales were being maintained in
fairly good shape. New car sales were quite brisk in June and depart
ment store sales were above last year by about 3 per cent. Building
activity had declined somewhat from the high level reached in May.

7/6/60 .29
Mr. Fulton went on to say that borrowings from the Reserve Bank,
which had been running considerably below last year, at only about 2 or
3 per cent of the System total, had increased recently. He noted that
total borrowings from the System were being maintained at around $400
million, which in his opinion was a little high for a period in which
the Federal Reserve was trying to inject some ease into the reserve
situation. Loan demand was reported to be strong at most District
banks. The demand was heavy for capital improvement loans and there
was a fair-sized volume of term loans for which the banks had committed
themselves previously. There was a fair demand for mortgage loans. The
statement was heard that the rate situation was not the real deterrent to
the sale of houses; rather, that there was a situation of overbuilding in
some areas and that people wanted less costly houses.
Mr. Fulton expressed the view that the need for reserves that he
felt existed should be met by the System, and he added that he would be
inclined to favor releasing some additional vault cash to be counted as
reserves. It seemed to him that the Desk had been striving to be quite
precise in maintaining a free reserve figure of around $50 million. He
would be favorable to a greater fluctuation in that figure, feeling that
$50 million should be regarded as a minimum rather than a maximum and
that free reserves should be allowed to go as high as $150 million, with
fluctuations between that point and $50 million. A result of the precise
ness in trying to maintain a figure of $50 million also had been pressure

-30-
on bill yields on various days when the Desk felt it necessary to supply
reserves. To repeat, he believed that $400 million of borrowings, which
had been quite consistent, was too high, and he would furnish reserves
in somewhat greater volume, feeling that the current hesitancy needed an
indication that the System would supply all the reserves that were legiti
mately required. He would not favor changing the discount rate or the
directive.
Mr. Hilkert commented substantially as follows:
Business in the Third District has shown little improvement.
Employment is not encouraging; there has been a noticeable slack
ening of department store sales; production of durable goods is
off; and carloadings have declined.
Hours worked in manufacturing plants in May showed wide
spread drops in comparison to the equivalent period of 1959. The
May figures are better than those for April, but this is partly
because manufacturing employment decreased. Unemployment claims,
both new and continued, have leveled off at rather high totals
since early in 1960.
Production statistics are not encouraging. The steel rate
is down to 61 per cent of capacity. Electric power consumption
increased slightly in May. The increase was entirely in plants
producing nondurable goods. Durable goods producers in May con
sumed less power than in April, and 6 per cent less than in May
1959. Pennsylvania Railroad's freight carloadings (Philadelphia
region) have been under last year's figures for many weeks.
Construction contract awards, after rising sharply in April,
dropped again in May, so that for five months in 1960 awards in
our District are under 1959 totals by slightly more than is true
for the nation.
Department store sales declined more than seasonally in May,
and remained low through the first half of June. There have been
increases in the last two weeks, however.
In contrast to the somewhat sluggish business situation, our
banks are still fairly tight. Loan demand is strong and banks
have been borrowing fairly heavily. Reserve city banks have been
in the Federal funds market; country banks have been more frequent
visitors at our discount window.

7/6/60
Despite the somewhat pessimistic appearance of current
business and some continuing tightness in the banking picture,
we would be inclined not to make further moves toward ease at
the present time. This is apart from the fact that a Treasury
financing operation is now in process. Actions already taken
seem sufficient to carry us through the current and prospective
period of uncertainty. After the summer lull, we should be in
better position to see the effects of recent actions and to
appraise the need for further steps.
We would be inclined toward no change in the directive,
the present degree of ease, or the discount rate.
Mr. Bryan presented a statement on Sixth District developments and
on monetary policy substantially as follows:
Sixth District business activity in May and early June
seems to have held at a high level. Non-farm employment has
increased slightly to a new record, and unemployment has
declined further. Construction activity is up a bit; and
department store sales, which have been at a record in early
June, suggest continued strength in retail sales. Either
weakness in business loan demand--which does not seem to be
the case--or continuing tightness in the banking situation is
indicated by the fact that the District's business loans have
recently been less than usual for this time of year; and total
loans and investments have resumed a declining trend.
As we see the national picture, there is still no sign of
exuberant boom or of general downturn. But it is necessary to
note that unemployment remains uncomfortably large, with steel,
airplane, oil, appliance, furniture, and other industries under
going difficult adjustments. Meanwhile, business spending prospects
seem a little less rosy. The problem of policy, as we see it,
lies in determining what to do when the business situation is not
so robust as to give rise to inflationary consequences if there
were further monetary ease, nor so anemic as to threaten prompt
collapse if no further ease is forthcoming. The situation is the
more complicated by recent foreign monetary moves in particular
and the posture of our balance of payments problem in general.
As matters stand, my own inclination is to make little change
in my policy views as of the last meeting. That is, I believe we
should work for a slow, steady increase in the reserves available
to the banking system. I believe this is necessary because of
the economic situation and because of the lagged effects of mone
tary policy. But I also believe that we should, at least for the
present, strive to effect the reserve increases so slowly, gently,

7/6/60 -32
and steadily that we give no indication of panic, produce,
if possible, no speculative movement in investment asset
values, and do not drive short rates to the ridiculous
and obviously unsustainable low levels that have character
ized other easing cycles of monetary policy.
Now, in line with my previously expressed opinion that
such qualitative language is of little use to the Desk, I
will try to put an opinion in more interpretable, quantitative
terms. The total reserve figure for June, on a daily average
basis was $18,289 million. That figure represented a modest
increase in total reserves and non-borrowed reserves, and
permitted approximately the same modest increase in required
reserves. The policy has been in the right direction, I feel
sure, and in an entirely defensible amount.
For July, then, I would suggest that we head for a
reserve target consisting of the June daily average figure,
plus a seasonal of $110 million, plus, in view of the unemploy
ment and non-boom characteristics of the economy, an additional
$50 million. That would bring me out with a target for July of
$18,449 million on a daily average basis.
Of course, it will have been noticed that I have advocated
for the present a policy of modest, steady increments in total
reserves and, at the same time, have exhibited concern lest we
drive short bill rates down to an unsustainable low--a low that
might be alarming abroad and, perhaps, equally unfortunate at
home. In this situation, I believe we should have recourse to
a policy of bills "usually" but by no means to bills "only."
For it will also have been noticed that in setting my reserve
target of 160 million additional reserves for July, I have
carefully differentiated between two components: a 110 million
seasonal and $50 million of what I have been calling, for want
of a better name, a growth factor--perhaps better called a pro
vision of reserve base for the secular expansion of the economy.
Such a reserve base for the secular expansion of the economy
is, as I see the matter, a fraction of total reserves having a
far, far greater aspect of permanence than reserves supplied for
seasonal or other temporary purposes. Accordingly, I would urge
that we go, for such component of our purchases, well beyond the
91-day bill if that should be necessary to avoid rate-cutting
competition with other purchasers of that instrument.
Mr. Johns said he and his associates in St. Louis believed that the
current rate of economic activity, although high and perhaps not showing
notable signs of softness or weakness, nevertheless was below an attainable

7/6/60 -33
and sustainable rate consistent with price stability. In arriving at this
conclusion, due weight was given to many factors and indicators of economic
activity. Some indication of a potential for a higher rate of activity was
found in the relatively high rate of unemployment, the slow rate of growth
in the labor force, and gains in output per worker since the last recession.
Also, capacity in mining, manufacturing, and transportation appeared to be
more than ample. In spite of this, however, a policy had been followed by
the Federal Reserve for several months, until recently, that permitted
deposits and total bank credit to contract. This was a policy that would
be appropriate for checking an expansionary movement which threatened to
be unsustainable. Since that did not appear to be the case, it seemed to
follow that open market operations should carry out, as and when they could,
the mandate contained in the policy directive to supply reserves needed for
moderate bank credit expansion.
Mr. Johns commented that he was arguing for moderate bank credit
expansion, not for drastic measures. If his remarks at previous meetings
had been construed as favoring drastic actions, he wished to make clear
that they were not so intended. He had thought that he was speaking
within the framework of the directive calling for moderate bank credit
expansion.
Mr. Johns went on to say that he would not attempt to place any
numbers on this objective. He was gratified at the appearance of a turn
around in the reserve position and, perhaps hopefully, in the money supply.

7/6/60
-34
He merely would like to make sure that this continued, and perhaps at a
slightly accelerated rate. At a meeting some time ago, and in another
context, he had spoken of his desire for some exploration of the possi
bility that the System might supply what in that context were referred
to as growth reserves by at times going outside the bill market. Having
held that view, he was now well disposed toward the suggestion that when
the System wanted to supply reserves, and when aggressive attempts to
buy bills would force the yields down further than might be considered
desirable, the possibility be explored of buying securities other than
bills.
Mr. Johns added that he had been concerned about the suggestion
that the Federal Reserve could not take steps to increase total bank
credit because of possible depressive effects on interest rates and conse
quent capital movements having adverse effects on the balance-of-payments
situation, and especially our gold position. It was of concern to him to
hear it implied that the gold position is so precarious that the System
can not afford to pursue an appropriate internal monetary policy. There
fore, he was comforted when, if he understood correctly, Mr. Marget said
in effect that such gold movements could be taken in stride. Mr. Johns
said it was his opinion they should be taken in stride and observed that
such gold movements are not relatively significant as compared to develop
ments in our foreign trade position, to which healthy growth in the economy
is so important.

7/6/60 -35
Mr. Szymczak commented on the degree of preparation and fore
thought evident in the presentations at this and other recent meetings of
the Open Market Committee. He went on to say that he would not recommend
any change in policy at this time, but that there were two matters worthy
of consideration. The first involved the possibility of Account operations
in short-term securities other than bills, if and when there should be times
when that might seem desirable. This was a matter that in his view might
well be left to the judgment of the Manager of the Account and the Chairman
of the Committee. Second, he felt that the time had come for the Board of
Governors to consider further the question of releasing additional vault
cash to be counted as reserves, along with other actions having to do with
the legislation on reserve requirements that was enacted last year.
Mr. Balderston said that he shared the views of Mr. Szymczak regarding
the fresh ideas being brought before the meetings of the Open Market Committee
and that he had been impressed with the memorandum from Mr. Gaines to Mr.
Hayes dated June 30, 1960, relating to total reserves and nonborrowed
reserves. This memorandum, which had been distributed prior to the meeting,
helped in understanding the views that Mr. Bryan had been presenting to
the Committee.
Mr. Balderston said that he would not recommend any change in policy
for the next three weeks. With respect to the suggestion that the Desk
operate on some occasions in short-term securities other than bills, he
would be the last one to say that the Open Market Committee should be

7/6/60 -36
wedded to a doctrinaire policy of bills only. As a practical matter, how
ever, the System already owned about half of the outstanding certificates,
and there were relatively few bills in the portfolio. Also, he was impressed
by the fact that during the past year or so the Account portfolio had grown
less liquid; it seemed that when the System purchased longer securities, as
the occasion required, it had difficulty in disposing of them.
Mr. Balderston went on to say that the question he wished to raise
concerning the suggestion made at this meeting had to do with the composition
of the Federal debt, which, he thought, was a responsibility of the Treasury
rather than the Federal Reserve System. He would like to see the Treasury
increase the supply of bills available in the market, feeling that this
would be a timely thing to do, as bills were scarce and the Treasury was
raising money. If the Treasury had made every feasible effort to lengthen
the debt, he thought that it would be quite appropriate to increase the
supply of bills and that this might appropriately be suggested to the
Treasury. However, for the System to monkey around with rates through
its own actions seemed not only to assume a burden that properly belonged
to the Treasury but also a rather futile action, because the Treasury, in
its actions since the first of the year, had greatly reduced the supply of
bills. What the System did in its operations was small in comparison, and
he had some concern about the use of open market operations toward that end.
Having said this, he wished to recall his concern in the spring of 1958 when
the bill rates fell through the floor, and he still looked at the charts

7/6/60 -37
with unhappiness. He merely wanted to be sure, in considering the suggestion
made today, that the responsibilities of the Treasury and the System were
not confused.
Chairman Martin said he had little to add to the discussion, except
to suggest that this was a bad time of the year to be taking soundings on
the economy generally. One should be careful in July and August, particu
larly with all of the varying views that were going to be heard around the
country, not to make hasty judgments as to what was going to happen. On
the whole, he saw more to be encouraged about in early July than he had
expected six weeks ago. There was an underpinning to the economy that
should not be overlooked.
Chairman Martin said he had had no idea that the matter of bills
only, bills usually, or short-term securities, preferably bills, would
come up at this meeting. After relating an incident to illustrate his
point, the Chairman suggested that the Committee would not want to get
into a position of debating the matter of "bills only" indefinitely. It
was proper to raise the question, of course, and he sympathized with Mr.
Balderston's point about the problem of the Treasury in regard to the
supply of bills. However, he felt the Committee should recognize that
even in most extreme moments it should not get into the position that it
was only bills about which we were talking. If one were to go to securities
of 18 months or two years or something of that sort, and if there were
clearly no other securities to be acquired except by really pushing the

7/6/60 -38
bill rate down, this was something that ought to be taken into consideration.
At least, that was his own feeling. The Committee would be subject to the
charge of being doctrinaire if, under extreme conditions such as occurred
recently, it pushed the bill rate down to, say, .5 per cent in order to
acquire bills. This was just an observation.
The Chairman then said that he had sympathy with the presentation
of Mr. Bryan this morning. The System ought to try to build the reserve
position steadily, not in the sense of creating easy money but in the sense
of supplying reserves for growth of the economy. How to do this was a
difficult question, the answer to which was illusive. However, he believed
the System was making progress in that direction. In a period like this,
he suggested, it would seem that errors--although this was not to suggest
that they be made deliberately--could be more on the side of ease than
under other circumstances.
Chairman Martin then said that, within the general framework in
which the Committee had been operating for almost three months, all that
seemed to be called for at present was to mark time. This appeared to be
the consensus; that is, to mark time, within the framework and spirit in
which the Committee was operating today. What the Committee might want to
do six weeks from now was another question.
Referring to the comments by Mr. Szymczak concerning implementation
of the reserve requirement legislation, the Chairman noted that these questions
were before the Board constantly. The Board had discussed them actively in

7/6/60 -39
recent weeks and would continue to discuss them. He went on to say that
everyone ought to be trying to see how the System could handle the growth
factor in the economy from the standpoint of reserves. This should be
done in as orderly and intelligent a way as possible.
The Chairman then suggested that, unless there was a disposition
to debate the question of degree, the present directive be reaffirmed and
there be agreement to maintain until the next meeting about the same
general state of operations that had been maintained.
In further discussion it was noted that the directive called for
providing reserves needed for moderate bank credit expansion, and the
Chairman commented that the question of how to achieve that objective
was difficult. However, he thought that the Committee was slowly getting
it.
There were several indications of agreement with this comment, and
the Chairman added that, like Mr. Johns, he would not want to lose the
ground that had been gained. However, the Treasury was in the market and
it would be necessary to be rather careful about stirring up the market in
either direction.
The Chairman then said that, if there was no disposition to the
contrary, the present directive would be approved. He inquired whether
Mr. Rouse had any comment, and the latter replied in the negative.
Mr. Hayes said he had no question on the consensus or the directive.
However, it was not entirely clear to him what the Committee felt the leeway

7/6/60 -40
of the Account Manager was in the matter of dealing in short-term securities
other than bills if a situation existed where operating solely in bills
would have an undesirably strong effect. He asked whether the Committee
felt that the Manager had this leeway or whether it was felt the Manager
should come to the Committee for specific instructions.
Chairman Martin said he had always thought this leeway existed.
The Manager could, of course, confer with members of the Committee if he
had doubts, but the Committee might be criticized for having a doctrinaire
position if it did not mean "short-term securities, preferably bills."
Mr. Allen recalled that on one occasion the portfolio of bills got
so low that the Desk sold securities other than bills, and Mr. Robertson
recalled that there had been some discussion of the matter at the meeting
of the Committee before this occurred. Mr. Shepardson said he would have
the same understanding as had been expressed by the Chairman, and Mr. Bryan
said this would be his understanding of the matter also.
Mr. Mills said it should be understood that this indicated a
departure from what had been a general practice, and that presumably such
operations should not be undertaken without consultation. Otherwise, the
judgment of the Desk would be pitted against what might be conflicting
views among the members of the Committee at the particular time. If he
were the Manager, he would be loath to go off on a new venture, particularly
under present conditions, on his own authority and initiative.

7/6/60 -41
Mr. Hayes said the Manager clearly had been loath to do so in the
past, and Mr. Mills replied in terms that he hoped the Manager would continue
to feel that way. Mr. Robertson indicated this was also his feeling.
Reference was made to the possibility of discussion of any such
situation during the morning telephone call, and Mr. Mills observed that
the morning call involved only a tripartite discussion, which in his
opinion did not seem broad enough. Mr. Hayes commented that all Committee
members and other Presidents receive a wire on the morning call within a
short time thereafter, and they would therefore have an opportunity to
express their views concerning any operations beyond the bill area that
may be contemplated.
Mr. King commented that according to the reserve projections he
would not envisage the need for a lot of operations in the next few weeks,
and Mr. Hayes said that his question had not been raised with particular
reference to the next three weeks but rather with reference to the antici
pated need for reserves during the balance of the year.
Mr. Hayes then made the comment that he did not feel one could say
that the level of rates was solely the interest of the Treasury and not the
System. The rates are inevitably affected by what the System does, and in
his view they are a joint responsibility of the Treasury and the System.
Mr. Hayes also said that if there was no objection he would have
distributed to the Committee members and other Presidents copies of a
memorandum prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York under date of

7/6/60 -42
July 5, 1960, with regard to the possibility of open market operations in
other short-term securities in addition to bills. The memorandum, he
pointed out, would amplify the comments he had made in his statement
this morning.
Chairman Martin indicated there would be no objection to the
distribution of the memorandum.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Committee voted unanimously
to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, until otherwise directed by the Com
mittee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (including
replacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities to
run off without replacement) for the System Open Market Account
in the open market or, in the case of maturing securities, by
direct exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary in the
light of current and prospective economic conditions and the
general credit situation of the country, with a view (a) to
relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs of
commerce and business, (b) to fostering sustainable growth in
economic activity and employment by providing reserves needed
for moderate bank credit expansion, and (c) to the practical
administration of the Account; provided that the aggregate
amount of securities held in the System Account (including
commitments for the purchase or sale of securities for the
Account) at the close of this date, other than special short
terms certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time
for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be
increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one
or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such certificated held at
any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in
the aggregate $500 million.

7/6/60 -43
There had been distributed to the Committee copies of a memorandum
from Mr. Rouse dated July 1, 1960, transmitting a memorandum of the same
date from Mr. Larkin, Assistant Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, concerning System Open Market Account transactions in one
year Treasury bills maturing July 15, 1960, under the authorization given
by the Committee on April 12, 1960, and renewed at subsequent meetings,
to acquire up to $150 million of such bills either by outright purchase
or by swapping other bills. Mr. Larkin's memorandum showed that $36.8
million of these bills had been acquired since the meeting on June 14,
making a total of $134.7 million acquired under the Committee authorization
and total System Account holdings of $148.1 million.
In commenting on the matter, Mr. Rouse suggested that if the
Committee should decide to give similar authority at a later date with
respect to other issues of one-year bills, the authorization be clearly
confined to bills that might be acquired by way of "swap" transactions.
The authorization, in the form adopted with respect to the July 15 bills,
seemed to limit also the acquisition of such bills by outright purchase,
thus deterring the Desk, on the basis of such an interpretation, from
acquisition of certain one-year bills that were offered yesterday at a
time when it desired to supply additional reserves to the market. He
added that there appeared to have been no repercussions in the market as
the result of transactions conducted pursuant to the authorization first
given on April 12, 1960.

7/6/60 -44-
In response to a question as to whether he intended to request
authority for the acquisition of other issues of one-year bills, by swap
transactions, similar to that given with respect to the one-year bills
of July 15, 1960, Mr. Rouse replied in terms of stating reasons why he
would prefer to study developments and wait until the next meeting of
the Committee before determining whether to recommend that such authority
be given. He indicated that at present it seemed possible that there
would be no occasion to ask such authority for the acquisition of one
year bills maturing October 17, 1960.
There followed discussion in which reference was made to current
System Account holdings of one-year bills, other than the July 15 bills,
and to the possibility that the Account might be able to acquire such
quantities of those bills as it desired without going into swap trans
actions. In this connection, Mr. Rouse stated his understanding that
no special authority from the Committee was needed for the outright
purchase of one-year bills, and there was no indication of disagreement
with this statement.
With respect to the language of the authorization to acquire
July 15 bills first given on April 12, 1960, which provided for the
acquisition of up to $150 million of such bills either by outright
purchase or by swapping other bills, Mr. Robertson made the comment
that, as Mr. Rouse had suggested, consideration should be given to

7/6/60 -45
phrasing any future authorization with respect to other issues of one-year
bills in such manner that it would be clear that the Desk was not limited
in acquiring such bills by outright purchase, as opposed to swap transactions.
At the suggestion of the Chairman, it
was then agreed unanimously to terminate,
effective immediately, the authorization
originally given on April 12, 1960, for the
acquisition of one-year bills of July 15,
1960.
Reference was made to a memorandum from Mr. Young, which had been
distributed under date of July 1, 1960, suggesting that in view of the
initiation of the uniform statistical reporting program in the Market
Statistics Department of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in May,
it now seemed appropriate to give further thought to steps that might be
taken looking toward the development of standard accounting practices for
Government securities dealers. As background, the memorandum pointed out
that with the memorandum of October 5, 1959, from the Secretary of the
Committee regarding the Treasury-Federal Reserve study of the Government
securities market there was distributed an inventory of areas for possible
administrative action which suggested certain steps for obtaining more
adequate information about the market, including: "Undertake preparation
of recommendations for, or manual of, standard accounting practices for
Government security dealers, designed to facilitate daily reporting, at
minimum cost to dealer respondents, of needed current statistics and
periodic reporting of dealer's financial and earnings position on

7/6/60 -46
standard basis . . ." Also, the report of the Steering Group dated January
5, 1960, regarding the setting up of a reporting system for obtaining
information about the Government securities market included a statement
that one element of an adequate informational program included the develop
ment of composite financial statements for Government securities dealers
for such public information use as experience shoved to be appropriate.
The report further contained a recommendation that among the reports to
be submitted by dealers there be a statement of financial condition
having standardized content and form, such reports to be submitted
quarterly, but one each year to be certified by an independent firm of
accountants in the case of nonbank dealers. Copies of such financial
statement reports of nonbank dealers would be available to the Trading
Desk of the New York Bank for the purpose of appraising credit worthiness
and financial standing.
In the course of commenting on the memorandum, Mr. Young noted
that nonbank dealers currently submit reports to the Desk once or more a
year, but not on a standard form, and anyone who might be interested in
studying the market was handicapped by a lack of information in composite
form. This matter had been the subject of lengthy discussion with the
Treasury in connection with the study of the Government securities market,
and the Treasury representatives were inclined to feel that this was an
important item. However, although the recommendations referred to in the

7/6/60 -47
memorandum were made, the principal concern at the time was with getting
the statistical reporting program started and no action was taken on them.
Chairman Martin noted that the matter of devising standardized
accounting practices and reports involved difficult problems. He sug
gested, however, that the Committee might wish to ask the Steering Group
to explore the matter. This group, which would include Messrs. Young and
Larkin and someone designated by the Treasury to replace Mr. Mayo, who had
resigned from the Treasury staff, would be asked to bring back a recom
mendation for the consideration of the Committee.
The Chairman then turned to Mr. Rouse, and the latter said he
would like to reiterate his comments on the subject earlier in the year.
As far as data were concerned, the Desk was getting audited reports at
least on an annual basis from each nonbank dealer. From the credit
standpoint, therefore, there was no problem. The Desk knew the condition
of the dealers, and in all the years there had been no problem with which
the Desk could not deal. In the circumstances, he did not know for what
reason additional information might be needed by the Desk.
Mr. Rouse then described some of the difficulties that would be
involved in developing standardized reports for the use of all Government
securities dealers. He also pointed out that the System had no mandate
from the Congress on this matter. Conceivably, this was a type of infor
mation that the Treasury might like to have for use in responding to
certain questions that might be raised by Congressional sources, but

7/6/60 -48
there was a question in his mind regarding the propriety of undertaking a
program such as had been suggested.
Mr. Hayes said he had a good deal of sympathy with the view that
Mr. Rouse had expressed. He could understand that the Treasury and the
Federal Reserve might be in a stronger position to refute loose statements
if composite figures for Government securities dealers were available, but
he was impressed by the difficulties that Mr. Rouse had mentioned in
developing standardized practices that would encompass the many diverse
activities of the dealer group, and also he was disturbed about the
interference in an area of free enterprise that would be involved in
developing a system of standardized practices. If dealing in Government
securities was as profitable as some were suggesting, he felt that it
would be obvious that there would be more than seventeen Government
securities dealers. In view of the burden of reporting that the System
had placed on Government securities dealers recently, he felt that it
would be unwise to make additional reporting requests at this time,
particularly in an area where dealer reaction would be apt to be far
less sympathetic. These factors, of course, would not preclude the
Committee from asking the Steering Group to look into the problem.
Chairman Martin commented that the Steering Group had done a good
job in putting the statistical program together and that this was a loose
end. If there was no objection, he proposed that the Committee request

7/6/60 -49
the group, which would include a person designated by the Treasury to replace
Mr. Mayo, to explore the matter further, with the understanding that a memo-.
randum would be brought back to the Committee for consideration.
There being no objection, it was agreed to proceed in the manner
suggested by the Chairman.
As an addendum to the foregoing discussion, Mr. Young noted that
the Douglas Subcommittee last year sent rather elaborate forms to the
Government securities dealers and obtained certain data covering a period
of ten years. The Subcommittee now had obtained two university men for
the summer and had assigned them to analyze the data. It was understood
that they were to submit a report based on their analysis later this
summer.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, July 26, 1960, at 10:00 a.m.
Chairman Martin noted that according to the usual three-week
schedule, succeeding meetings of the Committee would be held on August
16 and September 6, 1960. He suggested, however, that the meeting which
would normally be held on September 6 be held instead on September 13,
1960, subject to review at the July 26 and August 16 meetings in the
light of developments that might indicate the desirability of any change.
There was agreement with this suggestion, and it was understood
that a meeting of the Conference of Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks would be tentatively scheduled for Monday, September 12, with a

7/6/60 -50
meeting of the Board and the Presidents following the Open Market Committee
meeting on Tuesday, September 13.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary