A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, December 13, 1960, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bopp
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Fulton
Mr. King
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Messrs. Leach, Allen, Irons, and Mangels, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Erickson and Johns, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and St. Louis,
respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Brandt, Hostetler, Noyes, Roosa, and
Tow, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Messrs. Garfield and Koch, Advisers, Division
of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Brill and Williams, Associate Advisers,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board
of Governors
Mr. Keir, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors

12/13/60 -2
Messrs. Ratchford, Mitchell, Jones, and
Coldwell, Vice Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Chicago,
St. Louis, and Dallas, respectively
Mr. Holmes, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Parsons, Director of Research, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Messrs. Young, Noyes, Garfield, Koch, Williams, and Brill
participated in a visual-auditory presentation to the Committee on the
subject of economic growth.1/ Copies of the text and accompanying charts
have been placed in the files of the Committee and have been sent to the
Committee members and other Reserve Bank Presidents.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report on open market operations covering the period
November 22 through December 7, 1960, which report also contained a review
of the 13-week period since September 7, 1960. There had also been
distributed copies of a supplementary report covering the period December
8 through December 12, 1960, and of a memorandum from the Securities
Department of the New York Reserve Bank commenting on the views that
Mr. Robertson had expressed at the Committee meeting on November 22, 1960.
Copies of these reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Rouse commented as
follows:
1/ Messrs. Garfield, Williams, and Brill withdrew following the
presentation.

12/13/60 -3
In conducting open market operations since the last meeting
special attention was given to the impact of the changes in
Regulation D effective November 24 and December 1. As was to be
expected, the free reserve statistic increased sharply without
being immediately or completely reflected in the feel of the
money market. However, the fact that the money market subse
quently remained generally easy, both in New York and elsewhere,
suggests that country banks have been making better use of these
new reserves than in previous instances when they acquired new
reserves. On the other hand, it is discouraging to note that
nonborrowed and required reserves have not been substantially
expanded as a result of the ready availability of reserves.
This is partly due to float but more significantly to the slow
rate of creation of new bank credit.
Actual operations during the period were quite limited and
were aimed at mopping up a modest part of the surplus reserves
to forestall the development of sloppy money conditions. While
short-term rates have fluctuated, they have remained within a
reasonably satisfactory range. In one instance, on Friday,
December 2, there were clear signs that excessive ease was
forcing lower short-term rates and the System sold a moderate
amount of bills and other short-term issues. It is worth noting
that in this instance the market was quite ready to make bids
for certificates, notes, and bonds, as well as for bills. On
last Friday a somewhat similar situation developed, posing the
problem of having to sell short-term securities. However, as
it turned out the only thing necessary was the avoidance of
putting a foreign buy order in the market, and market rates
subsequently moved back up.
It is quite possible in my opinion for the System to sell
as well as to buy short issues other than bills in worthwhile
size under most conditions. We realize that we cannot always
move them in as large blocks as bills and there is no doubt
that the Treasury bill will remain the principal security for
System use. However, we have been told by a number of the
dealers that we should have no real problems in dealing both
ways in other short-term securities. Incidentally, over the
past week or so we have had a number of contacts with the Ford
Motor Company, and their money man volunteered that they find
no difficulty in trading issues up to two-year maturity in some
size.
While the lowering of the British bank rate on Thursday,
December 8, has generally been regarded as helpful to the U. S.

12/13/60
balance-of-payments situation, the spread between the British
and U. S. bill rates, on a covered basis, has not yet narrowed
as much as might be hoped because the discount on forward
sterling has narrowed. Yesterday, the yield in favor of
British bills was about 1.15 per cent which, if anything, is
more than it has been.
Last week the International Monetary Fund sold $300 million
gold to the U. S. Treasury and has given us instructions to
invest the dollar proceeds in U. S. Government securities matur
ing in up to one year. We expect that this can be accomplished
by the end of this year with the minimum adverse reserve effects
and perhaps it will afford an opportunity for the Account to
dispose of some certificates.
This sale of gold to the Treasury obscured for one week
the continued outflow of gold to a number of foreign accounts.
The outflow for the current week to date aggregates over $204
million to several accounts, including $150 million to the
British representing utilization of a portion of the proceeds
of the sale of sterling to the Ford Motor Company. The balance
was invested in U. S. Government securities.
I should also like to report that in yesterday's auction
the Treasury awarded us only 57 per cent of our bid for $25
million six-month Treasury bills. As a result $10,750,000 of
System holdings of December 15 bills are scheduled to mature
this coming Thursday.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the open market operations dur
ing the period November 22 through December
12, 1960, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Mr. Hayes presented the following statement of his views on the
business outlook and credit policy:
There is nothing in the recent business news to suggest
a near-term reversal of the slow downward drift, but at the
same time there is no evidence of a developing cumulative
decline. While inventory adjustments continue to exert a
negative influence, it is hopeful for the longer run that
some progress is being made in getting inventories under
control in relation to sales. Business spending on plant
and equipment is apparently now declining a little more

12/13/60 -5
rapidly than had been expected. Although a number of surveys
show considerable hope of an upturn by next summer, the current
level of profits and of excess capacity throws some doubt on
these expectations. Residential construction seems to be
making little progress. On the other hand, government and
export demand remain favorable, and in the key area of consumer
spending the October-November record has been mildly encouraging.
But undoubtedly the overriding fact in the current business
situation is the high and rising level of unemployment and
unused plant capacity. Although the current sag in business
has been milder than any other postwar contraction, there is a
possibility that the economy's upward "bounce" may also be less
now that so many war-created demands have been filled, and
with inflationary psychology so greatly diminished.
As for bank credit, it may be of interest to note that
the trend of total bank loans in November and since midyear
has been somewhat stronger than in 1957. Monthly changes in
bank holdings of securities were distorted by the October bill
financing, but since midyear both investments and total bank
credit have risen much more sharply than in 1957, with an
especially rapid rise at New York banks. The tendency this
fall for money pressures to be concentrated at New York banks
is not surprising, since loans and investments at these banks
have risen by about 5 per cent from midyear through October,
with deposits up only 2 per cent; whereas outside of New York
each of these items has risen about 3-1/2 per cent. The same
contrast is shown in the recent changes in bank liquidity
measures. Loan-deposit ratios have continued their slow decline
outside of New York, but in New York there has been little net
change since midyear. The current performance of the money
supply has been disappointing. Moreover, the outlook in this
respect is only moderately hopeful in view of the likelihood
that Treasury balances will stay high until next year and that
there will be no Treasury cash financing until next spring.
Incidentally, however, it now looks as if there would be no
cash surplus in the fiscal year, so that the April cash
financing might be substantially larger than had been expected
a few months ago.
In the last week we have seen a pronounced improvement in
the atmosphere of the bond market, with the successful completion
of several corporate offerings which had been initially "sticky."
It may be questioned, however, whether the long-term interest
rates, which have risen appreciably since the summer, are
consistent with the dubious state of the economy. In this

12/13/60 -6
connection, some concern has been expressed over the sluggish
behavior of mortgage rates, which have dropped a good deal
less than in earlier recession periods.
The international financial situation shows signs of
temporary betterment, with a possibility that the short-term
capital outflow may have passed its peak. However, the
situation remains exceedingly delicate, with a continuing threat
of loss of confidence abroad in this country's ability to
handle our affairs soundly and to avoid such highly undesirable
measures as controls over capital exports. Among other things,
we must, I think, continue to pay very close attention to the
comparative levels of short-term interest rates in this country
and abroad. The latest reduction in the British bank rate from
5-1/2 per cent to 5 per cent indicates that abroad there is
increasing recognition of the close interdependence of the
various national money and capital markets.
It seems to me clear that the condition of business war
rants our maintaining our policy of ease, but perhaps with
probings toward greater ease than has prevailed, on the average,
in recent weeks. Our aim should be to encourage an active
search by the banks for loan and investment outlets. While I
would de-emphasize the reserve figures, as we have so often
agreed is desirable, I would not be at all concerned if, as
a result of our actions, free reserves should fluctuate around
the $750 million level. As in the past, I would hope that the
Manager would be guided mainly by the feel of the market and by
the action of short-term rates, especially the rate on three
month Treasury bills. No major open market operation seems
likely to be needed in the next few weeks, and seasonal factors
should tend to exert pressure on short-term interest rates.
After the turn of the year, however, the problem may become
more difficult, despite the prospective absorption of reserves
by the System, in view of the tendency at that season for bill
rates to decline.
This is no time, in my judgment, to consider a lower
discount rate, especially in view of the risk of nullifying the
favorable psychological effects of the recent rate reductions
by various European central banks. The directive seems
satisfactory in its present form.
In view of possible actions, especially in the fiscal area,
to cope with the domestic business situation, I am wondering
if it is not incumbent on the Syster to demonstrate its willing
ness to explore all reasonable possibilities at its disposal to
encourage domestic expansion without taking undue risks on the
international front. I have an uneasy feeling that long-term

12/13/60 -7
rates are somewhat higher than they should be to be as helpful
as possible in present economic circumstances, although I can't
prove this or set any quantitative measure on it. Also, I have
some fear that with bank liquidity still rather low, the banks
may not be seeking expansion of their lending and investing as
actively as we would wish.
Faced with this kind of problem, together with the even
more serious problem of avoiding substantially lower bill rates,
we may be approaching a time when a departure from our usual
policy of confining open market operations to short-term
securities may be justified. It might turn out to be desirable
to place reserves in the market by means of any maturity which
seemed to be currently in supply--and even the possibility of
useful swaps of shorts against longs should not be overlooked.
Probably we need not face up to these problems today; I am not
sure that I would advocate operations in long-term securities
even during the early months of next year. But I hope the
members of the Committee will be considering these questions
over the coming weeks with an open mind; for if ever there
was a time when we should demonstrate our flexibility, and
our willingness to explore all alternatives, that time is the
present.
Mr. Johns said he continued to believe that the directive to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York was correct in stating that it should be
the goal of the Committee to encourage monetary expansion for the purpose
of fostering sustainable growth in economic activity and employment while
taking into consideration current international developments. Although
he claimed no particular competence as a business forecaster, he had a
rather uncomfortable feeling that the current situation, whatever it might
be called, was something more than a mere inventory adjustment and that
there might be more fundamental causes involved. The behavior of final
demand was far from encouraging, especially if sales of goods were
separated from sales of services, and it might be that the inventory
adjustment which had been going on, and probably was continuing, was not

12/13/60 -8
the only cause of such behavior of final demand. He could only express
the hope that when the history of this period was written it would not
be the conclusion of the historians that the almost unprecedented
contraction of the money supply which occurred from mid-1959 to mid-1960
had put to too severe a test the question of the relationship between
the money supply and economic activity. He shared with Mr. Hayes a
feeling of disappointment that the System had not obtained, at least in
the most recent period, the expansion of bank credit for which the
directive called. It seemed to be indicated from the weekly reporting
bank figures that commercial bank credit declined slightly in November,
that the banks sold securities on balance, and that loans increased
somewhat less than would be normal at this time of the year. It also
appeared that from the last half of October to the last half of November
the seasonally adjusted money supply declined on a daily average basis.
It further appeared that the velocity of money had been declining.
In these circumstances, Mr. Johns said, he would recommend that it
be the aim of the Committee, in order to carry out the directive, to keep
the member banks supplied with reserves. At some point, he felt that this
would begin to show up in an expansion of bank credit. To illustrate,
Mr. Johns related a recent conversation with a banker in the southernmost
part of the Eighth District who expounded the view, which he claimed
was shared by many other bankers, that the banks were uncomfortably
illiquid. Their loan-deposit ratios were higher than they would like,

12/13/60 -9
so much so that the banker expressed doubt whether his bank and others
similarly situated were in a position to expand their loans if they had
the applications, although they would take care of the credit needs of
their communities. The banker went on to say that it would not do any
good to furnish more reserves because the banks could not use them; they
did not have the loan demand and their loan-deposit ratios were already
too high. Effective November 24, the country banks in that area obtained
quite a lot of additional reserves through the release of vault cash, and
these reserves had not found their way into the money markets, at least
with any degree of rapidity. The country banks requested some of the
cotton paper held by the bank with whose official Mr. Johns was conversing
and although this bank was reluctant to give them the cotton paper, it
did so in view of correspondent bank relationships. This tended to
relieve somewhat the bank's uncomfortable feeling of illiquidity, and the
banker indicated that if his institution should continue to be liberally
supplied with reserves it would make loans if it had acceptable
applications. If not, the bank would buy Government securities.
Mr. Johns commented that this conversation tended to point up the
course that he would like to see the System follow; that is, to keep the
commercial banks supplied with reserves until their feeling of illiquidity
had been repaired. If the System then continued to keep reserves in
supply, he thought that the expansion of bank credit which the directive
called for would occur.

12/13/60 -10
Mr. Bryan stated that the Atlanta Reserve Bank had been reviewing
rather carefully the performance of Sixth District statistics, which in
previous postwar recessions had generally shown less decline than the
national figures and in periods of expansion had moved upward more. In
this recession, however, most of the figures showed a performance less
favorable than the national figures. Generally speaking, the District
figures had gone down more than the national average. The State of
Florida, which made the District figures look so good in most of the
postwar periods, was not doing so this time, and some industries such as
lumber and textiles that are important in the District were showing poor
figures. Moreover, it appeared that the District was being hurt rather
badly, and might be hurt more on a long-term basis, by disturbances.
Turning to the national situation, Mr. Bryan said that there
appeared to be a slow, mild deterioration. Because of the slowness of
the deterioration, it might be hoped that the recession would be shallow
and short-lived. However, that remained a hope and not something that
could be proved. Accordingly, as far as monetary policy was concerned,
he felt that the System had little choice except to continue the policy,
expressed in the directive, of supplying reserves for the purpose of
attempting to bring about an expansion of the money supply. For a
considerable part of the year the System had pursued a policy that had
achieved a slow expansion in the reserve figures. Thus far this month,

12/13/60 -11
however, those figures were slightly less, on a daily average basis,
than in December 1959. In the current month the System was confronted
with important seasonal factors of about $350 million from November.
Therefore, to state a target in terms of total reserves, he hoped that
the System would fully take care of the seasonal factor of $350 million
and in addition supply some amount of reserves as a contracyclical
influence. Whether that should be $100 or $200 million, he did not know,
but he would think of something in that magnitude during the month of
December. Accordingly, he believed that the System ought to add to
total reserves in December, on a daily average basis, by something like
$450 to $550 million.
With reference to the comment of Mr. Hayes concerning the seasonal
factor in short-term rates after the turn of the year, Mr. Bryan said he
was rather fearful that if the Committee were to hold a preconceived
notion of what the short-term rate ought to be, it could easily get into
trouble. He shared with a number of other members of the Committee the
feeling that it would not be desirable to drive short-term rates to a
greater disparity with competitive short-term rates abroad. At the same
time, if it became necessary to make a choice, he believed the System must
concern itself primarily with the domestic economic situation and not the
country's international position. As he had noted many times at Committee
meetings, there are some things monetary policy cannot do, and he thought

12/13/60 -12
it must be recognized, with regard to the international situation, that
this is not a matter that fundamentally and basically responds to monetary
policy. Instead, it arises from causes separate and distinct from
monetary policy and can only be cured by actions outside the jurisdiction
of the Federal Reserve. If what was involved was merely a short-term
flow of capital in response to interest-rate differentials, the United
States would be in no difficulty. However, more was involved in the
problem and the Federal Reserve should not be expected to cure a problem
that it did not create.
Mr. Bopp reported that business in the Third District continued to
deteriorate, as reflected in a number of statistics. New and continued
unemployment claims were rising and were now as high as at the equivalent
point in 1958. The proportion of the labor force unemployed increased in
October and remained higher than the national figure. Electric power
consumption declined from September to October, and construction awards
declined in both September and October while rising nationally. For the
first ten months of 1960, construction awards in the District were down
11 per cent, while nationally the decrease was 3 per cent. In the
latest four weeks, department store sales were 7 per cent below a year
ago. Automobile registrations provided about the only bright spot,
rising in October to 4 per cent over last year. The banking situation
remained relatively unchanged; from time to time there were still some
evidences of pressure on reserves of the larger banks.

12/13/60 -13
Mr. Bopp said that he would not recommend a change in the discount
rate or the directive at this time. However, like others who had spoken,
he believed that somewhat greater ease would be appropriate in view of
the domestic situation, which he felt was becoming increasingly important
relative to the international situation.
Mr. Fulton said that except for good automobile sales, indicators
in the Fourth District were all down. The situation was not only
sluggish but deteriorating. The steel mills were moving along at an even
slow pace, with no significant improvement anticipated until the latter
part of next year. The mills were well supplied with iron ore, and one
company recently announced the complete closing of a high-cost mine in
upper Michigan. On the other hand, low-cost properties were being
developed in Canada and locations abroad. In the aluminum industry there
was a gradual downward trend. The export market had been disappointing,
and the industry was faced with a price problem in world markets. The
volume of operations in the paper industry was running only 1.5 per cent
above 1959, compared with an annual increase of 4 to 5 per cent over a
number of recent years. The packaging part of the industry's operations
was off, with orders down due to the inventories of customers already in
packages, and no immediate uptrend was foreseen. A Reserve Bank director
representing a company with considerable distribution throughout the
United States indicated recently that orders from the south, southwest,
and west coast were picking up, but that eastern and midwestern orders

12/13/60
-14-
were on a low level. While auto production was now high, expectations
for the first quarter of next year were that production would fall off,
with a consequent effect on the already low rate of steel production.
Department store sales had not held up well recently, although for the
year to date sales were running one per cent above a year ago.
Unemployment was now higher as a percentage of the labor force and in
actual numbers. Several cities had been added to the list of those
having a substantial labor surplus, principally in the steel and metal
working areas.
Mr. Fulton said there seemed to be a widespread belief among
businessmen and bankers that there would be little change in the business
situation until after the middle of next year. Bankers reported that
there was beginning to be quite a bit of competition for mortgages now
that repayments were running in excess of new mortgages, particularly at
savings and loan associations. Due to substantial repayments, the
associations had been forced to search for new mortgages to keep up their
portfolios. This development suggested the likelihood of less stability
in the mortgage rate and the possibility that long-term rates generally
would begin to be less settled.
As to policy, Mr. Fulton expressed the view that the degree of
ease currently being maintained was quite appropriate and said he
concurred in the statements that had been made relative to the short-term
rate. He did not feel that the System should charge itself with

12/13/60 -15-
maintaining a level of short-term rates; instead, he would prefer to
seek a level that would encourage investment in longer-term securities.
If the funds now going abroad were actually short-term funds, they
would come back, and whatever temporary outflow occurred was not going
to embarrass this country over the longer run. For these reasons, he
would not concentrate on maintaining a level of short-term rates after
the turn of the year.
Mr. Fulton concluded by saying that he thought the discount rate
was appropriate and that no change in the directive was needed at this
time.
Mr. King recalled that several meetings ago a member of the staff
said, in discussing the economic situation and the business outlook, that
perhaps as never before the consumer held the key to the future trend of
the economy. The events of the past several weeks had borne out the
wisdom of that observation, Mr. King suggested. Continuing, Mr. King
said that he was almost persuaded by the statements that had been made
to the effect that the domestic, as contrasted with the international,
situation was the most alarming factor at the present time. He was aware
that bankers had a feeling of insecurity, but the consumer also had
manifested this feeling in his decisions to moderate purchases. Mr. King
did not believe that undue monetary ease at the present time would cause
the consumer suddenly to rush out and buy goods. Instead, that decision
was likely to occur only when the population as a whole had reached the

12/13/60 -16
point where people believed they had improved themselves to some extent
in their personal finances. This might develop within a month or two or
it might take a somewhat longer time, but in any event he was inclined
to feel that this was the turning point that would occur some day. As he
had said, he was almost persuaded by the appeal with respect to the
domestic economic situation, but at the present time he hoped that the
bill rate could stay in the vicinity of 2 to 2.20 per cent. It must be
recognized that shortly after the turn of the year seasonal factors would
exert a downward effect on the bill rate, and too precipitate a move at
this time might drive the bill rate to an unduly low level. He agreed
with the view that it would be desirable if long-term rates could level
off or drop, but he did not believe that undue ease would cause the
consumer to make the decisions that must be made before the economy again
would move ahead.
Mr. King said that he would not favor a change in the discount
rate at this time. He anticipated that open market operations would be
so conducted that free reserves would fluctuate rather widely, possibly
in the range from $600 million to $1 billion. However, he hoped that it
would be possible to maintain the bill rate in the area from 2 to 2.20
per cent.
Mr. Shepardson commented that there had been some slowing down of
business activity, along with some increase in unemployment, and that
both developments were matters of concern. On the other hand, it seemed

12/13/60 -17
to him that the country was going through some wholesome and salutary
adjustments, painful to be sure, but adjustments that were needed at
some time. The country appeared to be getting in a little better
position competitively, and that was needed. Some of the price movements
and some of the indications of a little more restraint in wage
negotiations were sound and constructive developments.
Mr. Shepardson went on to say that he did not think the Federal
Reserve could take care of the international situation entirely; other
factors were of more significance. However, he did not believe that the
Federal Reserve would aid the situation by flooding the carburetor. The
System should maintain a position of ease, as it had, but he did not
feel that providing any large amount of additional reserves at this time
would have a wholesome effect. Mr. Johns had related a conversation with
a banker who said that his bank did not have any large demand for loans,
and to him (Mr. Shepardson) it would not be constructive to provide a
flood of money when there was not the demand for credit. Accordingly,
he would favor holding to the position that the Committee had attempted to
maintain for the past two or three periods. He would keep an eye on the
short-term rate, but not in the sense that that would be the controlling
factor. He would provide needed reserves but not attempt to flood the
market, and he would not change the directive at this time.
Mr. Robertson referred to the remarks he had made at the November
22 Committee meeting concerning the manner in which the Account was

12/13/60 -18
handled during the preceding three-week period and noted that, in
accordance with the procedure agreed upon, there had been distributed
prior to this meeting a memorandum from the Securities Department of the
New York Reserve Bank commenting on the views that he (Mr. Robertson) had
expressed. As he read the memorandum, he felt the faulty logic and
strained interpretations were apparent to anyone who wished to see them,
but he did not wish to labor the point, other than to assert that he
thought the comments he had made at the preceding meeting may have been
a contributing factor in leading to the better administration of the
Account since that meeting.
With respect to policy for the forthcoming period, Mr. Robertson
expressed himself as very much in agreement with the comments that had
been made today to the effect that the Committee ought to aim at an easier
position. In short, he would attempt to do more to get the economy
switched around toward an upward movement, for over the long pull this
was the Federal Reserve's real function and he had some doubt as to
whether the System had functioned in that respect as well as it could
have. To pinpoint a move toward greater ease such as he recommended, he
would say that in his opinion free reserves should be somewhere in the
neighborhood of $750 million. He would expect that this might permit the
bill rate to move downward toward 2 per cent and that it would keep the
Federal funds rate low. He would like to have the actions of the System
construed as meaning that the System really wanted ease.

12/13/60 -19
If he were a member of the board of directors of a Federal
Reserve Bank, Mr. Robertson said, he would push right now for a
reduction of the discount rate by one-quarter of a percentage point. In
his opinion, this would not indicate panic but rather a move designed to
encourage the commercial banks to perform their function of searching
for loans in order to expand the money supply to the extent possible and
try to get the economy moving upward. As he saw it, such a move would
not disturb confidence in the dollar; instead, it probably would have the
reverse effect. The directive seemed to him proper, and he thought the
Committee ought to move further in the direction indicated by it.
Mr. Mills stated that in his comments he proposed to discuss
problems having to do with the money supply and satellite considerations
regarding developments in the area of bank credit that were disturbing to
him and caused him to doubt whether heavy injections of additional
reserves into the commercial banking system would, as they had in the
past, have the effect of jolting the economy and the bank credit
statistics off dead center. Mr. Mills then read the following statement:
A stagnant money supply in the face of energetic Federal
Reserve System actions to supply reserves and promote the
expansion of commercial bank credit demands a new look into the
roots of monetary policy formulation. Presently the System has
essayed the trick riding stunt of trying to have one foot on an
effort to foster business expansion through low interest rates
and ready availability of credit and the other foot on an
effort to maintain an interest rate structure high enough to
prevent the transfer of funds abroad for investment at higher
interest yields. The last time a somewhat similar Roman riding

12/13/60 -20
trick was tried in the 1920's the horses pulled apart and an
effort to maintain an interest rate high enough to prevent
inflation, but not so high as to induce an inflow of gold from
Great Britain, failed and the forces of inflation took over.
Current financial conditions are not comparable to the
1920's, but the lesson of the earlier experience suggests that
the Federal Reserve System should no longer attempt an
ambivalent monetary and credit policy. The policy called for
is one that will assure ready availability of bank credit at
interest rate levels high enough to retain volatile investment
funds in the United States and possibly attract a return flow
from abroad. The adoption of this policy requires subordina
tion of the attempt to promote the expansion of bank credit
by the forced feeding of new reserves into the commercial
banking system, which policy, in any event, is proving and has
been proven ineffective in achieving its intended purposes.
The reason that an aggressive Federal Reserve System
policy of active ease is not causing the desired expansion of
bank credit and the money supply can be laid to the fact of a
sluggish and waning demand for bank credit accountable to the
dominance of recessionary business influences. The money supply
not only represents the pool of previous extensions of bank
credit, but is also a measure of the magnitude of total spend
ing. Inasmuch as the demand for bank credit has fallen, the
spending that originates from bank lending and investing has
also fallen, and may fall further if total bank loans should
contract. Under these circumstances, and considering the
dampening effect of recessionary influences on consumer and
entrepreneur propensities to spend and invest, a Federal
Reserve System policy of supplying new reserves in abundance
does not promote bank credit expansion, but merely forces the
level of short-term interest rates down to an undesirably and
unrealistically low level.
Whereas the forced injection of reserves into the
commercial banking system is not inducing an expansion of bank
loans, it might be expected to promote increased investments in
U. S. Government securities and thus to support an increase in
the money supply. It is true that commercial bank holdings of
short-term U. S. Government securities have risen substantially,
but this has been largely because of massive acquisitions of
U. S. Treasury tax anticipation bills through the medium of
their Tax and Loan Accounts. These purchases have served to
increase outstanding bank credit and to sustain the money
supply, and illustrate the need of a forceful demand for credit
in order to spark an expansion in the money supply. Other
commercial bank purchases of U. S. Government securities have

12/13/60 -21
not done so, inasmuch as they were financed through funds avail
able from rising totals of time and savings deposits which, in
turn, are a reflection of lesser spending attitudes and a drab
business situation. Moreover, it does not follow that commercial
bank purchases of U. S. Government securities otherwise financed
will induce an expansion of bank credit because, where such
purchases are made by commercial banks located outside of the
money markets, they are transacted by transferring available cash
to the U. S. Government securities dealers in the money markets
and not by creating a new deposit on their own books which would
tend to bolster the money supply. This sequence of events occurs
regardless of the volume of reserves held by the "up-country"
commercial banks, and its effect is only to heighten the demand
for short-term U. S. Government securities and to drive their
yields down without promoting an increase in bank deposits and
the money supply. The opposite is, of course, true of central
reserve city bank purchases of U. S. Government securities which
do result in the creation of new deposits for the accounts of
their U. S. Government securities dealer customers. However,
the investment activities of the central reserve city banks are
not alone enough to bolster the money supply at a time of a low
demand for commercial bank credit.
What is evident seems to be that an easy monetary and credit
policy is ineffective in inducing an expansion of bank credit at
a time when the demand for credit and the propensity to spend is
slack, and that an active demand for private and public credit is
the economic ingredient essential to a successful pump-priming
monetary and credit policy.
Under present conditions, an aggressive Federal Reserve
System policy of supplying reserves merely fritters itself away
in an attrition of short-term interest rates that increases the
difficulty of trying to prevent a further outflow of funds from
the United States. A suitable monetary and credit policy at this
time would aim at making credit readily available, but at an
interest cost compatible with the objective of making the short
term U. S. Government securities market attractive for the invest
ment of both domestic and foreign funds. A level of positive free
reserves on the low side of $500 million should promote the pro
posed policy objective and without doing the kind of violence to
the short-term interest rate structure such as has occurred in
response to an over-generous injection of new reserves into the
commercial banking system. At some time in the future, there will
be a resurgence of demand for bank credit which will call into
play the latent credit promotive forces that the Federal Reserve
System controls. Until then, monetary policy may well be a neutral
factor in the complex of fiscal and monetary policy considerations
that in ordinary times serve the national economy in tandem.

12/13/60 -22-
In conclusion Mr. Mills said that he would not recommend a
reduction in the discount rate or a change in the directive at this time.
Mr. Leach reported that the downward drift in the economy of the
Fifth District continued. With few exceptions employment, seasonally
adjusted, had been declining slowly and man-hours in manufacturing
industries had continued to drop. The textile industry, one of the first
to cut back early in the fall as new orders dragged, continued to adjust
output, and might schedule a full week's shutdown at Christmastime to
check a slow growth in inventories. Furniture makers experienced a
satisfactory level of orders immediately after their fall market, but this
situation proved temporary and current orders were not sufficient to main
tain backlogs. The nation's largest steel plant, the Bethlehem plant at
Sparrows Point, Maryland, which had been maintaining production and
employment at higher levels than the industry as a whole, recently cut its
workweek and laid off a substantial number of employees. Coal production
in the District continued to decline, and a new series of layoffs had
recently been reported. The Ohio and Kanawha River valleys in West
Virginia, with their busy chemical and other industrial plants, stood in
sharp contrast to the depressed coal areas in other parts of the State.
Retail trade reports in the District were quite varied, but there was
apparently little hope that this year's Christmas business would equal
last year's volume. A somewhat brighter spot in the District's economy
was afforded by construction employment, which remained near its peak level
and was supported by a continuing high level of contract awards for non
residential and public works and utility projects.

12/13/60 -23-
Total loans of Fifth District weekly reporting banks had trended
contraseasonally downward since mid-September, and investments had moved
up at a pace unmatched in any recent year. Borrowings at the discount
window the past few weeks averaged less than during the comparable
periods of any of the past five years.
From the standpoint of policy, Mr. Leach said, the four weeks
before the next Committee meeting seemed to fall into two distinct parts:
the period between now and Christmas and that between Christmas and
January 10. During the first period, he believed the Committee should
see that reserves were readily available for seasonal purposes, while
maintaining approximately the present degree of ease. For the second
period, the problem presumably was to decide how quickly and to what
extent the Committee wished the Desk to mop up surplus reserves created
by the return flow of currency. It was his suggestion that operations
be so shaped as to maintain substantially the ease achieved in recent
weeks, with particular care taken to avoid a sloppy market with downward
pressure on short-term rates.
Mr. Leach stated that he would not recommend a change in the
discount rate at this time. It seemed doubtful that a reduction would
result in any noticeable improvement in the domestic situation, and it
almost certainly would aggravate the balance-of-payments problem. On
the other hand, an increase would be out of the question in view of the
current economic downturn. He would expect some decline in short-term
rates after Christmas, but he thought the System had learned from
experience that nothing was to be gained, and something was lost, by

12/13/60 -24
forcing short-term rates to extremely low levels through excessive ease,
even in periods when there was no serious balance-of-payments problem.
Mr. Leedy said that there had been no significant developments
in the Tenth District since the Committee meeting three weeks ago. As
to policy, it seemed to him from the projections for the period between
now and the next Committee meeting that a minimum of open market
operations might be required. While he felt that the System should
continue to follow a policy of ease, he had the feeling that, at this
juncture in particular, nothing was going to be accomplished in the
way of stimulating loans and nothing in the way of creating a demand
on the part of borrowers by contributing to a sloppy position in
reserves. As he saw it, the System had been doing the job that it
should do in providing a large volume of reserves. However, use had
not been made of those reserves in the expansion of loans and there
was no reason to expect that anything different was going to happen
in the period immediately ahead. This was due to the general situation
of the economy at the present time, which involved a waiting period to
see what might be ahead, and in such circumstances it did not appear
to him that the mere piling up of reserves would accomplish real results
as far as loan expansion was concerned. The System should take care,
and was taking care, of seasonal requirements, and it wanted an easy
position in reserves, but to push that ease to the point where the
country's international position would be jeopardized did not seem to
be the proper course. The domestic situation was something with which
to be greatly concerned, especially so in the present period, but the

12/13/60 -25
System should be extremely watchful of the international situation.
In the circumstances, he would keep a close eye on the bill rate,
which had given a good account of itself in the period since the
preceding Committee meeting. If the System could contribute to a
continuation of that performance, he would favor doing so. It
followed, of course, that he would not suggest any change in the
discount rate, and he did not see any need for a change in the
directive.
Mr. Allen stated that at the annual Business Outlook Conference
held last week at the First National Bank of Chicago the ten businessmen
panelists pretty well agreed that business activity in the first half
of 1961 would not differ greatly from the last half of 1960. There was
a general expectation, however, that business would improve during the
second half of next year. As to developments in the Seventh District,
additional layoffs and shorter workweeks had been announced recently in
construction machinery, appliances, and television. The recently released
classification of labor market areas indicated deterioration between
September and November for Fort Wayne, Gary, South Bend, Des Moines, and
Muskegon, and seven major District centers were not classified as having
a substantial labor surplus. Department store sales, strong in October,
slipped 5 per cent below last year in November and continued below a
year ago in the week ended December 3.

12/13/60 -26
A bright spot was found in sales of automobiles, which were
at a record high in both October and November. Many of the cars sold were
1960 models and about 30 per cent were compacts, so the trend in dollar
sales was not as strong as in number of units. One result of the good
sales was that production schedules were not being cut back as much as
had seemed probable. The high inventories, however, indicated that if
production in 1961 was to equal that of 1960, sales next year would have
to be very good indeed.
On the subject of inventories, Mr. Allen recalled having mentioned
before that the many more models being offered today was an important
factor. The Fisher Body Division of General Motors was currently
producing 113 body styles. Sales of the new compacts offered by Buick,
Oldsmobile, and Pontiac were said to be quite satisfactory, and thus
far 24 per cent had been cash sales; that is, no trade-in was involved.
This meant that many of the compacts were being bought as second or
third cars and represented new business. Thus, fears about high
inventories were reduced.
Agricultural loans at member banks in cattle feeding areas
increased sharply in November, Mr. Allen said. Purchases of feeder
cattle were delayed this fall because of relatively unfavorable results
from cattle feeding last year, hopes that prices of feeder cattle
would decline, and prospects that favorable weather would make most of
the corn eligible for price support loans. Although there was less high

12/13/60 -27
moisture corn than last year, there was enough to have the effect of
deferring marketing of cattle and hogs, increasing the demand and the
prices for feeder cattle, and probably laying the groundwork for
stability in livestock prices in late winter and spring.
Borrowing at the discount window in the December 7 week averaged
only $5 million. The largest Chicago banks still showed a basic deficit
position, but it was not large and coverage through the Federal funds
market had been advantageous.
Mr. Allen said he would not favor changing the discount rate or
the directive. He continued to feel that monetary policy had made its
contribution toward greater economic activity on a sustainable basis,
and he agreed with those, notably Mr. Shepardson, who would maintain
about the current degree of ease but not add to it. To maintain the
current degree of ease presupposed continuing to inject reserves in
replacement of those lost through the gold outflow, which apparently
was continuing. Most certainly, however, he would not go beyond that.
Mr. Mangels said that in the Twelfth District items were
beginning to show up on both sides of the ledger. In southern California
another major area had been classified as an area of substantial labor
surplus, and in October unemployment stood at 6.6 per cent in California,
7 per cent in Oregon, and 8.2 per cent in Washington. The figures for
the latter two States, however, each showed a decline from the preceding

12/13/60 -28
month, Oregon being down .3 per cent and Washington down .5 per cent.
The over-all employment situation in the District was somewhat better
than a year ago, employment being up about 3.2 per cent from October
1959. No major change in either the employment or the unemployment
situation was foreseen for the next two or three months.
Continuing, Mr. Mangels commented that in November the steel
rate in the District dropped to 48 per cent, against a national rate
of 51 per cent. However, steel executives appeared to feel that the
cutting of inventories was about over and that existing rates of
consumption would support higher operating rates. In other words, if
consumption should continue at about the same rate as in the recent
past, there seemed to be a fairly good possibility that the rate of
steel production would increase in the next few weeks or the next few
months. Toward the end of November nine plywood mills in Oregon shut
down for a period of a week, reducing industry output to 60 per cent
of capacity as against 70 per cent in October. This had the effect
of equalizing production and demand, so the situation was a little
better than it had been. Total construction contracts in October were
2 per cent above September and were about equal to a year earlier.
The improvement in residential construction was also about 2 per cent,
although residential construction was down somewhat from the year-ago
figure. Department store sales had been somewhat disappointing, and
the cumulative figure from the first of the year was down one per cent

12/13/60 -29
from 1959, Some stores had released part of the extra help taken on
for the Christmas season. Automobile sales were holding up fairly
well. In October they were 13 per cent above the September figures,
but sales leveled off somewhat in November.
Mr. Mangels went on to say that during the three weeks ended
November 30 weekly reporting banks showed a reduction of $220 million
in loans to banks. Excluding that reduction, loans increased about
$55 million, of which approximately one half was in consumer loans. The
banks also increased their holdings of Government securities by somewhat
more than $100 million. Total deposits were little changed, but demand
deposits increased while time and savings deposits dropped, part of the
decrease in savings deposits being the result of distribution of
Christmas club accounts. Reporting member banks now showed an average
loan-deposit ratio of 59.3 per cent, about 3.5 per cent below the ratio
at the end of October and about 6 per cent below the June high. Savings
and loan associations continued to accumulate funds, showing a 28 per
cent increase over their share accounts a year ago, but the growth in
mortgage holdings was 7 per cent under a year ago. The question of the
maximum rate of interest on time and savings deposits was beginning to
raise its head again with the end of the year approaching; there had
been some inquiries as to whether any consideration was being given to
a change in the 3 per cent maximum rate. Several banks had shifted to
the crediting of interest on a daily basis, and some to a monthly

12/13/60 -30
computation basis. One of the banks in San Francisco that at midyear
shifted to a daily basis had increased its savings accounts about
53 per cent in the intervening period. There had been practically no
borrowing from the Reserve Bank during the period since the last
Committee meeting, and purchases and sales of Federal funds about
balanced out.
Mr. Mangels expressed agreement with those who had suggested
that the System should supply reserves liberally between now and the
end of the year. It was difficult, however, to find measurements to
evaluate the effectiveness of System actions. The release of vault
cash had made the free reserve figure less valuable as an indicator and
the money supply figure may have lost some of its usefulness because of
the increase in savings and time deposits and the conversion of money
to forms of investment not included in the money supply. Many treasurers
had sharpened their pencils to reduce demand balances and get them
working wherever possible.
There had not been a great deal of change in short-term interest
rates, but there had been a firming up of longer-tem rates, and the
Federal funds rate seemed to have lost some of its value as an indicator
with the discount rate higher than market rates.
For whatever value it might be as a guide in the present
circumstances, Mr. Mangels suggested keeping free reserves somewhere in
the range from $500 million and $750 million, with considerable leeway
given to the Manager of the Account to determine what operations were

12/13/60 -31
necessary on a day-to-day basis according to the feel of the market. He
felt that the directive was satisfactory.
With reference to the discount rate, Mr. Mangels commented that
under normal conditions the rate probably should be reduced in light of
the other changes that had taken place in the monetary picture, including
the actions of the System in freeing reserves. Because of the
international situation, however, he did not feel that the discount rate
should be changed.
Mr. Irons reported that there had been little over-all change in
the Eleventh District and that there had been mixed developments. In
the last month there had been some improvement in the petroleum industry.
It appeared that the stock situation might improve and that production
would move into the new year on a nine-day allowable basis instead of an
eight-day basis. There had been some pickup in drilling activity. The
industrial production index in Texas had remained relatively steady over
the past few months. Department store sales during November were not as
favorable as had been hoped, and for the year as a whole they were about
2 per cent under a year ago. The first week in December was not conducive
to good sales due to rain and cold, and what would happen during the next
two weeks remained to be seen. The position of consumers seemed to be
strong as far as liquidity was concerned; time and savings accounts had
been increasing substantially.

12/13/60 -32-
The position of District banks appeared to be very easy,
Mr. Irons said, and there had been virtually no borrowing from the
Reserve Bank except on the part of two or three banks in western
Texas. The demand for bank loans seemed fairly satisfactory. Loans
had increased, with commercial and industrial loans up and some decline
in interbank loans. Both demand and time deposits were up during the
past three-week period, and District banks had been substantial sellers
of Federal funds, with practically no purchases. No banks had indicated
recently that their positions were tight from the standpoint of the
loan-deposit ratio or the availability of funds.
Mr. Irons expressed himself as quite satisfied with the operation
of the Account for the past three weeks. On an occasional day or so he
had thought the situation was excessively easy, but those occasions
reflected day-to-day changes in the market and on the whole he felt that
the Account Management had operated very satisfactorily. Over the
forthcoming period, he would like to see a continuation of the same
degree of ease. He would not like to see additional ease forced on the
market. While he did not have much faith in net free reserve figures,
when they got into the range of $500-$600 million he felt that the System
was getting into an aggressive provision of reserves. When reference was
made to free reserves up to $1 billion, that meant to him a supersaturation
of the market, and he would not like to see that occur. He continued
to feel that the international situation, as it related to and was

12/13/60
-33
reflected in short-term rates, was a serious problem and one that could
not be ignored. At times he found himself more concerned by the
international than the domestic situation in this rather mild recession,
from which he was confident that the country would emerge without
devastating consequences. In his opinion, the international situation
and the short-term rate situation should not be given secondary
importance, although he realized that the movement of short-term funds
was not the fundamental cause of the problem. A long-range problem
was involved in getting the balance of payments into a satisfactory
position, but developments in the area of short-term rates and the
movement of short-term funds and gold simply could not be ignored.
These developments were an immediate consequence of a deep-seated
deterioration that must be dealt with over a long period, but one
should not lose sight of the immediate consequences.
In summary, Mr. Irons recommended trying to maintain the current
degree of ease, adding that in his opinion the System had made reserves
available liberally. He would like to see the bill rate stay in a range
from 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 per cent, and he would not change the discount rate
or the directive.
Mr. Erickson reported that the New England manufacturing index
continued to show the unfavorable trend which developed three months
ago and had proceeded at a quicker pace than nationally. However,
electric power output continued to surpass last year's figures. In

12/13/60 -34
October, construction contracts were 11 per cent ahead of a year ago
against a national increase of 6 per cent. For the first 10 months,
the cumulative figure was 6 per cent behind 1959 against a drop
nationally of 3 per cent, with a substantial reduction in public works
and utility contracts. The employment situation was not good. Insured
unemployment showed rapid increases, and another city had been added to
those already classified as having a substantial labor surplus.
Department store sales lagged in November, although for the year to date
they were still 2 per cent ahead of last year. For the 11 days after
Thanksgiving, sales ran 5 per cent behind the comparable period in 1959.
In 1959, sales also ran behind the previous year and then picked up in
the remaining days before Christmas, with the result that the season as
a whole showed an increase. However, it remained to be seen whether
that pattern would again develop this year.
The discount window had been used very modestly, Mr. Erickson
said. For a part of the period since the November 22 meeting District
banks were sellers of Federal funds, and on a few days they were net
purchasers. A couple of months ago a large bank in the District shifted
to a basis of crediting interest on savings accounts on a day-to-day
basis, much to the disgust of its competitors.
Mr. Erickson said that he would not favor a change in the discount
rate or in the directive, and that in his opinion the Desk had done a
good job over the past few weeks. He wished to associate himself with

12/13/60 -35
those who had spoken against excessive ease, feeling that probably
this would not accomplish what it was hoped to accomplish and that it
might complicate the problem of withdrawing surplus reserves from the
market in January. He would favor instructing the Desk to the same
effect as at the November 22 meeting; that is, to attempt to maintain
the current degree of ease, with the hope that the bill rate would
remain around 2-1/4 per cent and that the Federal funds rate would be
under the discount rate.
Mr. Szymczak said that he would favor no change in existing
policy. He expressed the opinion that the Management of the Account
had done an excellent job, to which he added that under present
circumstances it was difficult to do a job in the market such as had
been done. It was his view that the Desk should continue to operate
primarily according to the feel of the market, and that the question
whether free reserves went as high as $750 million should depend on
the tone of the market.
Mr. Balderston commented that Mr. Leach had put his finger on
a perplexing problem. At least until December 21, or shortly there
after, he (Mr. Balderston) felt that the present policy should be
followed. In this connection, he noted that the Federal funds rate
had been running between 1-1/2 per cent and 2 or 2-1/4 per cent for
the past 10 days, which was an indication of the effect of System

12/13/60 -36
policy. However, what might happen to the bill rate after Christmas
presented an entirely different problem, to which he did not know the
answer, He had a feeling that domestic conditions were worsening;
unemployment seemed certain to rise even more. Since the commercial
banks were still in an illiquid position, he felt that the System
should not cease supplying reserves.
Summarizing, Mr. Balderston said it was his feeling that
neither the directive nor the discount rate should be changed, and
that the System ought to continue pressing reserves on the banks at
about the current rate. He realized, however, that this probably would
push the bill rate down through the floor after the turn of the year.
Chairman Martin noted that at recent Committee meetings he had
been tending to begin his comments by saying that he thought the
System had been doing about right. He continued to feel that way.
However, he also felt that everyone should be thinking about the
longer-range position in terms of the relationship between the domestic
economy and the international economy. While he believed that the
System had acted wisely, there was quite a body of opinion--much more
substantial than perhaps was generally realized-to the effect that
the System had played fast and loose with the credit of the United
States in pursuing as easy a monetary policy as it had been pursuing.
There had been quite a bit of talk to such effect in Europe and, while

12/13/60 -37
it perhaps was not too important, one must not disregard it entirely
as a factor in the present situation. As he had indicated, he felt
that the System had eased at the right time and that it had moved
progressively in the right way. He also believed that one should
think of the domestic economy first. However, as Mr. Mills had pointed
out today, the System was dealing with an entirely new set of circumstances,
not the same circumstances that prevailed in the 1953-54 and 1957-58
recession periods. No longer was the world price mechanism outside the
area of immediate relevance. No longer, either, were there important
shortages of anything in the United States; the country must depend on
research for the development of new products.
The Chairman went on to say that whether one liked it or not,
it must be recognized that the United States was on a modified gold
standard. It had been interesting to read in the past few weeks the
various comments, of which the number was increasing, to the effect that
the relationship of the dollar to gold was obsolete or antiquated, that
it had no real importance, and that there would be no real effect if
the country lost all of its gold. Such comments, he noted, always are
heard when people find that the rules of the game are a little hard to
observe. He added that domestic convertibility would be ideal if one
could have the conditions that would permit it. However, in a world
torn by strife, as at present, domestic convertibility would be
intolerable.

12/13/60 -38
Continuing, Chairman Martin expressed the view that the System
should not force monetary policy at a time like the present. It had
forced monetary policy in 1957-58, and he thought that was the last
time, perhaps, in this particular cycle that monetary policy could be
forced. The present situation seemed to him to be summed up in the
comment of Mr. Johns regarding his conversation with the banker: the
demand for credit was not there. To force banks to go out and seek
loans at a time when the price mechanism was working against businesses
would only cause people to get into hopeless positions and lose money,
The System would not want to encourage people to borrow simply because
banks might make money on the loans, for the borrowers probably would
get into trouble within a short time in view of the declining price
level and declining profit margins.
Chairman Martin then referred further to the outflow of gold
and possible developments before the outflow came to an end. Against
that background, he suggested that the System would not want to compromise
itself by forcing money into the market when it was the competitive
pricing of goods and services that was really the problem of the world
at the moment. In Europe, he noted, there was a slight slowing down of
the boom, but he did not believe it was going to be very serious. He
went on to say that if it were not for the fact that the dollar, on
current account, was stronger than the pound, on current account, and

12/13/60 -39
the fact that they are the two world reserve currencies, he might be
in favor of tightening up a little. On balance, however, in view of
the shakiness of the domestic economy, he felt that the System should
give as much aid as it could through the poultice of easy money without,
on the other hand, trying to force the commercial banks. In many
instances, banks had gotten into high loan-deposit ratios through
imprudence. Now that business was not as strong as it had been,
bank directors were saying that they wished their institutions did
not have such a high loan-deposit ratio and that they would like to have
this corrected before the banks became aggressive. Furthermore, the banks
did not have the loan demand. In summary, the present situation involved
an entirely new set of circumstances.
What he was trying to point out, the Chairman said, was that
monetary policy has limitations both as a restraining factor and a
stimulating factor. In his opinion the System had played its part well
in the current recession by providing the maximum stimulation it could
to an economy that was bound to decline when it reached this particular
stage. If he were thinking of measures to stimulate the economy further,
he would think more in terms of adjustments in fiscal policy than in
monetary policy. As Mr. Mills had said, the proof of the pudding is in
the eating. The System had been energetically supplying reserves for
some time. It had not made much of a dent in terms of the money supply,

12/13/60 -40
however, partly on account of the gold outflow.
Chairman Martin said he did not think that one could separate
domestic and international economic problems at the moment, or that
one could ignore the problem of the prices of world products. As he
saw it, what the System had to do was to keep a reasonably even keel,
and the System should not expect monetary policy to do more than it
could. At this juncture, particularly, the System should be careful
not to appear to be embarking on a cheap money policy just for the
sake of cheap money. A lower discount rate at this point would make
the European central banks that were lowering their own rates look
silly, for it would appear as though the Federal Reserve was trying
to be competitive. Similarly, if the Federal Reserve got the reputation
of following a cheap money policy just for the sake of doing so, people
abroad would be encouraged to think that the System was not concerned
with the balance of payments or with the soundness of the dollar.
This was something about which one should think carefully.
Chairman Martin then referred to the comments of Mr. Hayes
regarding the possibility of System Account operations in long-term
securities and stated that he felt it was proper for all members of
the Committee to raise for consideration questions involving possible
changes in the Committee's operating procedures. He hoped that everyone
would consider such suggestions with an open mind. It might be that

12/13/60 -41
there was a need to look into the question of operations in long-term
as well as short-term securities. However, as he had said several
times before, the Committee should be very careful in its moves or it
would get back to pegged interest rates before this was realized.
Before the Committee started buying long-term bonds, it should
consider whether it was going to establish a long-term rate or
whether it was just going to acquire long-term bonds for the Account
portfolio. In other words, any experimentation ought to be entered
into very carefully. Personally, he had some questions about the
adequacy of performance of the Government securities market, and
those questions would be magnified by the extent to which the Committee
went into longer-term securities. As he had indicated, the Committee
should do this only for a specific purpose and in order to obtain a
specific result. He was not sure in his own mind that the Committee
would obtain such a result, and everyone should be very careful to
be sure that he felt such a result would be achieved. While he
(Chairman Martin) could go along with the argument for purchasing
securities up to a maturity of one, two, or three years in certain
circumstances, when it came to 20-year maturities the Committee
would be dealing with an entirely different market.
Chairman Martin said that what it came down to today was that
there was certainly no disposition at this meeting to favor a change

12/13/60 -42
in the policy directive or in the discount rate. Everyone recognized
that the System must supply reserves to meet the seasonal needs for
credit and to compensate for the outflow of gold that was occurring.
The only question appeared to relate to whether the majority wanted
to pursue a somewhat easier policy than the Committee had been pursuing
or preferred to attempt to maintain about the present degree of ease.
There appeared to be a difference of opinion on that point, and it
might be advisable to take a poll.
Mr. Hayes inquired whether it was possible to separate the
question raised by the Chairman from the question of the short-term
rate, which he regarded as almost a crucial thing, to which Chairman
Martin replied by suggesting that too much emphasis on the short-term
rate would amount to making a pattern. The Committee was really
dealing with the supply of reserves, and if the Committee was going to
supply reserves he did not believe it could control the impact on the
short-term rate.
Mr. Hayes suggested that a good many people felt that the
short-term rate represented a danger signal that might help in
determining how many reserves could safely be supplied.
Chairman Martin commented that he did not know how that could
be put in terms of an instruction to the Desk. Personally, he would
like to see the short-term rate as high as one could have it. However,

12/13/60 -43
the problem that the Committee must discuss was the degree of ease
in terms of the reserves supplied to the market.
Mr. Johns commented at this point that when he spoke previously
he did not have any intention of arguing for excessive ease or for
creating a so-called "sloppy" condition in the market. His point had
been simply that bank credit expansion can and does result from
commercial bank investment. He certainly had no intention of arguing
that the System drive banks into making imprudent loans if, indeed, that
is likely. Instead, he would desire bank credit expansion to occur in
moderation and prudent magitudes. He would like to see some introduction
of reserves in excess of seasonal needs and offset of gold outflow.
Chairman Martin replied that this was exactly how he had tried
to state the question, and Mr. Johns said that he thought the Chairman
had stated it well. He (Mr. Johns) had simply wanted to disclaim what
might have been a misinterpretation of his earlier comments.
Mr. Bryan said he wanted to make the same kind of disclaimer.
A number of his colleagues seemed to have been under the illusion that
the Committee had been pursuing an aggressive easy money policy.
Actually, the low point in total reserves of the banking system came
in March, after many months of sharp decline. Since that time the
System had added a little less than $800 million to the total supply
of reserves in a period when the economic situation was deteriorating,

12/13/60 -44.
and he did not regard that as an aggressive easy money policy in any
sense of the word. His stated objective was merely to give the banking
system the usual seasonal requirement in December of about $350 million
of reserves, plus about $100 million.
After further comments, Chairman Martin stated that the division
of opinion seemed to be between continuing the present degree of ease
and proceeding toward a moderately easier policy. He asked whether this
was a fair way of putting the question, and there were no comments to
the contrary. Mr. Johns stated that his point was that whatever ease
had been achieved had not brought about what he felt was called for
by the directive. In his opinion, therefore, something else should be
tried. He would not change the directive because he thought it was
appropriate.
The Chairman then called for comments on the question he had
stated, and Mr. Hayes said that he found himself in a dilemma. While
he would like to see slightly greater ease, he would not be willing to
instruct the Desk to seek that ease without paying attention to short
term rates, which he felt constituted a limiting factor. If slightly
greater ease could be achieved without doing too much violence to
short-term rates, that would be fine, but he did not believe that the
two matters could be separated.
Mr. Robertson inquired whether Mr. Hayes had a floor in mind on
the bill rate, to which the latter replied that it was best not to be

12/13/60 -45
too precise since there was always the danger that a floor would become
an objective. When reference was made previously to a rate of 2 per
cent, he had thought of that rate as representing an outside limit.
He would like to see the bill rate stay somewhere in its present general
range,
Mr. Erickson said he would favor continuing the degree of ease
that had been maintained, and Mr. Irons commented to the same effect,
adding that he would not favor a further increase. Mr. Mangels recalled
that he had mentioned a range of free reserves from $500 to $750 million.
He pointed out that free reserves had averaged around $500 million during
November and almost $700 million in the first week of December. He
hoped that the bill rate would not fall too much below 2.15 per cent.
Mr. Allen stated that he would continue the present degree of
ease, without increasing it, and Mr. Leedy said that he was satisfied
with the degree of ease that prevailed. Mr. Leach said that he would
favor maintaining approximately the same degree of ease. He added that
the feel of the market involves a lot of things, including interest
rates, but that he felt a little more attention might be paid to
interest rates at the present time than was given to them before the
balance-of-payments problem was in the picture.
Mr. Mills stated that he would move back moderately from the
degree of ease of the past few weeks to a somewhat tighter position,

12/13/60 -46
while Mr. Robertson stated that he would favor moderately greater
ease and that he would not be fearful if the bill rate went as low
as 2 per cent. Mr. Shepardson said that he would recommend no greater
ease and that he hoped that the bill rate would not vary significantly
from its present level, following which Mr. King said that he would
not favor greater ease.
Mr. Fulton indicated that he would like to see the bill rate
between 2 per cent and where it now stood, which would suggest a little
greater ease, and Mr. Bopp indicated that he would favor slightly
greater ease,
Mr. Bryan commented that he did not know what slightly greater
ease meant. He felt that the System ought to supply seasonal requirements
for reserves plus some additional amount of reserves as a kind of
contracyclical measure. Mr. Johns said that he wished to associate
himself with the point of view expressed by Mr. Robertson.
Mr. Szymczak stated he would favor continuing the existing
degree of ease. Mr. Balderston agreed, but added that he was concerned
that after the turn of the year the bill rate might cause a situation
that would be quite different.
Mr. Shepardson suggested that the most significant thing about
the money supply was the relationship of that supply to the demand for
money. When demand slackened, a sloppy condition could occur without
any increase in the money supply.

12/13/60 -47-
Chairman Martin remarked that he had commented several times on
the contrast between 1957-58 and the present situation, the international
situation being the principal difference.
The Chairman then stated that the results of the poll indicated
that the majority was clearly in favor of continuing the present degree
of ease, with the feel of the market constituting the guiding factor.
A clear majority would like to have the bill rate stay as high as
possible.
There being no further comments, the Chairman noted that the
minutes would record the varying shades of opinion that had been
expressed.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, it was voted unanimously
to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York until otherwise directed by
the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges
(including replacement of maturing securities and allow
ing maturities to run off without replacement) for the
System Open Market Account in the open market or, in the
case of maturing securities, by direct exchange with the
Treasury, as may be necessary in the light of current
and prospective economic conditions and the general credit
situation of the country, with a view (a) to relating the
supply of funds in the market to the needs of commerce
and business, (b) to encouraging monetary expansion for
the purpose of fostering sustainable growth in economic
activity and employment, while taking into consideration
current international developments, and (c) to the
practical administration of the Account; provided that
the aggregate amount of securities held in the System
Account (including commitments for the purchase or sale

12/13/60 -48
of securities for the Account) at the close of this
date, other than special short-term certificates of
indebtedness purchased from time to time for the
temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not
be increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for
the account of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
(with discretion, in cases where it seems desirable,
to issue participations to one or more Federal
Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short-term
certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary
from time to time for the temporary accommodation
of the Treasury; provided that the total amount of
such certificates held at any one time by the
Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the
aggregate $500 million.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, January 10, 1961, and that the
ensuing meetings would be tentatively scheduled for January 31,
February 14, and March 7, 1961.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary