A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, August 16, 1960, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Balderston, presiding
Mr. Bopp
Mr. Bryan
Mr. King
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Mr. Allen, Alternate for Mr. Fulton
Messrs. Irons, Leach, and Mangels, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Erickson, Johns, and Deming, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, St.
Louis, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Messrs. Brandt, Hostetler, Marget, Noyes,
and Tow, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Keir, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board
of Governors
Messrs. Ratchford, Mitchell, and Einzig, Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Richmond, Chicago, and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Gaines, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Anderson, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia

8/16/60
Mr. Coldell, Director of Research, Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas
Mr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department,
and Assistant Secretary, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
Mr. Bowsher, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, Mr. Balderston was
elected to preside at this meeting in the
absence of the Chairman and Vice Chairman.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on July 26, 1960, were
approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report of open market operations covering the period
July 26 through August 10, 1960, and supplementary report covering the
period August 11 through August 15, 1960. Copies of both reports have
been placed in the files of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Rouse made the
following comments:
The lowering of the discount rate at five of the Reserve
Banks last Thursday and Friday had only a moderate impact on
the market for Treasury securities, as was also the case after
the Board announced the changes in Regulation D. To be sure,
prices of Government notes and bonds were marked higher on
Friday and bill rates moved lower. These movements, however,
just about offset the developments on Thursday when note and
bond prices had declined and bill rates had risen. On Monday
there were no very significant changes in prices of notes and
bonds, but bill rates again moved higher. In yesterday's
auction, average issuing rates of 2.278 and 2.621 per cent

8/16/60 -3
were established for the new three- and six-month bills, 6
and 16 basis points higher, respectively, than a week ago.
As the written reports point out, this development is mainly
a reflection of the heavy inventories of Government securi
ties--particularly the longer-dated bills--that Government
securities dealers had built up partly in anticipation of the
large reinvestment demand expected to stem from the Treasury's
August financing operation. The first part of this payoff
took place only yesterday, and the remainder will occur on
August 23 when the FNMA issue matures. Nevertheless, dealers
have been disappointed in the volume of demand they have seen
in the market and have had some difficulties and expense in
financing their positions. The split discount rate was, of
course, reflected in the Federal funds market, which, for all
practicable purposes, has been two markets since last Friday.
The demand for funds in districts where the discount rate has
remained unchanged has been apparently great enough to keep
the supply of excess reserves in such districts from spilling
over into 3 per cent districts in any volume. With the New
York banks under pressure and unwilling to pay 3-1/2 per cent
for funds, borrowing at the New York Bank jumped from $17
million on Thursday night to $340 million at the close of
business yesterday. Banks in other 3 per cent districts may
also have shifted from the funds market to the discount window
to meet their reserve needs.
There are certain problems that loom on the horizon to
which I should like to call the Committee's attention. The
first has to do with the changes in the amount of vault cash
that can be counted for reserve purposes on August 25 and
September 1. While this will bring about a more or less
instantaneous change in bank reserve statistics, it is by no
means clear how soon this will be reflected in the actual
availability of funds in the money market. As you will recall,
there was a period of considerable uncertainty that surrounded
the last change in Regulation D, and that experience would sug
gest that statistics be treated with more than usual caution
and that special attention be paid to the actual developments
in the money market over the period ahead.
Also, I should like to call the Committee's attention to
the spread sheet that accompanies the supplementary report
which indicates a very substantial bulge to $920 million in
the banks' free reserve position in the week ending September
21, mainly in reflection of a rise in float. This bulge can
represent a complicating factor as far as our operations are

8/16/60 -4
concerned inasmuch as a further estimate now suggests a
drop to under $500 million the following week. I hope
that we can deal with this mainly through repurchase agree
ments, since at the present time the Account holds only
$51 million of the September 15 bills.
Yesterday was the payment date for the Treasury's
August financing operations. While there was little
doubt about the success of this operation from the
financial standpoint, a careful analysis will have to
be undertaken before any final judgment can be made on
the relative advantages or disadvantages of the cash
refinancing technique that was used for the first time.
There were a good number of complaints from large corpo
rations and other investors who held the maturing issue
and who were unable to continue their investment as they
desired. The Treasury has received quite a number of
objecting letters, most of which have been answered
directly, and in this same connection we understand they
are planning to publish the text of a reply made to the
Iowa Bankers Association. A number of these complaints
have to do with the 100 per cent allotment to the Federal
Reserve System and to foreign central banks and foreign
governments. There were also a number of problems in
making allotments, and it may be necessary to take a
second look at the list of subscribers who were entitled
to full allotment on the certificates.
Finally, I wish to report that dealer holdings of
Treasury securities are currently about twice as large as
what we have come to think of as their usual position,
even allowing for additions to the dealer list. The
weighting is in short-term securities. A considerable
amount--although we have no way of measuring it--of longer
Treasuries are in the hands of other investment dealers,
and there have been sizable amounts of all high-grade
bonds--Treasuries, municipals, and corporates--bought for
cash by stock exchange houses and others, including their
customers. These purchases, like the excess dealer holdings,
represent a large-scale speculation based on the conviction
that the System will continue to promote still easier money.
It is somewhat reminiscent of 1958, although without quite
the flavor that Garvin, Bantel & Co. and "rights" provided.

8/16/60 -5
The swollen positions of the dealers are, as suggested
in the supplementary report, probably mainly responsible
for the tightness in the money market.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the open market transactions
during the period July 26 through August
15, 1960, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Mr. Noyes presented substantially the following statement with
respect to the economic situation, the credit situation, and the money
supply:
The information which has become available since
the last meeting of the Committee reflects very little
change in the over-all economic situation. Sometimes
little over-all change is the result of fairly sub
stantial counterbalancing movements in various sectors,
as it was in the summer of 1957, but in the present
instance, the over-all sideways movement reflects very
little change in any of the important components. Little
or no change in industrial production, construction
activity, employment, retail trade, and prices--and,
for the period as a whole, in the stock market--all
support the generalization that economic activity has
been going forward at a rate which is about the same
as that which prevailed at the end of the second
quarter.
Whether this sort of sideways movement has favorable
or unfavorable overtones depends to a large extent on the
expectations which preceded it. Those who anticipated the
beginnings of a strong upward push in the second half,
spurred by an increasing volume of investment expenditures,
could certainly find the past six weeks disappointing. On
the other hand, analysts who were concerned that many lead
ing indicators were pointing down may feel reassured, both
by the course of actual developments and by upward revisions
in a number of preliminary figures for June.

8/16/60 -6
Perhaps the most disappointing information which
has become available in recent weeks relates to the
second-quarter performance of corporate profits. Not
only is our current estimate down from the very high
year-ago level and from the first quarter, but the
decline appears to have been quite general, rather
than concentrated, as might have been expected, in
metal and metal-processing industries. This dis
appointing profits picture will undoubtedly dampen
the enthusiasm of many companies for capital expansion
in the period ahead.
On the positive side, final takings appear to be
holding up very well, and the general observations
which Mr. Koch made at the last meeting regarding the
inventory situation seem to be equally pertinent today.
The available data do not suggest excessive inventory
accumulation at any stage in the process of manufacturing
and distribution, and in some lines--especially steel-
inventories have been reduced further.
An important element in the continuation of the
relatively high level of activity which has prevailed
has been the maintenance of consumer demand. There have
been some doubts expressed as to the likelihood that
consumer purchases will continue at this level, and these
doubts have been supported to some extent by recently
published reports of two surveys taken around midyear.
Both the University of Michigan and the National Industrial
Conference Board survey results were generally interpreted
as reflecting a decline in consumers' intentions to pur
chase major durable goods, although the NICB survey did
show some increase for new automobile purchases. We have
just received preliminary results from the quarterly survey
of buying intentions conducted for us by the Bureau of the
Census, which was in the field during the week of July 17
23. In general, these results are not as pessimistic as
those of the two earlier surveys, although they do suggest
some decline from the previous survey in April. They do
not indicate any substantial concern on the part of the
public generally toward the economic outlook, as indicated
by the fact that the proportion of consumers expecting
income increases over the next twelve months is somewhat
higher than a year ago, and the same as in April of this
year. Taken at their face value, the survey results would
suggest that consumer demand is likely to be close to the

8/16/60
levels of recent months, but is unlikely to provide any
additional stimulus to economic activity.
In credit markets, the most noteworthy developments
of the past few weeks have been the success of the first
test of the Treasury's cash refunding technique and the two
steps taken by the Federal Reserve System last week. In
July, bank credit expanded by about $2 billion as net
acquisitions of Government securities overbalanced
considerably a $700 million decline in business loans. A
business loan decline is not unusual in July, but the
magnitude this year was larger than any other for which
comparable data are available. In early August this fall
off in lending appears to have been reversed, at least for
the time being.
On balance, market interest rates have shown substantial
further declines since the last Open Market Committee meeting.
There has been some backing up of rates since early August,
particularly in the Government securities market, but most
yield series are nevertheless still close to their lows for
the year.
Yield declines since midyear have been most pronounced in
medium-term Treasury issues, which are currently nearly half
a percentage point below end-of-June levels; while yields on
long-term bonds have dropped about one-eighth to one-fifth of
a percentage point over the same period.
Although Treasury bill yields also declined sharply from
mid-July to early August, much of this change represented a
reversal of the advance that had occurred earlier in July at
the time of the Treasury cash financing. This is illustrated
by the fact that the average rate of 2.28 per cent resulting
in yesterday's auction of 90-day Treasury bills was almost
identical to that resulting in the second week of June, while
yesterday the 6-month bill average of 2.62 per cent was 12
basis points above the second week in June.
This brings us to the money supply, and I would like to
call your attention to the chart entitled "active money supply"
which has been distributed. The black line shows the
familiar end-of-month series by which we have measured money
supply movements in the past. The red line above is the new
semimonthly average of daily figures which has been developed
in recent months, and which we expect will supplant the old
series after a brief period of testing. You will note that
there is very little difference in the direction or amplitude
of change over longer periods, but that the new series brings

8/16/60
out some significant movements that were lost in the end-of
month series and reduces the magnitude of other fluctuations
that was attributable to the single date character of the old
series. The data on which this chart are based and a brief
description of some of the technical changes will be circu
lated within the System in the forthcoming issue of Banking
Developments, and we hope to publish the back data and release
current figures regularly on the new basis some time this fall.
I should add that we are especially grateful to Mr. Abbott of
the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis for his work on this
project.
As I am sure you have already noted, in terms of the
familiar series the seasonally adjusted money supply increased
$300 million in July, on top of the $600 million increase in
June. This increase is especially noteworthy in that it
occurred in a period when the Treasury balance was being main
tained at higher levels than usual. As is apparent from the
chart, the new series showed both a smaller decline in the
preceding months and a smaller increase since the end of June.
In the period since the last meeting--or to be more
specific, for the three weeks ended August 10--free reserves
averaged about $170 million. In the same period total reserves
fell from $18,762 million to $18,509 million--a drop of about
$250 million. We estimate that a decline of about $340 million
in total reserves, after allowing for changes in the Treasury's
tax and loan balance and for seasonal factors, would have
permitted the maintenance of the same seasonally adjusted
active money supply as prevailed at the beginning of the period.
In other words, the net effect of all factors affecting bank
reserves, including the System's operations, was to supply
about $90 million more reserves than would have been needed to
maintain the seasonally adjusted money supply at the July 20
level. We can conclude from this that in the circumstances
which prevailed in this particular period, the maintenance of
a free reserve level of around $170 million resulted in the
net availability of reserves sufficient to permit an expansion
in the seasonally adjusted active money supply of somewhat more
than half a billion dollars.
If you will look at the last column which has been added
to the reserve projections, you will see similar figures pro
jected for the period ahead. These projections indicate that
if the Treasury's tax and loan account moves as expected,
required reserves will have to increase in the next three weeks
by a little more than $200 million (the difference between

8/16/60 -9
$18,428 million and $18,638 million) to support the same
seasonally adjusted level of active money supply which could
have been supported, but which may or may not have actually
prevailed, in the week ended August 10. The projections would
also indicate that to bring about this level of total reserves
for the week ended August 31, the System would presumably have
to absorb on balance approximately $100 million of reserves
during the coming three weeks after allowing for expected changes
in other factors affecting member bank reserves.
The highly tenuous nature of the estimates of both the total
reserve target and the volume of System operations is obvious.
In the first place, if the behavior of the Treasury's tax and
loan account is not as projected, or the implicit seasonal
adjustment of the money supply, on a weekly basis, is not
accurate, then the total reserve target itself could be wide
of the mark in either direction--by much more than $200
million. The System operations needed to accomplish the
appropriate change in total reserves are subject to even
greater margins of error in projection--the net amount of gold
flows, the timing and amplitude of fluctuations in float, and
many similar factors can result in large differences between
the actual figures and projections prepared in advance, as
the period progresses. In other words, it is literally
impossible to quantify in advance either the change in total
reserves or the volume of System operations which would be
necessary to maintain the existing level of the seasonally
adjusted money supply or to increase or decrease it by a
specified amount.
On the other hand, it does appear possible, in retrospect,
to determine with reasonable accuracy whether the net effect
of all factors affecting member bank reserves, including
System operations, was such as to provide more or less reserves
than were needed to support the level of the seasonally adjusted
money supply which prevailed at the beginning of the period.
However, whether such an analysis adds substantially to the
insight which can be gained from observation of the movements
of the money supply itself on a semimonthly basis is at least
open to question. After spending considerable time working
over the data, my own judgment is that an appraisal of the
impact on the money supply of levels of reserve availability
that have prevailed in the recent past can be made best in terms
of the behavior of the money supply itself, rather than the
reserve base available to support it. If the level of free or
net borrowed reserves which has prevailed has produced changes

8/16/60 -10
in the money supply other than those intended by the Committee,
then it should be adjusted in the direction indicated. While
the level of total reserves is a logical link between the two,
it does not seem practical to use it directly as a guide for
current operations, on the one hand, nor does it seem to shed
light on the impact of past policy actions which is not revealed
by an examination of the course of the money supply itself.
I should add that this is a highly tentative conclusion, which
I come to somewhat reluctantly, and only very recently, and
which I might well wish to modify after further study.
There ensued an exchange of comments between Mr. Bryan and Mr.
Noyes with a view to clarifying some of the points covered in the con
cluding portion of the latter's statement.
Mr. Marget then presented the following statement:
One of the main concerns these days of most of the headline
writers on international finance seems to be the matter of gold
outflow from the United States. Gold outflow is not a matter to
be silent about, necessarily. But one would like to see dis
cussion of the matter kept in perspective; and, whatever else
may be said of much of the recent public discussion on this
point, it can hardly be said to have distinguished itself as
having retained a proper sense of either perspective or pro
portion.
Why does gold flow out of a country such as the United
States? Broadly speaking, for one of two reasons.
In one group of cases, gold outflow could be the result of
a decision on the part of a holder of an existing dollar balance
to convert that dollar balance into gold because he has lost
confidence in the future value of the dollar in relation to
gold. To the uninstructed, this is the only case conceivable;
and this is why, in 1958, when there was a gold outflow from
this country of some $2.3 billion, it was represented for
months (and, unhappily, it is still sometimes described, in
retrospect) as a kind of "flight from the dollar." The only
trouble with that description of what is supposed to have
happened in 1958 is that, as we all know, it doesn't happen
to fit the facts. What the facts show is that in 1958, instead
of there having been a net conversion of $2.3 billion of exist
ing foreign-owned dollar balances into gold, there was an

8/16/60 -11
actual increase in the total of foreign-owned dollar balances
of over $1 billion.
This notion of gold outflow as the result of the conversion
of existing dollar balances into gold because of a general
preference for gold over dollars fitted the facts even less well
in 1959. In that year, the total gold outflow (exclusive of
the United States contribution to the International Monetary
Fund) was just under $700 million. Instead of existing foreign
owned dollar balances declining by that amount, these balances
actually increased by $2.8 billion.
What of 1960? The total of gold outflow from January to
June of this year was very small: $125 million in all. Again,
moreover, there was an increase--not a decrease--in the amount
of foreign-held dollar balances, this time by something over a
billion dollars over the six months.
Quite obviously, then, during this whole period of gold
outflow from 1958 through June of this year, there was no net
conversion of existing foreign-held dollar balances into gold.
There simply was no "flight from the dollar," or anything
resembling it.
What about July and thus far in August of this year?
There has been, undoubtedly, a very sharp step-up in the rate
of gold outflow. In July alone the gold outflow amounted to
over $175 million, and for August thus far the figure is $110
million. Since the first of July, then, a total of $285
million, as against only $125 million for the first six months
of the year. Has this intensified gold outflow since the
first of July been matched by a corresponding decline in the
total of existing foreign-held dollar balances? The fact is
that we do not yet know the answer to this question even with
respect to the month of July, the figures for which we should
have in a week or two. But surely a reasonable sense of
perspective would suggest that, after two and a half years of
gold outflow without the corresponding decline in foreign
owned dollar balances that would indicate a wide-scale con
version of existing dollar balances into gold as the result
of a preference for gold over dollars, some other kind of
thing may be happening.
What was happending during the period for which we do have
figures showing that foreign-owned dollar balances increased
at the same time that gold was flowing out was, as we now see
quite clearly, that we were having a balance-of-payments

8/16/60 -12
deficit which had somehow to be met. It was met partly by the
payment of gold, but also partly by the transfer into foreign
ownership of dollar balances. Since, we now know, there was
no concerted effort to convert existing foreign-owned dollar
balances into gold, it follows that if we had not had a
balance-of-payments deficit there would probably have been
no net gold outflow. The basic moral, then, ought to be very
clear: the surest way to avoid having to worry about losing
gold is to see to it that our foreign accounts are in balance.
I have put these simple considerations forward because
they seem to me to provide the background against which one
has to judge the significance, for policy purposes, of the
intensified gold outflow that we have been witnessing in July
and thus far in August. Let us assume, for the sake of
argument--though it is anything but clear that the assumption
corresponds strictly with the facts--that the whole of such
changes in capital movements as have occurred since June is
attributable to the intensification of a divergence in the
level of interest rates as between this country and abroad.
Would it automatically follow that we must expect every such
divergence in the levels of interest rates to lead to a
corresponding increase in the volume of gold outflow plus an
increase in foreign-owned dollar balances? The answer,
obviously, is no: that it depends, to begin with, on what is
happening to the items other than capital movements that make
up our total balance of payments.
The point can be illustrated by the balance-of-payments
estimates for the second quarter of this year that were released
some days ago by the Commerce Department. Disappointment has
been expressed, in some quarters, that the over-all deficit
for the quarter, at an annual rate of close to $3 billion,
was not much different from the over-all deficit during the
first quarter. But I suggest that quite a different light
is cast on this result if we recognize a further fact;
namely, that as between the first and second quarters of this
year there was an increase in capital outflows of around $1
billion; and that the reason why this did not result in an
increase in our over-all balance-of-payments deficit for the
quarter was that there was an improvement in our trade balance
of nearly $1 billion (annual rate). And if we take the past
year as a whole--beginning with the improvement in our balance
of-payments position that set in around the middle of last
year--we find that an increase of around $2 billion in capital
outflows and other payments has been prevented from being
registered in a corresponding deficit in our over-all balance
of payments because the improvement in our trade position

8/16/60 -13
(particularly as the result of the increase in our exports by
around $4 billion, annual rate) has been about twice as large
as the increase in capital outflow.
It is this type of consideration which helps to explain
why, while of course we must pay close attention to inter
national capital movements, and to the effect which monetary
policy may be expected to have on such movements, in many
ways the more basic question is whether the monetary policy
being pursued is such as to affect adversely the movements in
our trade account. At a time when inflationary pressures are
strong and the trade account is seriously deteriorating, a
policy of monetary ease would obviously represent the height
of irresponsibility. But, equally obviously, the situation
is entirely different when inflationary pressures are not
strong, when there is widespread evidence of the existence of
the kind of competitive pressures which we need to maintain
if we are to maintain our international trade position, and
when we find in the trade account itself evidence, not of
steady deterioration--of the kind that we had up to the
middle of last year, for example--but of steady improvement.
The net of the argument, then, is that a country in a
strong reserve position which is giving evidence not only of
a sensitiveness to the competitive forces which may be expected
to bring about steady improvement in its trade position, but
also of actual and sustained improvement in the trade position,
can afford to take steps in the direction of monetary ease
which countries less favorably situated in these respects
cannot afford to take. This proposition holds with equal
force even when--as may very well be the case in the period
immediately ahead--the geographical distribution of the
recipients of new claims on the United States economy is such
as to make it likely that a larger percentage of these new
claims on us will be taken in the form of gold than in the
form of increased dollar balances. The one kind of gold out
flow that we could not stand is the kind which, as I suggested
at the outset, so many people have assumed was occurring,
particularly in 1958; namely, a gold outflow which would be
primarily the result of a loss of confidence by the foreign
holders of existing dollar balances in the soundness of the
currency of the United States--which is to say, in the
soundness of the policies pursued by the fiscal and monetary
authorities of the United States. These foreign holders of
dollar balances did not so act when the trends in our basic
situation, with respect both to the internal fiscal position

8/16/60 -14
and the external trade position, were much less favorable
than they are as of now. If, contrary to present expectation,
they were so to act, this country would be confronted with a
policy dilemma which would be very serious indeed. But it would
not be fair to say that that kind of policy dilemma is before us
as of now.
Mr. Allen raised the question of having Mr. Marget's statement
available for presentation at the next meeting of the directors of the
Chicago Reserve Bank, and other Presidents likewise expressed an interest
in having the statement. No objection being seen with regard to the use
of the statement in such manner, if desired, it was understood that
copies would be sent to all of the Presidents following the meeting.
With respect to a further suggestion, relating to the possibility
of making the statement available for wider reading, perhaps in the form
of an article in the Federal Reserve Bulletin, certain points were raised
by members of the Committee and by Messrs. Marget and Young which sug
gested that due consideration should be given to questions of timing as
well as to the problems involved in converting a statement prepared
specifically for presentation at a meeting of the Open Market Committee
into an article suitable for general public consumption.
Mr. Treiber then presented the following statement of his views
on the business outlook and credit policy:
Recent information on the business situation has done
little to resolve the uncertainties as to which direction the
economy may take. Business activity is high and prices are

8/16/60
-15-
relatively stable. While the economy continues to produce at
a record level, there are divergent movements in modest amounts
in the various factors that make up total demand. Employment
and unemployment statistics for July show a slight improvement
over June. There is, however, little reason to expect any sub
stantial reduction in unemployment.
While wholesale prices have not changed significantly during
the last year, the consumers' price index has been slowly moving
upward; this movement is bothersome. The strong demand for
bank loans during the first half of the year appears to have
tapered off. The decline of business loans in July was importantly
influenced by repayments by metal and metal-products firms--the
same group that borrowed so heavily earlier in the year. Yet
total loans and investments were up in July because the banks
increased their investments at a much greater rate than in pre
vious years. The banks were able to do this because the Federal
Reserve made the reserves available. The shift away from loans
toward investments has improved bank liquidity positions. The
rise in total loans and investments in July was accompanied by
a $300 million rise in the seasonally adjusted money supply;
this is the second consecutive month in which the money supply
has increased. The large Government deposits at the end of
July provide a potential for a further increase in the money
supply, aside from any increase in total bank credit. Thus a
further increase in the money supply in August is probable.
Total reserves, nonborrowed reserves, and required reserves
have risen substantially in the last three months.
Forecasting business developments is an especially diffi
cult job at this time, but such forecasting is not necessary
for the determination of current credit policy. There is no
evidence of inflationary pressure on prices, of inflationary
credit expansion, or of inflationary psychology. The absence
of such prospects and the unclearness of the business outlook
counsel a relaxed credit policy. The Federal Reserve has been
following a policy of increasing relaxation over the last six
months. To this end it has taken a number of steps. Viewing
these steps as a whole, they constitute an impressive list of
relaxing measures in a period that is still marked by high
business activity. It seems to us that open market operations
should continue to be directed toward supplying reserves
readily, resolving doubts on the side of ease. This trend
toward further ease should be gradual, however, and not aggressive.

8/16/60 -16
Such a policy would be symbolized by free reserves in
the neighborhood of the level of last week, with further
expansion in total reserves and total nonborrowed reserves.
As seasonal pressures develop in the central money markets
in the next few weeks and as reserves are released through the
reduction of reserve requirements and the use of more vault
cash for reserve purposes, the Manager should rely principally
on the feel of the market in order to achieve a steadily easy
tone. Such reliance on the feel of the market is particularly
important in view of the uncertainty, in the light of our
experience with the vault cash release last December, as to the
extent to which banks will use vault cash to meet their reserve
requirements.
At the last meeting of the Committee Mr. Balderston suggested
the possibility of deleting the word "moderate" from that part of
the present directive that calls for "providing reserves needed
for moderate credit expansion." We think that it would be
appropriate to change the directive in this way.1/
Mr. Balderston commented that Mr. Johns had made available to him
prior to this meeting a possible revision of clause (b) of the policy
directive that the latter intended to suggest.
Mr. Johns having indicated that he would have no objection, copies
of the proposed revision were distributed. The suggestion contemplated
providing, in clause (b), that open market operations would be conducted
with a view "to stimulating growth in economic activity and employment by
providing reserves needed for bank credit expansion."
Mr. Erickson reported that there had not been much change in
conditions in the First District. The New England production index had
gone up from 118 to 124; the Reserve Bank had checked and could find
nothing wrong because all of the component parts had increased. The New
1/ Quotation should read: "providing reserves needed for moderate
bank credit expansion."

8/16/60 -17
England purchasing agents' survey in July showed them slightly more
optimistic than the national figures. Construction was still lagging,
but there was a suggestion of an upward trend because the Engineering
News Record showed engineering contracts in July up 19 per cent from
last year. The seasonal gains in employment continued, primarily in the
nonmanufacturing field. Manufacturing employment was still going down.
Department store sales and automobile registrations continued good,
while the vacation business this year was excellent. There was still a
strong demand for consumer and real estate loans; less so at the moment
for business loans. In the past three weeks District banks had been
sellers of Federal funds except on two days, and the banks had rarely
used the discount window. Average borrowings were less than $10 million
per day during the three-week period.
Mr. Erickson said he was pleased by the Board's recent actions on
vault cash and reserve requirements. As to the directive, he felt that
he would prefer the suggestion made by Mr. Balderston at the July 26
meeting, namely, to omit the word "moderate" from clause (b). As to the
discount rate, the Boston directors were scheduled to meet next Monday,
and he anticipated that the directors would act at that time to reduce the
rate to 3 per cent.
With regard to open market operations, Mr. Erickson said that in
view of Mr. Rouse's comments regarding dealer holdings of Government

8/16/60 -18
securities, and also in the light of the comments by Mr. Noyes, he felt
the Committee must leave it in the hands of the Account Manager to main
tain the same degree of ease as had prevailed, with free reserves in the
neighborhood of $200 million. If it should become necessary, he would
resolve doubts on the side of greater ease. As he saw it, the forthcoming
period would be a difficult one in view of all the factors that were to
come into play.
Mr. Irons reported that conditions in the Eleventh District had
not shown much change in the past three weeks. There were mixed trends,
but the over-all level of economic activity was about as it had been. In
some sectors, increases had been recorded. Industrial production in
Texas was up a point and thus stood within 2 points of the all-time high,
while construction contract awards moved upward in the latest month for
which figures were available. The agricultural picture was favorable;
it looked as though production would be larger than last year, which was
a good year. There had been no substantial change in the petroleum
situation. Production in August was on an 8-day allowable basis, and it
appeared likely to continue at about that rate. Employment in July was
down a little, but unemployment insurance claims in early August showed
a declining tendency.
With reference to the banking situation, Mr. Irons said that loans
and deposits were both down over the past three-week period and that

8/16/60 -19
unquestionably there had been some relaxation in the pressure on bank
reserve positions. District banks were not borrowing heavily from the
Reserve Bank; borrowing, which had been averaging around $14 to $16
million, was on the part of smaller banks for seasonal purposes. The
major city banks had not been borrowing nor had they been using Federal
funds so extensively.
On the whole, Mr. Irons said, conditions were good in the Eleventh
District. He sensed no real pessimism but, on the other hand, no greater
exuberance as yet. The general psychological reaction was that this was a
time of uncertainty, not only because of the summer season but because of
the forthcoming election and other things now in the picture. Therefore,
the general attitude was one of caution.
As to credit policy, Mr. Irons said that the operations of the Desk
during the past period had been quite satisfactory to him. The actions
taken by the Board on vault cash and reserve requirements seemed to him to
be actions that would add up to an impressive move toward ease. He viewed
that trend with a little reluctance because such a trend tends to feed
upon itself and build up. In saying this, however, he did not mean to
infer that he did not favor what had been done. He favored a reasonable
amount of ease but simply injected a note of caution because the situation
could build up more than would be liked if the System was not careful.

8/16/60 -20
With regard to the discount rate, Mr. Irons explained that at the
Dallas Bank no meeting of the Board of Directors is held in August except
on special call. Further, it is not the practice for the Executive Com
mittee to act to change the discount rate. The next meeting of the Board
of Directors was scheduled for September 8, with an Executive Committee
meeting to be held on August 25. If enough directors were available, the
meeting on August 25 might be converted into a meeting of the Board of
Directors and action perhaps would be taken on the discount rate. Other
wise, the rate might not be changed prior to the September 8 meeting.
As to policy for the next three weeks, Mr. Irons said that be was
still a little concerned about the possibility of additional rate declines.
He would prefer to maintain about the degree of firmness that had prevailed,
although he would not object to erring on the side of ease if necessary.
In general, he felt that it might be well to take stock of what had been
done and to give the actions already taken an opportunity to take effect
before continuing to move in the direction of ease. Of the alternatives
suggested with regard to the directive, he would prefer just to delete the
word "moderate" from clause (b).
Mr. Mangels said that in the past three weeks not too much new
Twelfth District information had become available. The information made
available was rather mixed, leaning somewhat on the side of weakness.
Three States in the District showed declines in employment, while the
other States showed increases, with the result that July was at about

8/16/60 -21.
the same level as June. The unemployment figures reflected a somewhat
more difficult situation. In the State of Washington, unemployment was
at the rate of 8.6 per cent in July against 7.8 per cent in June. There
had been declines in lumber, shipbuilding, and metals manufacturing, with
a slight increase at aircraft production plants. The aircraft increase
was contrary to the experience in southern California, where employment
was at an 8-year low. However, electronic manufacturing industries in
California were now picking up.
Continuing, Mr. Mangels reported that lumber prices were down,
with inventories high at the mills. Nevertheless, two large plywood
manufacturers had announced small price increases. Construction in June
was higher than in May, but down from a year ago. Most of the increase
in June was in public works, while there was only a modest increase in
residential construction, which stood 17 per cent below a year ago.
There were some expectations on the part of builders that the remainder
of the year would see an improvement in residential construction. On
the other hand, vacancy rates had increased in all Western States; the
rate of 10.6 per cent for the second quarter was up 1 per cent from the
first quarter and represented almost an all-time high. Steel production
continued to move downward in July, and the first half of August found
the mills operating at 48 per cent of capacity, somewhat less than the
national rate. Department store sales were 3 per cent below a year ago,
but there were some indications that automobile sales were picking up.

8/16/60 -22
In agriculture, smaller wheat and deciduous fruit crops were anticipated,
and there were still labor difficulties having to do with picketing of
the orchards in California. However, the cotton crop apparently would
be at a record level. Livestock people in California were somewhat con
cerned about the substantial increase in mutton and lamb imports, with
the first third of 1960 showing an increase of 113 per cent over 1959.
In 1956 about one million pounds of mutton and lamb were imported, while
in 1959 the figure increased to 58 million pounds. Oregon lamb prices
were now 16 cents a pound compared with 20 cents a year ago.
Mr. Mangels reported that demand deposits were down in the three
week period ended August 3, while there was a moderate increase in time
deposits, including savings accounts. Loans and Government security
holdings both were down. Borrowings from the Reserve Bank had been
nominal, averaging about $10 million a day over the past two weeks.
Turning to policy for the period ahead, Mr. Mangels said he agreed
that this was a period in which the Account Manager should be given more
than the usual leeway because of the general uncertainties in the business
situation and the fact that the recent changes in reserve requirements
and vault cash allowances might require some revisions in the projections
of bank reserve positions. In any event, however, he would lean toward the
side of ease.

8/16/60
-23
As to the directive, Mr. Mangels said that he would suggest
changing clause (b) so as to provide for operations with a view "to
encouraging monetary expansion to foster sustainable economic growth."
In response to a question, he added the words "and expanding employment
opportunities." Mr. Mangels went on to say, however, that he had no
strong feeling in regard to the language he had suggested.
With respect to the discount rate, Mr. Mangels explained that the
situation of the San Francisco Bank was somewhat similar to that of the
Dallas Bank. The next meeting of the Board of Directors was scheduled
for the first of September, with an Executive Committee meeting to be
held this Thursday. Depending upon the views of those directors attending,
it might be decided to poll the remaining directors by telephone; other
wise, consideration would be given to the rate at the meeting on the
first of September.
Mr. Deming reported that the Ninth District banking picture had
improved somewhat in terms of ease and liquidity. Bank deposits at both
city and country banks now were about where they should be seasonally
relative to the end of last year. This represented an improvement since
they had been running below their normal level; but they still remained
below the level of a year ago. Loan growth in July was smaller than a
year earlier at both city and country banks, and the net result was an
easier banking situation. This had been reflected in a sharp reduction
of borrowing from the Reserve Bank. The recent vault cash action would

8/16/60 -24
release some reserves in the District; however, due to the fact that
Ninth District vault cash relative to demand deposits tends to run
below the national average, relatively fewer District banks would be
affected than nationally and a relatively smaller amount of reserves
would be released.
In agriculture, Mr. Deming said, the outlook was for a slightly
less favorable crop than forecast a month earlier. Thus, while agri
cultural prospects were substantially better than a year ago, they had
deteriorated somewhat in the past month due to overly hot and dry
weather. Iron ore shipments from the Lake Superior region this year
were now expected to total about 70 million tons. While this would be
much better than in 1959, shipments would be smaller than in any other
postwar years except the recession years of 1949, 1954, and 1958, and
those years when shipments were affected by strikes.
Turning to the national picture, Mr. Deming said there seemed to
be a tendency to emphasize all of the unfavorable developments that were
occurring and to gloss over anything that looked favorable. As a result
the atmosphere, both in the Ninth District and elsewhere, was one of more
pessimism than he thought the facts warranted.
Mr. Deming expressed the view that System policy had been good and,
on the whole, quite well timed, and in this comment he included the recent
move on vault cash allowances and reserve requirements. He suggested
continuing to maintain about the same degree of ease, or restraint, that

8/16/60 -25
had prevailed. Due to the obscurity of the outlook over the next four
weeks, he agreed that the Manager of the Account should be given somewhat
more latitude for the exercise of discretion than would normally be the
case. As he understood it, the problem was not so much the statistics
themselves as the problem of interpreting their meaning in terms of ease
or restraint. A major problem, it appeared, would come after the next
Committee meeting.
With respect to the directive, Mr. Deming said that he would prefer
the suggestion of Mr. Balderston. He also raised the question whether the
word "needed" was necessary in clause (b) of the directive.
Mr. Allen said that the Seventh District business picture seemed to
include both favorable and unfavorable signs. Consumer buying had become
somewhat less vigorous. On the other hand, some business economists and
business leaders who had been expecting continued deterioration only a
month or two ago now reported improvement in order trends, modest in most
instances, but an improvement nevertheless. Thus, whereas in the spring
many businessmen were disturbed about current trends and consumers
appeared confident, the reverse was true at the present time. The lines
in which it was heard that there had recently been a noticeable improvement
in orders included copper products, aluminum extrusions, tool and die shops,
metal fasteners, folding paper boxes, television and stereophonic equip
ment, electronics, mobile homes, and various wood products used in industry.

8/16/60 -26
Airline travel was at a high level, and there had been a substantial growth
in air express business. The Illinois Bell Telephone Company had advised
that new installations were stronger in July and August than expected and
that toll calls continued to run 5 to 6 per cent above last year, this
being about the long-term growth rate.
On the other side, Mr. Allen said, retail sales of all stores
in the country in July were 1 per cent below June, and in the last two
weeks department store sales in both the Seventh District and the
United States ran slightly behind last year. Recent nationwide surveys
of consumer buying intentions showed a substantial drop in anticipations
to buy major items other than automobiles. Automobile sales slipped
below last year for the first time in July, when they were off 2 per
cent. The car inventory remained near the million level, about the
same as last year, but at that time dealers' stocks had been built
up in anticipation of the steel strike.
In the field of bank credit, Mr. Allen reported that Seventh
District banks showed a slightly stronger picture than all banks in
the country. There had been some loan expansion in the last two weeks
and a small net increase for the period since midyear. In this same
period last summer there was an unusually strong rise, but it should
be noted that loan levels, both in dollar amount and in relation to
deposits, were now substantially higher than a year ago. The effects

8/16/60
-27-
of progressively greater credit ease had shown up among all three classes
of Seventh District member banks. The basic deficit shown by Chicago
central reserve city banks was heavily concentrated at one dealer bank,
and the reserve position of other large Chicago banks had improved.
Both reserve city banks and country banks sharply reduced their use of
the discount window in the past two weeks.
Mr. Allen said he presumed that the Chicago Board of Directors
would vote for a 3 per cent discount rate at its meeting on August 18.
The several moves in the field of monetary and credit policy toward
greater ease, some of which would not become effective for a couple of
weeks, seemed to him to be enough for now, and he would favor resting
on the oars for the present. He would suggest trying to keep net free
reserves in the area of $200 to $300 million until the next meeting.
Mr. Allen agreed that it would seem appropriate to remove the
word "moderate" from clause (b) of the directive, as suggested by
Mr. Balderston at the last meeting, and he also agreed with Mr.
Deming that the word "needed" was not necessary.
Mr. Leedy reported that agricultural conditions in the Tenth
District continued to be exceptionally good. Expectations had been ex
ceeded, especially with regard to the wheat crop. The August 1 report
of the Department of Agriculture showed very favorable conditions for
the District, as it did for the country generally. Figures that had
recently become available indicated that cash receipts from farm marketings

8/16/60 -28
in the Tenth District during June were 22 per cent larger than in June
last year; crop receipts were 37 per cent higher and livestock receipts
10 per cent higher. The June increase caused cash receipts to be about
1.5 per cent higher for the first six months of this year than for the
same period last year, while the comparable comparison for the nation
was slightly on the minus side.
Excluding the State of Colorado, District employment in June
was slightly below the level of last year but this decline could be more
than accounted for by the serious and widespread construction strike in
the metropolitan Kansas City area. For the four weeks ended August 6
department store sales showed a 1 per cent increase, although for the year
sales were down about 1 per cent compared to the national increase of about
2 per cent.
Mr. Leedy commented that bank deposits continued to move upward
during July. For the week ended July 27 reserve city member banks showed
daily avarage deposits $143 million higher than a month earlier, of which
about $72 million represented interbank deposits. Over the same period
daily average deposits at country member banks increased $121 million,
reflecting the unusually large wheat crop which was then being harvested.
Loan demands continued to be moderate and borrowing from the Reserve Bank
had been at a lower level, reflecting generally easier money market con
ditions and undoubtedly some increased use of Federal funds due to the
more attractive rate.

8/16/60 -29
As to policy, Mr. Leedy said it seemed to him that the System should
be moving--trending a little further--in the direction in which it had been
moving in recent weeks. Certainly there should be an avoidance of tight
ening reserves through using statistics and not taking account of the
uncertainties involved in the counting of additional vault cash as part
of required reserves. As he understood it, for the past period it was
felt that a level of free reserves of around $200 million would be appro
priate. For the month ahead, it was his view that a figure of perhaps
$300 million would be more nearly indicative of the proper objective.
Mr. Leedy expressed the view that actions taken since the July 26
meeting had gotten policy ahead of the directive. It seemed to him that a
change such as Mr. Balderston had suggested would be appropriate, along with
leaving out the word "needed." However, he would be inclined personally to
go a little further in order to indicate that policy was now moving actively
in the direction of promoting the economy by making bank reserves more avail
able. While the suggestion made by Mr. Johns would be agreeable to him,
he would prefer language that would call for providing reserves to encourage
bank credit expansion, or perhaps for "increasing the availability of bank
reserves with a view to encouraging bank credit expansion." Such a change,
it seemed to him, would afford a needed indication of the concern of the
Committee about encouraging actively, or attempting to stimulate, the growth
of the economy by making bank reserves more available.

8/16/60 -30
Mr. Leach said that although prospects were clouded by scattered
weaknesses and indecisive trends, the current volume of business in the
Fifth District continued on a high level. There had been no large changes
in economic activity in the Fifth District over the past month, but nearly
all the changes that had occurred were downward. The characteristic
picture of recent industrial activity appeared to be one of declines in
unfilled orders and rises in inventories; this was particularly true in
the cotton textile industry. The volume of orders received by furniture
factories last month declined more than had been anticipated, and no
improvement was expected until the next important market in late October.
The easing situation in general in manufacturing was evidenced by the
latest reports on man-hours and employment, both of which had slight but
widespread declines. The seasonally adjusted index of debits fell 4
per cent during July--the second straight monthly drop--and July was the
first month this year that debits had fallen below those of the
corresponding month last year.
Mr. Leach went on to say that the past three weeks had brought
signs of easing at District banks, even though the banks were slow to
admit it. Borrowings at the discount window were light. Average out
standings were only $20 million in the past three weeks as compared with
$67 million in the corresponding period of 1959. Reserve city banks had
been out of debt to the Reserve Bank most of the time during the past two
weeks and had been on the selling side in the Federal funds market.

8/16/60
31
Mr. Leach said he was well pleased with recent actions of the
System and did not think there was need to do anything exciting in the
immediate future. He would continue to maintain a comfortable atmosphere
in the money market. Because of scheduled actions with respect to vault
cash and reserve requirements, he would expect greater than usual variations
in free reserves, but he hoped they would average at least $200 million in
the period ahead.
Mr. Leach said it was his view that the Committee should not go
too long at any time without changing the directive. In his opinion the
directive should be modified when economic conditions changed and when
Committee policy changed. Thus, he felt the Committee was at least six
weeks too late in changing to the present directive. At present, however,
this directive seemed about in line with what it appeared that the Com
mittee proposed to do, that is, to foster substantial growth in economic
activity and employment by providing reserves needed for moderate bank
credit expansion. In the discussion around the table regarding the next
four weeks, no one had suggested a policy going much beyond providing
reserves to meet seasonal needs. If the word "moderate" were eliminated
from clause (b), then the discussion should be in terms of free reserves
of $300 or $400 million rather than $200 million. On the other hand,
unless the thinking was in terms of substantial ease, the directive should
not be changed to indicate a policy easier than was actually contemplated.

8/16/60
-32-
Mr. Mills said he admitted to being more pessimistic about the
business outlook than others who had discussed conditions as they saw them.
He sensed that in the future economic historians were going to look back
at this period as one in which the earlier absence of a dynamic monetary
policy contributed to a loss in forward economic momentum at a time when
a major downward movement in the business cycle was brewing. Against
that reasoning he wished to address himself to the two factors that he
regarded as being of most importance to the Committee at this time. One
was the money supply, while the other was the position of the United States
Government securities dealers.
Mr. Mills then presented the following statement:
Since midyear, the "Condition of Weekly Reporting Member
Banks in Leading Cities" statements provide increasing evidence
of a contraseasonal reduction in bank loans, which trend again
raises puzzling questions about the money supply. The continued
failure of a Federal Reserve System monetary policy to obtain an
increase in the money supply in response to overt actions taken
to inject additional reserves into the commercial banking system
superficially would suggest more aggressive policy actions along
similar lines. The arguments in favor of using the leverage of
monetary and credit policy to induce an expansion in the money
supply would be persuasive if the contraction in bank loans had
come about through a forced liquidation of credit. If that had
been the case, an effort to stimulate an expansion of bank de
posits through monetary and credit policy actions would be in
order so as to offset the current shrinkage of deposits that is
consequent upon a contraction in bank loans which is especially
apparent in the central reserve cities. However, there are
reasonable grounds to believe that the contraction that is
occurring in commercial bank loans and deposits is a reflection
of the general slackening in economic activity and is in no wise
a result of any forced liquidation of bank credit except as that
term might be loosely applied to the policies of banks who are

8/16/60 -33
unwilling to permit the level of their loans to rise higher,
and in order to forestall such a happening are curtailing their
outstanding loan commitments in some areas. Under such con
ditions indicating that the contraction of bank loans and deposits
is the result of the conscious actions taken by borrowers to
repay their loans rather than actions taken by the banks to de
mand loan repayments, it follows that aggressive actions taken
by the Federal Reserve System,and intended to produce a bolster
ing influence on the sagging money supply, would have only a
minimum effect in that direction, but could have a devastating
effect in forcing down the level of short-term interest rates.
The question, therefore, becomes whether it is better policywise
to attempt to stimulate an increase in the money supply at the
expense of producing an artificially low level of interest rates
carrying an inflationary bias, or whether it would be wiser to
recognize the downtrend in the money supply as a combination of
reluctant lender and reluctant borrower attitudes which should
not be interefered with.
In the light of current credit developments, Federal Reserve
System policy makers would be well advised to avoid actions
that would aggressively attempt to force an expansion of the
money supply that would have the harmful effect of exerting
unduly heavy downward pressure on interest rates to the detriment
of commercial bank earnings at a time when their retention is
necessary in order to strengthen bank capital positions. Every
thing considered, and particularly as an overly easy Federal
Reserve System monetary and credit policy could be expected to
produce only minimum effects toward expanding the money supply,
it is essential that policy actions skirt the pitfalls that
have been described. The kind of monetary and credit policy
now called for is one that will continue to maintain a moderate
volume of free reserves, with the free reserve level partly to
be gauged by the movement of interest rates, to the end that
the supply of positive free reserves will be brought down on
such occasions as there are indications that monetary and credit
policy actions may be causing interest rates to fall unduly.
Furthermore, due to the fact that previous Federal Reserve
System policy actions have permitted member banks to reduce
their discounts at the Federal Reserve Banks to a low level,
the expansive effects of a relatively low level of positive
free reserves are now greater than at times when the member
banks were more heavily indebted to the Federal Reserve Banks.
Therefore, there is no longer any urgency to aggressively force
new reserves into the commercial banking system.

8/16/60
Continuing, Mr. Mills said it was an impressive fact to him that
the volume of Government securities currently held in dealer positions
represented, percentagewise, a very considerable proportion of the expan
sion that had occurred in member bank holdings of Government securities since
the time that the Federal Reserve System commenced to supply reserves more
freely. He would judge that the dealer positions might represent perhaps
one-third of the $6 billion increase. In a sense the dealer positions
seemed to be both an overhang in the market and also an element of stability
in the market, in that the dealers had outdone themselves in creating a
market having breadth and depth. At a time like this it would seem to be
the self-interest of the dealers to protect their investments and pro
tect their positions. Their investment in United States Government
securities at this very high level in a real sense tended to aid and abet
System policy intentions in that the dealers would wish to retain those
investments until the flow of investment funds into the market reached
a point where they could move their securities into permanent hands.
If there was rationality in that reasoning, dealer positions were in a
sense important in maintaining the interest rate structure and would con
tinue to be until those positions were lowered to a degree. This brought
him back to his original thesis that a monetary policy objective combining
both a lower level of free reserves and a fluctuating level of free reserves,
say around $100 million or thereabouts, would be in order and would have
the concomitant outside assistance coming from the position of the dealers
in Government securities.

8/16/60 -35
In reply to a question, Mr. Mills said that he would perhaps drop
the word "moderate" from the directive, but that otherwise he would be
inclined to leave the directive in its present form.
Asked what he would suggest with regard to reserves coming into
the market through the actions on vault cash and reserve requirements,
Mr. Mills said he agreed with Mr. Rouse that the reserves provided through
a release of vault cash tend to work themselves through the banking system
slowly enough that there might not be any immediate impact. If there was
some seasonal increase in bank loans, this would tend to absorb a portion
of those reserves. In his opinion the reserves supplied to the central
reserve city banks through the forthcoming reduction in reserve require
ments would have a much greater impact at the time it occurred. If reserves
should be superfluous, they could be more easily withdrawn from the money
market when they had gone into the position of central reserve city banks
than any other market area.
Asked whether he would sell securities if free reserves for the
banking system as a whole reached larger proportions than $250 or $300
million, Mr. Mills said that he might be so inclined. Here again, how
ever, he would follow movements in interest rates and dealer positions
closely.
Mr. Szymczak noted that many dealers apparently had bought and
held securities looking toward a rise in prices, at which time they would
sell on the basis that there would be larger free reserves. That was the

8/16/60 -36
time they would start unloading. In his opinion the holdings today were
based on the expectation of a rise in prices.
Mr. Mills commented that the dealers must have a market and that
the market in a sense would reflect the supply of reserves. By careful
handling, he hoped that the interest rate structure might be maintained.
Mr. Szymczak then noted that many dealers apparently expected a
greater demand than had come forth, and Mr. Mills commented that the
dealers would not want to sell at a loss if they could help it.
Mr. Rouse commented that the dealers would try not to sell at a
loss; they would endeavor to protect themselves. Thus far they had had
an extremely profitable year, and they had quite a cushion on which to
operate. He also noted that bidding on bills comes up every week. Some
dealers would get to a point where, if they were not able to reduce their
holdings, they could not bid for new bills. Thus there would be a higher
bill rate in order to move the securities. The dealers could not go far
beyond where they were now. In addition to carrying about $2 billion of
securities, they were using another $500 or $600 million of credit in the
form of a type of repurchase agreement called an investment repurchase
agreement. He had not included that in the figures he used. Only a
fraction was bank credit, the largest amount having been provided by nonbank
sources.
Mr. Robertson commented that he hoped the Committee would not
formulate policy on the basis of trying to outguess the dealers. As to

8/16/60 -37
the economy, he felt that the country was not on a marked downslide at
the moment. However, the economy appeared to be on a fairly even level
with perhaps a little sliding-down. Consequently, in the next month the
System could afford to permit the actions that had been taken thus far to
work in the direction of providing a relaxation that would enhance the
growth of the money supply. As he saw it, there would be a fall upturn,
and the System would not want to go so far that it could not switch the
other way. In all the circumstances, he would recommend that the Desk
not endeavor to offset all of the additional reserves that would come into
the market through the actions that had been taken, but rather that it
permit those actions to support the current trend to some extent without
getting greatly easier. This would involve providing a greater latitude
for the exercise of discretion on the part of the Manager than would be
ordinarily the case, particularly in view of the statistical picture
that would be presented. He would not let that statistical picture
overbalance the feel of the market. Rather, he would try to hold the
feel of the market, while permitting a moderate amount of ease to develop
over the next month.
Mr. Robertson said he would carry this out by amending the policy
directive in a way that would not merely take out or insert a word, for
that would tend to overemphasize the importance of the particular word.
Instead, he would prefer to see the policy directive expressed in a

8/16/60 -38
different set of words, such as "to encouraging monetary expansion to foster
sustainable growth in economic activity and employment." This would carry
out the view of Mr. Mangels and also that of Mr. Leedy, he believed. He
was fully aware that the Committee probably would want to change this
directive a month hence, or at least not too far in the future, because
he expected the Committee to be swinging in the other direction. If he
was wrong, however, that would not hurt anything. At this particular
period the Committee could afford to be easy in view of the state of the
economy and the lack of inflationary pressures at the moment.
In reply to a question, Mr. Robertson said he would prefer to use
"encouraging" rather than "stimulating" in the directive at this particular
juncture. In hindsight the word "stimulating" would have been fine if it
could have been used two months ago.
Mr. Shepardson said he concurred with those who viewed the picture
as one of fairly level activity with no widely divergent offsetting trends.
There were some divergent trends, it was true, but in general the economy
was moving along at a good level. The future was somewhat clouded by the
impact of various factors, including uncertainty as to the fall upturn.
However, with a high level of activity and the economy continuing on a
plateau for the moment, it seemed to him there was no reason for any marked
shift in the policy that the System had been pursuing. Current Committee
policy, as set forth in the present directive, appeared to be in line
with the comments around the table about providing for some expansion in

8/16/60 -39
the money supply. This, he thought, was desirable. Expansion should be
permitted to take place at a rate that would not create an unduly easy
condition and would not have a further depressing effect on rates. With
uncertainty existing as to the timing of the effects of the vault cash
release, he thought there was much to be said for giving a good deal of
leeway to the Manager of the Account in appraising the effects of the
released reserves as they came into the market. For that reason it was
difficult to set a statistical free reserve target, whether it be $100
million, $200 million, or some other figure. In all the circumstances,
he felt the Committee should ask the Manager to try to maintain about the
same condition in the market--whether it be called restraint or ease-
that now prevailed, taking into account the delayed effectiveness of the
reserves released through the action on vault cash. He agreed with
Mr. Irons that the Committee should be cautious about increasing ease too
fast at the present time.
With respect to the directive, Mr. Shepardson said that he would
not object seriously to removing the words "moderate" and "needed" from
clause (b). However, he would prefer to leave the directive as it stood,
since he felt that the present language more nearly expressed what most of
the comments around the table today seemed to regard as the appropriate
objective.
Mr. King said that Mr. Allen had expressed in his comments most
of what he (Mr. King) would have said. He believed that the economy had

8/16/60 -40
been in a dip of some kind, but that this may have bottomed out and the
economy was now rebounding. Thus, he was a little more optimistic today
than he had been in some time. His contacts with small businessmen and
small communities indicated that the economy may have bottomed out within
the past two weeks.
As to open market operations, Mr. King said he thought that any
effort to try to fix a target within a certain range of numbers would be
rather hopeless and would not serve any purpose at the present time. He
could not see that trying to work within a certain bracket of free reserves
would necessarily produce any certain results. The situation would
require discretion on the part of the Account Management, but in his view
the situation also called for minimum action on the part of the Desk.
The policy actions taken recently would have their effect in due course;
and it seemed to him that a procedure of absorbing and supplying reserves
alternatively would be rather fruitless. Accordingly, his views were on
the side of a minimum amount of open market operations, although he would
not want ease to develop to such a point as to set in motion all kinds of
worries. To summarize, unless he was informed of errors in his thinking,
his preference would be a minimum amount of open market operations, leaving
the market to fluctuate pretty much on its own. In view of the fact that
recent policy actions would result in injecting reserves, it seemed to him
that it would be of questionable wisdom to put in those reserves and then
withdraw them through open market operations.

8/16/60 -41
Mr. King went on to say that he could not work up enthusiasm for
changing three or four words in clause (b) of the directive periodically.
In his view, the important thing was the consensus for open market operations
developed at the respective Open Market meetings. Be would be inclined to
agree with any of the proposals made thus far, but he did not think there
was a great deal of difference between them. While he was not stating this
as a suggestion, his inclination would be to go so far as to leave clause
(b) in a permanent form calling for open market operations with a view
to fostering sustainable growth in economic activity and employment. He
recognized that it had been the practice of the Committee to change clause
(b) periodically. Even within this context, however, he did not see a
great deal of need for any change at this time.
Mr. Hostetler said that the year 1960 probably had been a greater
disappointment to people in the Fourth District than to people in any
other district. This might explain why a certain recent policy action
(reduction of the discount rate) was initiated in the Fourth District.
On the other hand, at the end of July a meeting of industrial economists
representing leading industries in the District was held at the Reserve Bank
and the participants were nearly unanimous in expecting economic activity
before the end of the year to reach a new record high in terms of the
industrial production index.

8/16/60
Mr. Bopp said he did not have too much to report on Third District
business developments and would say simply that there was nothing too
encouraging in the picture. However, the reserve positions of member
banks had eased significantly. The basic reserve position of Philadelphia
banks had moved from roughly $75 million net borrowed reserves to roughly
$30-$35 million. In the past three weeks only one Philadelphia bank had
borrowed from the Reserve Bank, and then only for one day.
Although he agreed with the thought that open market policy
should not be changed significantly and that a change in the directive
might not make much sense when one looked to the period ahead, Mr. Bopp
recalled that three weeks ago the Committee felt that a change in the
directive might not be appropriate in view of the Treasury financing.
The theory of catching up therefore might make a change appropriate at
this time. He was not too much concerned as to the precise wording, but
on balance he would prefer something along the lines suggested by
Mr. Robertson.
Turning to the discount rate, Mr. Bopp said that he and his
associates at the Philadelphia Bank were surprised to read on the ticker
on August 11 that some Reserve Banks had moved on the discount rate be
cause at the time the news appeared on the ticker the Board's wire had
not yet been received. He felt that in all probability the directors of
the Philadelphia Bank would act to reduce the discount rate at their
meeting this Thursday.

8/16/60
-43
With regard to open market operations in the forthcoming four-week
period, Mr. Bopp suggested that present conditions be maintained to the
extent possible, with any doubts resolved on the side of ease. He
agreed that the circumstances would require giving a great deal of leeway
to the Account Manager. In view of the dealer positions and other matters
that had led Mr. Rouse to say that the situation was perhaps reminiscent
somewhat of the summer of 1958, it might be that the Account Management
would have its work cut out and that sympathy for the Account Manager
would be needed.
Mr. Bryan said he did not see anything in the economic situation
in the Sixth District that required a report today. Neither did he
believe he had any comments on the general economic situation that would
add significantly to the discussion. One could make important arguments
on the general thesis that the economy was bottoming out of its dip, or
that it was going to move upward from the present plateau or whatever one
might want to call it. However, one could also make important arguments
that the economy was going into a downslide.
Mr. Bryan pointed out that he had never favored doing anything in
recent months that went beyond the idea of providing a reserve base for
moderate credit expansion. If the Committee wished to leave the policy
directive essentially unaltered, he would think it appropriate to omit
the word "moderate" from clause (b) of the directive, which would then
fully express his own feeling. If, however, the Committee should decide

8/16/60 -44
to alter the directive further, he believed that it ought to change the
linguistic approach. On the matter of giving a directive in terms of free
or total reserves, or on the basis of any other concept, it seemed to him
that this would be extraordinarily difficult at present because the market
repercussions of recent actions taken by the Board were not yet known.
Mr. Bryan said he wished to point out that in August of last
year daily average reserves were $18,613 million. Thus far this
August, daily average reserves were about $18,500 million. Further, on
the basis of the Board's staff projections circulated this morning,
it appeared that the daily average for the full month of August would
be well under $18,500 million. If so, the banking system of the
country had less reserves with which to support credit expansion this
August than last August and the policy was not one of ease as far as
total reserves were concerned. This illustrated the difficulty in giving
directions in terms of free reserves. Looking at the projections for
the weeks ending August 24 and August 31, one noted some rather radical
shifts in the components. A free reserve projection of $455 million for
the week ended August 24, would result in an average of $18,373 million
of total reserves; however, for the week ended August 31, free reserves
projected at $305 million would produce a substantial rise in total
reserves. The net result would be an average for the month well under
the figure for last year. Therefore, if the Manager was expected to pro
vide for moderate easing and some provision, say $50 million per month of

8/16/6 -45
total reserves, was to be made for secular expansion of the economy, then
in the week ending August 24 the Manager would have to let free reserves
run well above the figure of $455 million, and in the week ending August
31, he would have to allow another variation from the free reserve
projection if he was to average out with anything remotely comparable to
what he (Mr. Bryan) felt the result should be in terms of total reserves.
One thing obvious was that the free reserve figure, if it had been
projected at all accurately, would have to fluctuate radically to produce
what, in his judgment, would be an appropriate total reserve figure.
Mr. Bryan said be would favor a direction to the Account Manager
in terms of giving him latitude for the exercise of discretion; that is,
telling him to manage free reserves, depending on the components, so as
to provide for a moderate growth in total reserves.
Mr. Rouse noted that the daily average figure of total reserves
through August 12 was $18,503 million.
Mr. Johns presented a statement substantially as follows:
Without engaging in debate on the question whether the
economy is in recession or on the brink of recession, it is
generally agreed, I think, that production is substantially
below practical capacity and that inflation is not an immedi
ate problem. Economic activity is at approximately the level
of 15 months ago. The current posture of monetary policy,
which I take to be one of stimulating rather than restraining,
is therefore, in my opinion, appropriate and worthy of con
tinuance. It seems to me that recent policy actions by the
Board of Governors in its exclusive jurisdiction, along with
discount rate actions and operations carrying out the policy
adopted by this Committee in its directive of May 24, all
indicate clearly that the System is faced in the right
direction.

8/16/60 -46
With respect to the total reserves of the member banks, and
for the purpose of arriving at a conclusion as to the size of
desirable increments in the immediate future, I observe that in
the period April through July of this year the increase in the
supply of reserves, seasonally adjusted according to the Board's
series, was at the annual rate of 5.6 per cent (the July figure
is still preliminary). Our own figures indicate that this rate
persisted in the first ten days of August. In my view such a
rate of growth in reserves is appropriate, and I suggest it as
our approximate objective, subject to review, of course, at the
Committee's frequent meetings. I would again protest against
permitting a free reserve target to divert us from this objective
or distract us. I would urge that a free reserve target or range,
if such there must be, should be appreciated and used as a means
to an end and not as the definitive guide to open market operations.
Free reserves should be caused or permitted to vary and fluctuate
as needed in order to bring about the desired growth in total
reserves.
As to the directive, I might point out that one of the
disadvantages of having a suggestion for a change distributed
at an early stage of the meeting is that this permits the sug
gestion to be shot at before there is an opportunity for the
person making the suggestion to state his reasons.
Be that as it may, at the last meeting it was suggested that
the word "moderate" be removed from clause (b) of the directive.
I see no inconsistency between that word and recent developments
in reserves and bank credit because I do not think bank credit
expansion has been more than moderate. However, I support the
suggestion for removal of the word "moderate." It is not a very
precise word, but I think its connotations are, in present circum
stances, on the wrong side. At this time I would prefer not to
use a word which seems to suggest illiberality. I would prefer
to connote generosity.
Two other words in clause (b) also merit scrutiny, I think.
First, I suggest that for present purposes, and for the reason
just mentioned, "stimulating" is a better word than "fostering."
Perhaps I should say it is a stronger word. Second, it seems to
me that at this particular time the word "sustainable" puts the
objective of growth in activity and employment a bit out of focus.
Of course we want growth to be sustainable in the long run, but
in the present situation no cause appears for worry about too
rapid or unsustainable growth. We are now concerned--or perhaps
I should say I am--about lack of growth or possible contraction
in activity and employment. For these reasons I suggest deletion
of the word "sustainable" and in final result a revised clause (b)
in the form previously distributed.

8/16/60 -47
I think I agree with Mr. Deming that the word "needed" is
not required, and I would agree to its deletion. Also, I would
not object to Mr. Leedy's suggestion for use of the word "encourag
ing," unless it should be considered redundant to the idea we
suggested by use of the word "stimulating."
I am in favor of a discount rate reduction, of course. How
ever, I must confess to some unsettled feeling about the current
actions. If it is true, as I have read, that the reduction to 3
per cent is only a technical adjustment to the market, I think it
has to be said that less than the indicated technical adjustment
has been made, unless we wish to imply that market rates are lower
than we think they ought to be. If we do not intend such impli
cation, why do we underadjust? I, myself, have argued in recent
days--and I feel sure others must have--that to do more would
flash a "scare signal." In the cold, gray dawn of the morning
after, I wonder whether this is right. I wonder whether we tend
to take ourselves too seriously and to overestimate our power to
determine the attitudes of people who have attitudes about things
like this. I wonder how good our conjectural attempts to psycho
analyze the public are. I wonder whether it might be altogether
reasonable to assume that the public would take comfort and
assurance from Federal Reserve action which is resolute and all
that is indicated by facts visible to everyone. I wonder whether
it would be more frightening to lower the rate a whole point at
one time when such is indicated and the public is expecting rate
reduction, or to take smaller steps in fairly rapid succession.
The latter course, perhaps, could be nervously interpreted as
meaning that the Federal Reserve sees or thinks it sees progressive
degneration. Parenthetically, if degeneration should unhappily
come, requiring bold action, and we have deferred action to catch
up besides, we could find our difficulties compounded. Be all
this as it may, I think the discount rate ought to be under 3 per
cent, and I wish it were.
A special meeting of the St. Louis directors has been called
for Thursday of this week. When I left the Bank yesterday, it
seemed assured that a quorum would be present. These matters I
have just presented may form the substance of the questions I
will have to answer when the directors meet.
Mr. Szymczak said that, along with the others who had expressed the
thought, he felt this was a time when the Account Manager should be given
all of the leeway he had ever had. This was because of the policy actions

8/16/60 -48
taken recently and the question of their effects over the next four weeks.
He agreed with Mr. Mills that a problem was created by the holdings of
securities on the part of the Government securities dealers. He would
not favor any sudden or abrupt change in interest rates; if a change
should come, it should develop gradually and slowly.
Mr. Szymczak noted that the actions taken by the Board of Governors
recently were announced as a further implementation of the law so far as
the additional release of vault cash was concerned and as a first step in
implementing the law so far as the reduction of reserve requirements at
central reserve city banks was concerned. As announced, these actions
were taken at a time when, in the opinion of the Board, there would be a
seasonal need for credit. In other words, the Board was implementing the
law at a time when it felt that the law could appropriately be implemented.
It might be, of course, that the actions would supply more reserves than
should have been provided.
Continuing, Mr. Szymczak brought out that the change in the dis
count rate was announced, as indicated by Mr. Johns, primarily as a
technical adjustment. Perhaps the new rate was not quite at the point to
which the adjustment should have been made, but it was a step in that
direction. Thus far no one had said officially that the System was
changing its policy, although each person might have different ideas as
to what the actions meant and as to what actions the System should take.

8/16/60 -49
In his opinion this was a time when the Manager should follow the same
pattern. Therefore, if the total reserve pattern or the reserve position
of the banking system was such as to affect the rate structure too greatly,
this should be taken into account. On the other hand, if the vault cash
release did not affect the money market excessively, that should be taken
into account. The Account Manager should feel his way along until he
could see the entire picture.
Mr. Szymczak added that when the System formulates monetary policy
it does not want to disturb the financial structure of the country unduly.
No one could know what was going to happen to the economy after early fall.
Personally he felt that it would move upward, that it had gone down and
would firm up somewhat, and that there would be some positive change
upward if for no other reason than seasonal factors. Further, there would
be Governmental expenditures for defense, and perhaps there were other
things that could not be foreseen at the moment.
Accordingly, Mr. Szymczak said, it was his opinion that the System
should feel its way at this time and watch the situation from day to day.
He felt that the paper distributed recently from the New York Bank on the
use of short-term securities other than bills was a good one, and he hoped
that at some point it would be possible to discuss the matter further at
an Open Market Committee meeting. He also felt that the actions taken by
the Board on reserve requirements to this point had been good. On the

8/16/60 -50
question of their effect on the whole structure of reserves, one would
have to wait.
Mr. Szymczak noted that the Board had been endeavoring to formulate
a basis for the classification of reserve cities pursuant to the law
enacted in 1959. When the Presidents received material bearing on this
matter, he hoped they would review it seriously and give the Board the
benefit of their thinking because this was something that also would
affect the structure of the banking system. At some point, of course, it
would be necessary for the Board to do something. It must move forward
to eliminate the differential between the central reserve city and the
reserve city banks, and to provide bases for the classification of reserve
cities and the exemption of individual banks from reserve city requirements.
In summary, when talking about the possible reserve picture he
wished to say again that he thought it would be necessary for the System
to feel its way along. In his opinion, free reserves anywhere in a range
from $100 million to $250 million would be all right. However, whether
the figure was $100 million, $250 million, or even $300 million, he felt
that open market operations must be guided pretty much by the effect
rather than the figure.
Mr. Szymczak said he would prefer to leave the directive as it
stood.
Mr. Balderston referred to the presentation by Mr. Marget earlier
in the meeting and said his reaction was one of comfort as far as the

8/16/60 -51
prudence of the actions taken by the System over the past week was con
cerned but one of no comfort as to the longer-run future as long as a
favorable trade balance of around $4 billion failed to wipe out the
unfavorable balance of payments. He saw no long-run solution until a
decision was made to bring home the soldiers and their dependents who
were being supported abroad, thus leaving to others, to the extent
possible, the financial burden of supporting troops, particularly in
their respective countries. This country might have to provide the
hardware, but it did not have to provide the men and their dependents
and still pay for the burden of their upkeep. He merely threw this out
as a word of caution in connection with the distribution of the explanatory
statement presented by Mr. Marget this morning.
Turning to corporate profits, Mr. Balderston suggested that the
second-quarter reports, as referred to by Mr. Noyes, were significant
because a change in profits and expectations influences business deci
sions regarding plant expansion, inventory policies, and other things.
He recognized that the second quarter of last year was exceptional, the
$51.7 billion of profits recorded by corporations during that quarter
having been the largest in history. He also recognized that the drop
from the second quarter of 1959 to the second quarter of 1960 was only
in the order of about $5 billion. While this was not very large in the
aggregate, what impressed him was that corporations having no conceivable

8/16/60 -52
link with steel found that cost pressures had made it difficult to earn
as much in the second quarter of this year as the comparable quarter of
last year. Some TO per cent of manufacturing corporations earned less
in this quarter than in the same quarter last year, and in looking over
figures provided by Miss Stockwell of the Board's staff he found that
only four types of businesses had done better this year. Despite the
fact that the second quarter of 1959 was an exceptional period, it
gave him some concern that all of the other categories found it harder
to make profits during the second quarter of this year than a year ago.
Statistically, there was yet another unusual aspect of the matter. Only
in three other postwar years--1947, 1949, and 1951--had manufacturing
corporations failed to make a better showing in the second quarter of
the year than in the first quarter.
With regard to the consensus of this meeting, Mr. Balderston said
he gathered that the Committee favored a continuance of the current policy,
giving to the Account Manager more than the usual freedom to follow the
feel of the market because of the changes in reserve requirements that
were to occur in the near future.
As to the directive, Mr. Balderston noted that the views expressed
had been mixed. Of the members of the Committee, it appeared that six,
other than himself, were inclined to make a change and that four were
inclined to make no change. Of the other Presidents attending this meet
ing, it appeared that five favored a change and that one would not favor a

8/16/60 -53
change, He had the feeling that, of those who wished to make a change,
the sentiment early in the meeting was simply to drop the two words
"moderate" and "needed," but that later in the meeting, after there had
been the benefit of further discussion, there was increasing sentiment
for the adoption of wording along lines such as Messrs. Mangels, Leedy,
and Robertson had suggested. More specifically, he sensed that perhaps
there was some feeling toward going along with the language suggested by
Mr. Robertson. He then inquired whether those who had spoken early in
the meeting now would deem it preferable, after hearing the subsequent
discussion and suggestions, to go further than merely to eliminate the
two words he had mentioned.
Mr. Treiber said that this would be agreeable to him, while Mr.
Erickson said although he had no fixed feeling his preference would be
simply to omit the words "moderate" and "needed." Mr. Irons said he had
no strong feeling and would be willing to accept the suggestion of Mr.
Robertson, and Mr. Mangels indicated to the same effect. Mr. Deming
stated that his views were similar to those of Mr. Erickson. Mr. Allen
stated that he would be willing to omit the two words, but that otherwise
he would favor no change, while Mr. Leedy stated that he would accept the
Robertson proposal. Mr. Leach said that he would favor no change; if a
change were to be made, however, he thought it would be better to adopt
something along the lines Mr. Robertson had suggested, rather than just to
omit the word "moderate." Mr. Mills said that he would accept the Robertson
proposal.

8/16/60 -54
Mr. Shepardson said that he would favor no change. If a change
were to be made, however, he would do something other than just omit the
word "moderate." With reference to the suggestion of Mr. Robertson,
Mr. Shepardson proposed that clause (b) might read more smoothly if it
provided for operations with a view "to encouraging monetary expansion
for the purpose of fostering sustainable growth in economic activity and
employment."
Mr. King stated that he would prefer to leave the directive un
changed, and Mr. Bopp indicated that he would favor the Robertson proposal
as modified by Mr. Shepardson. Mr. Bryan expressed a preference for
leaving the directive unchanged but added that if a change were made
he would prefer the Robertson proposal to the others that had been
mentioned. Mr. Johns said that the Robertson suggestion would be agree
able to him, and Mr. Szymczak said be would favor no change in the
directive.
The suggestion was made that, in the light of the discussion, it
might be possible to accept by acclamation the language for clause (b)
suggested by Mr. Robertson, as modified by the suggestion of Mr. Shepardson.
However, there was an indication on the part of at least one of the members
of the Committee who favored no change in the directive that it would be
desirable to have the votes recorded in the minutes and in the policy
record of the Committee.

8/16/60
-55
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, it was voted, with Messrs. King,
Shepardson, Szymczak, and Allen voting
"no," to direct the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, until otherwise directed by
the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (including
replacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities to
run off without replacement) for the System Open Market Account
in the open market or, in the case of maturing securities, by
direct exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary in the
light of current and prospective economic conditions and the
general credit situation of the country, with a view (a) to
relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs of
commerce and business, (b) to encouraging monetary expansion
for the purpose of fostering sustainable growth in economic
activity and employment, and (c) to the practical adminis
tration of the Account; provided that the aggregate amount of
securities held in the System Account (including commitments
for the purchase or sale of securities for the Account) at the
close of this date, other than special short-term certificates
of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be increased or
decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one
or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such certificates held at
any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in
the aggregate $500 million.
Mr. Balderston then inquired whether there were any comments on
the consensus for open market operations during the forthcoming period as
stated by him earlier during the meeting.
In discussion of this point, Mr. King raised the question whether
the Committee could continue the policy that it had been following in
view of the change agreed upon in the policy directive.

8/16/60 -56
Mr. Robertson said he sensed that many of those at the meeting
felt that the Desk should not endeavor to offset the whole amount of
reserves that would be released through the action of the Board relating
to vault cash and reserve requirements. Then, after noting that the record
of the July 26 meeting indicated that the Committee was aiming at a given
figure of free reserves, he asked whether the consensus today did not mean
that the Desk would look more to the total picture. The figure of free
reserves might rise, but this still might not represent any further easing.
Mr. Rouse noted that the figure might rise or that it might go
down.
Mr. Balderston said he gathered from listening to the discussion
today that the Committee desired to carry over the goals discussed at
the July 26 meeting. The same goals would be carried over, but in view
of the shifting situation the Committee desired to give the Account
Manager more freedom.
Mr. Robertson suggested that the goals today included a quali
fication that the Desk would make errors on the side of ease.
Mr. Rouse stated the matter in terms of resolving doubts on the
side of ease, a revision with which Mr. Robertson expressed agreement.
Mr. Shepardson said that, as he understood it, the goal was also
to provide for some moderate growth in the money supply.
Mr. Rouse stated that this was to be hoped for although, as Mr.
Noyes had pointed out, it was a little difficult to figure on. Mr.

8/16/60 -57
Balderston commented that this was particularly true in view of the
Treasury tax and loan account balance at the moment being larger than
customary, to which Mr. Rouse added that the Desk should have an assist
in that respect in view of the prospective payments by the Treasury.
Mr. Balderston then inquired of Mr. Rouse whether the general
instruction was what he thought he needed for the next few weeks, to
which Mr. Rouse replied that it sounded like a vote of confidence but
that he was still a little fearful. He then stated that he had no
questions.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held in Washington on Tuesday, September 13, 1960.
Mr. Johns, speaking as Chairman of the Presidents' Conference,
said he had been interested in the indication that material might be
coming out to the Presidents at some point with respect to the study of
the classification of reserve cities. In view of the fact that the
Presidents' Conference would be meting on September 12, he inquired
whether there was anything the Presidents could do to prepare for dis
cussion with the Board at the joint meeting of the Board and the Presidents
the following day, if in fact it was intended to have discussion at that
time. He noted that it was frequently found to be helpful to have time
for a Committee or Subcommittee of the Conference to study such a matter
and present suggstions to the Presidents.

8/16/60 -58
It was indicated that material on the subject probably would be
distributed to the Presidents within a week. Mr. Balderston commented in
this connection that the material to be sent represented tentative sug
gestions based on tentative assumptions. The Board did not wish to send
out just a blank piece of paper, and it would therefore send what was
available with a request for criticism and ideas.
Mr. Szymczak commented that the Board had taken no position and
that the material to be sent out was in the nature of a collection of
working papers.
Mr. Johns suggested that it might be appropriate to refer the
material to a Conference Committee, and that perhaps the Subcommittee on
Legislation might pick up where it had left off in the latter part of
last year.
Mr. Balderston replied that the matter of procedure would be one
for the Chairman of the Conference and the other Presidents to decide. In
any event, however, the Board would appreciate all of the help it could get.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary