A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, October 25, 1960, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr, Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr.
Bopp
Mr. Fulton
Mr. King
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Irons, Alternate for Mr. Bryan
Messrs. Leach, Allen, and Mangels, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Erickson, Johns, and Deming, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, St. Louis,
and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Brandt, Eastburn, Marget, Noyes, Roosa,
and Tow, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Koch, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
Mr. Keir, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors

10/25/60 -2
Mr. Patterson, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Mr. Hickman, Senior Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland
Messrs. Ratchford, Baughman, Jones, Fossum,
and Einzig, Vice Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Chicago, St.
Louis, Minneapolis, and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Coldwell, Director of Research, Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas
Mr. Holmes, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
held on October 4, 1960, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report of open market operations covering the period
October 4 through October 19, 1960, and a supplementary report covering
the period October 20 through October 24, 1960. Copies of both reports
have been placed in the files of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Rouse commented
as follows:
Since the last meeting of the Committee, open market
operations have been generally successful in fostering a
reasonable degree of ease in the money market without
upsetting the securities market for the Treasury's
financing operations or creating unduly low short-term
rates. These policy objectives are not entirely compatible
and of course the results have not been perfect.
In the middle of the period reserve availability increased
to very high levels as float rose well beyond normal mid-month
proportions, While the System Account acted to mop up almost
$475 million of reserves from October 14 through October 19,
the money market became extremely easy as the excesses lodged
and accumulated in the New York banks, which found it impossible

10/25/60
to dispose of all of their surpluses. The reduction of System
Account holdings was accomplished largely through redemptions
of bills and sales of the shortest maturities of bills so that
there was a minimum of interference with the current Treasury
financing, which might have suffered from more drastic action.
A good demand for bills following the successful completion of
the Treasury's two special bill auctions arose in part from
the extremely easy reserve situation which in turn produced
strong bank buying of the shortest maturities at sharply lower
rates. Thus, the effects of the temporary and "sloppy" reserve
situation were not inconsistent with the System's objectives
so far as the money market and the Treasury were concerned.
Bank loans and investments as well as total and nonborrowed
reserves have continued to increase.
Now, however, we must face the problem of how to deal
with the prospective decrease in reserve availability which is
certain to result from the decline in float and from the
additional reserve requirement arising out of the Treasury's
cash borrowing without putting more downward pressure on bill
rates. Repurchase agreements will of course be useful and
purchases of longer-term bills can probably be made in some
size, but at some point soon the size of the prospective
operations, coupled with continued bank and nonbank demand,
will cause further marked decline in bill rates. To minimize
this, the Management would expect to augment bill purchases by
purchasing moderate amounts of other short-term issues to the
extent the circumstances warrant. Before this is done initially,
the intention to do so will be commented on in the morning
conference call. Conceivably, the tightening of the money
market, if it is permitted to develop, will help keep bill rates
up, but the question may come down to whether we, in supplying
enough reserves to keep the money market reasonably easy, can
do so without depressing rates, especially if substantial
nonbank and foreign central bank demand for bills continues.
The capital market has behaved about as might have been
expected in the face of the calendar of new financing and the
large supply already in dealer hands. Long-term rates have
continued somewhat sticky due to the technical situation in
the corporate and municipal markets which reflects buyers'
caution in a situation of major uncertainties. In the past
few days the atmosphere has improved somewhat and dealers have
made some progress in clearing up unsold issues at higher rates
in order to be in a better position to cope with the American
Telephone & Telegraph debenture issue being sold today. This
offering seems to represent a crucial point in the long-term
market; if it is attractively priced it should go well, and the
long-term market could then clear itself reasonably promptly.

10/25/60 4.
The Treasury's October financing operations were reasonably
successful. The secondary market for the new issues has been
good, apparently because banks which took sizable amounts of bill
issues have been able to hold on to their awards longer than they
normally do.
The next Treasury operation will be the refunding of the
November 15 maturities amounting to about $10.8 billion, of which
the System owns $5 billion in 4-3/4 per cent certificates. The
Treasury has announced that this will be a normal exchange
operation, which seems wise in view of the market uncertainties.
The main question to be resolved is how far the Treasury should
go in trying to extend maturities through offering an option to
exchange into an intermediate issue. Current market views are
that a moderate amount of intermediate bonds could be sold in
addition to an anchor issue in the one-year range. With respect
to the System's holdings of $5 billion of certificates, the
Treasury's plans for an optional offering are sometimes clear by
this time, but on this occasion the thinking about the issues to
be offered has not yet jelled. After the terms are known, the
Manager of the Account will make a recommendation on the exchange
of the System's holdings and will ask the Secretary to poll the
Committee.
In reply to a question by Mr. Balderston regarding the prospect
for disposing of securities in the Open Market Account other than bills,
Mr. Rouse said he thought it might be possible to sell blocks of such
securities in certain periods on a negotiated basis. Also, if the Treasury
should employ the cash refunding technique further, that would give the
Account an opportunity from time to time to run off some of its large hold
ings as they matured. In addition, the Account could sometimes break up
its large holdings through exchange operations, although this meant that
the Account would have to take some longer securities at least temporarily.
In September, the Account had no substantial bids for notes or certificates.
The largest bid was around $2 or $3 million, and the Management concluded
that in view of the situation in that sector of the market the Account
should not avail itself of those bids.

10/25/60 -5
Mr. Hayes suggested that there might be more bids for securities
other than bills if the market got accustomed to the idea that the System
was willing to sell in that area, and Mr. Rouse agreed.
Mr. Leach asked Mr. Rouse to what he would attribute, in the
present circumstances, the continuing foreign demand for United States
Treasury bills, to which the latter replied that there had been quite
a large outflow of funds to certain Western European countries whose
central banks were content to keep part of their funds invested in dollar
securities. As private sources converted their dollar holdings, central
banks were buying dollars and selling local currencies, and the central
banks then wanted to invest their dollars in varying percentages in
relation to their holdings of gold. As long as the flow of capital out
of the United States continued, a demand for bills might be expected
unless there was complete loss of confidence in the dollar, which seemed
unlikely.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the open market transactions during
the period October 4 through October 25, 1960,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
A staff memrandum on recent economic and financial developments
in the United States and abroad had been distributed under date of
October 21, 1960. With further reference to economic developments,
Mr. Noyes made the following statement:
At the time of the last meeting we had only a few early
estimates of the economy's performance in September, Now we
know that the downward drift continued and that, if anyting,
the pace of the decline quickened a little. This is also
confirmed by estimates for the third quarter as a whole.

10/25/60 -6
Gross national product was only down by a fraction of one per
cent, but it must be remembered that the level is well below
even the more conservative projections at the beginning of the
period.
Estimating the preliminary figure for the September
index of industrial production presented some unusual difficulties
because the sharp decline in manhours may have been attributable
in part to the overlap between the week in which the data were
collected and the Pennsylvania Railroad strike. However, other
information, as it has become available, tends to confirm that
the over-all decline from July to September was in the neighbor
hood of the 3 per cent suggested by the preliminary index.
In view of the critical position of consumer acceptance and
purchases of autos and new housing, which I shall discuss further
in a moment, special attention has been directed toward auto
sales and housing starts. Some of you may have more information
than we have here on the industry's estimates of consumer response
to the 1961 model autos and the success achieved to date in
liquidating the relatively large inventory of 1960 models that
was carried over into the new model year. Figures for the end
of September and the first ten days of October do not provide
a clear indication one way or the other, since comparisons with
earlier periods are affected by the earlier change-over this
year. After making some rough allowance for this, and for
pressure to move 1960 models at substantial discounts, the sales
performance so far appears satisfactory but not spectacular.
Housing starts for September were definitely disappointing.
At a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 1,077,000 units on the new
series, they were down 17 per cent from August and one-third from
last year's high. There have been considerable efforts to deter
mine whether this large decline can be attributed to some aberra
tion in the statistics, but no basis for discounting the
significance of the data has emerged so far, except that the new
series has generally tended to be somewhat more volatile than its
predecessor. Thus we find starts at an all-time low for the new
series and, after making allowance for the changes in the series,
at a point not much above the depressed 1957 level.
The further downward adjustment of materials prices also
deserves special mention. Copper, steel scrap, and other scrap
metals have all declined in recent weeks. The index of sensitive
materials prices has dropped over 5 per cent since the beginning
of the year, and is now back close to the 1953-54 average. It is
also noteworthy that the industrial commodity component of the
wholesale price index registered a further slight decline in
September, wiping out the increase that occurred in the last
half of 1959.

10/25/60
Department store sales improved in late September and early
October, but the most recent data have been running a little
below strong year-ago figures. The month as a whole will
probably show some improvement over September, however, if
present rates are maintained.
I would like to turn now, briefly, to a few comments on same
underlying factors which seem to me to merit your consideration.
Studies in the 1930's led some observers to conclude that
individuals' expenditures--even for such postponable items as
durable goods and housing--were determined by the current level
of personal income, and that it was, therefore, highly unlikely
that changes in consumer expenditures would ever be an autonomous
force in either recession or revival.
So far as housing was concerned, there was considerable
reason to question this thesis, even at the time, but it was
widely accepted that durable goods expenditures were closely
tied to current income, and that the initiating force in cycli
cal change was almost certain to come from the business sector.
A few critics of this point of view felt that the growing
availability of consumer instalment credit to finance durable
goods purchases might break the close link that had existed in
the past between aggregate consumer income and expenditures.
At the end of the World War II, the large accumulation of
liquid assets in the hands of consumers and the reduced volume
of consumer indebtedness-both mortgate and instalment--raised
further question as to the validity of projecting into the
future the rigid relationships between consumer income and
expenditure that had apparently prevailed in the past. In fact,
it was primarily this sort of concern that led the System to
undertake the Survey of Consumer Finances, to lend its support
to the efforts of Professor Copeland to measure moneyflows, and
to carry through with the development of the present flow of
funds accounts.
While the big backlog of demand for housing and durables
and the strong financial position of consumers have been important
elements throughout the postwar period, we seem to have just
encountered the first instance in which an autonomous decline in
consumers' expenditures for "capital goods" may have played a
critical role in business fluctuations. On two previous postwar
occasions, consumer expenditures for durables and housing have
declined in periods when incomes were well maintained. The
first was during the Korean War and the impact was offset by a
rapidly rising volume of defense expenditures. The second, in
1956, was offset by burgeoning expenditures for plant and
equipment by private business. Recent quarter-to-quarter
movements are clouded by the anticipations and repercussions

10/25/60
of the steel strike, but the broad movements over the past few
years are interesting, and I think revealing. Expenditures
for durable goods and residential construction went up sharply
in the 1958 recovery, increasing from $53 billion in the second
quarter of 1958 to $60 billion by the fourth quarter. By the
second quarter of 1959 these expenditures hit an all-time record
of $68 billion-up $10 billion from the prerecession high in the
third quarter of 1957. This peak in the spring of 1959 in
expenditures for durables and new housing brought them to 18 per
cent of disposable personal income. By the third quarter of 1960
15 months later--the dollar volume of expenditures for these
purposes declined to $63.5 billion, and the percentage of
disposable income to about 15 per cent.
This time neither business capital spending nor Government
purchases of goods and services was moving up aggressively to
fill the gap. The impact of lessened demand for durables and
residential construction has not been offset, but is reflected
in a reduced gross national product.
In saying that the recent decline in purchases of durables
and housing is autonomous of changes in income, I do not mean to
suggest that it was either arbitrary or capricious. There is no
doubt that the congestion in the capital market in the last half
of 1959 restricted the flow of funds for real estate lending,
especially under the Government-aided programs with prescribed
maximum rates, and that this situation is not yet fully relieved.
Vacancies have increased and the strength of the underlying
demand for more relatively high-priced new housing has come into
question. Perhaps, as Mr. Levitt suggested recently in an
interview here in Washington, the market has been "value starved."
Certainly the stimulus of lower downpayments and longer maturities
has not been available to the same extent as in previous periods.
Somewhat similar observations might be made with regard to
durables. Consumers undertook substantial instalment debt in
1959, and repayment obligations are at a high level in relation
to income. The judgment of manufacturers in their styling and
pricing has been subject to serious question. There are even
doubts as to whether types and varieties of new products have
been developed which will stimulate the same consumer response
as the ones at or near the point of market saturation.
In these circumstances, prognostications as to the future
course of economic events can be little more than expressions of
fear or hope, More than at any other time in the postwar period
the outcome appears to depend on the future decisions of millions
of individual consumers to purchase or not to purchase houses,
automobiles, air conditioners, washers, dryers, boats, and the
like. Any surge in business spending or voluntary resumption of
inventory accumulation must await signs of revived consumer
interest in end products. Whether this is "just around the

10/25/60
corner" or some distance in the future can only be guessed
from the current trend of retail sales, surveys of consumer
intentions and, as always, a winnowing of hundreds of word
of-mouth reports.
Staff memoranda on the outlook for member bank reserve positions
and on the Treasury cash outlook had been distributed under date of
October 21, 1960. With further regard to financial developments,
Mr. Thomas presented the following statement:
Bank credit developments in the past four weeks indicate that
the record-breaking expansion that occurred in the preceding four
weeks was due to temporary factors and did not represent a basic
change in the economic climate. A subsequent decline in loans
and investments at city banks offset a large portion of the
preceding increase, and left a net change for the eight weeks
that was probably close to the customary seasonal pattern. The
credit expansion was evidently needed to provide for the large
build-up in U. S. Government deposits. The subsequent contraction
in Treasury balances has had as a counterpart some decline in
bank loans and investments and some increase in private deposits.
The decrease in loans and investments was practically all at New
York City banks and most of the increase in private deposits,
which was largely seasonal, was at banks outside New York City.
For over ten weeks now, Federal Reserve policy has been
directed toward "encouraging monetary expansion for the purpose
of fostering sustainable growth in economic activity and employ
ment, " Actions directed toward the attainment of this objective
have been overt and substantial. Have they been sufficient? Has
the fear of reducing interest rates and encouraging accelerated
gold outflow made System operations more restrained than might
have safely or appropriately been adopted on the basis of domestic
considerations alone?
The review of economic developments indicates that economic
activity and employment have not grown, but rather show signs of
declining. There is even little evidence of monetary expansion,
the medium through which that desired growth was to be fostered.
Instead of declining, interest rates have actually risen during
the period since the adoption of the new directive, and credit
markets generally have had a feeling of tightness, not ease,
System actions to achieve its objectives have included:
(1) the release to reserves of over $500 million of vault cash
held by member banks; (2) reduction in reserve requirements at

10/25/60 -10
central reserve city banks in the amount of $125 million; and
(3) substantial open market operations designed to relieve
member banks of the need to borrow reserves and to keep them
provided with excess reserves so as to encourage credit
expansion. These operations entailed, first, a decline of over
$500 million in the System portfolio as reserves were supplied
through the other means, then an increase that exceeded $800
million, followed by another reduction of over $600 million
largely to offset a substantial increase in float. The net
result has been a reduction of over $300 million in the port
folio since early August.
These various System actions, together with an increase of
about $500 million in float, have supplied a net amount of about
$900 million in reserves since early August. These have provided
for a gold outflow of over $500 million, a reduction of about
$200 million in member bank borrowing to a minimal figure, and
a $200 million increase in required reserves to cover a deposit
expansion at member banks.
After adjustment for the usual seasonal growth, the money
supply expansion in the period has been at an annual rate of
about 2 per cent or less, seasonally adjusted. On the basis
of the new series of semi-monthly daily average figures, this
increase occurred largely in September. Preliminary estimates
for the first half of October indicate some decline on a season
ally adjusted basis. The money supply is less than $1 billion
above the low level reached in June and over $3 billion, or 2
per cent, below the peak reached in July 1959.
Since last spring, moreover, there has been little change
in the turnover of demand deposits at banks outside New York
City. At this level, velocity has continued to be about 6 per
cent larger than a year ago, when economic activity was held
back by the steel strike.
What the System's actions accomplished has been to provide
reserves to offset the large gold outflow and to take care of
exceptionally heavy temporary credit demands incident to tax and
other payments in September. These demands were unexpectedly
large, and it was helpful that the System's policy of ease made
it possible to meet them without excessively harmful strains on
the money markets. The objective, however, was to accomplish
more than simply to hold ground against diversionary difficulties;
some advance,was desired. It is possible that overcoming these
extraneous obstacles provided a feeling of accomplishment and
concealed the failure to achieve the real aims.
One collateral objective often stated has been not to induce
too great a decline in short-term interest rates. This has turned
out not to be a problem. In fact, interest .rates rose above the
low levels reached early in August. Reasons for this were

10/25/60 -11
elaborated at the previous meeting of this Committee. They
included the heavy demands on credit markets from tax borrowing
at banks, a substantial volume of new capital issues, and a
build-up in inventories by dealers in securities; the
concentration of excess reserves at country banks; the flow of
available funds into Treasury deposits instead of into private
hands; and the effect of the gold outflow in drawing funds
from the money centers.
City banks were called upon to supply the bulk of credit
demands, but at the same time showed little gain in deposits.
Although they reduced borrowings at the Reserve Banks, they
purchased Federal funds from others. Recently there have been
some indications of an increase in interbank deposits at city
banks, perhaps reflecting an increase in funds available to
country banks, but such a movement is at least partly seasonal.
Recently short-term rates have tended to decline again to
near the low levels of August. Medium and long-term rates,
however, continue sticky. In part this reflects the large volume
of new capital issues by corporations and by State and local
governments, and perhaps also the effect of the extension of
debt maturities through Treasury advance refunding operations.
The likelihood that the Treasury will continue to use every
opportunity to tap the long-term market in its future financing
may also be a factor in causing long-term investors to be
reluctant about bidding up the prices of bonds. Some
governmental bodies have withdrawn offerings in the hope of
obtaining lower rates later. After completion of the American
Telephone & Telegraph flotation being offered today, the
calendar of new issues both by corporations and by State and
local governments is much smaller than it has been. This may
relieve some pressures on capital markets,
The suggestion has been made that the System, by purchasing
longer-term securities, could aid in bringing about a desirable
downward adjustment in long-term interest rates and stimulate
borrowing in that area, and at the same time avoid reducing
short-term rates and encouraging the flow of funds abroad. Any
such operation would more than likely defeat the purposes for
which it was intended.
By far the main impact of System operations on interest
rates is exerted through the indirect multiple expansion process,
rather than through their immediate effect upon the particular
types of issues purchased. The eventual recipients of the funds
determine how they are used. What is desired is for investors to
place their funds in longer-term issues, not simply for the
Federal Reserve to buy them.

10/25/60 -12-
One reason why investors hesitate to do so is that the
existing margin between short-term and long-term rates is not
wide enough to induce them to undergo the risk of a possible
reversal in the trend of interest rates. To narrow that
margin by arbitrary intervention would add to their reluctance.
In particular, there would be even less confidence in the
existing level of bond prices and yields if it were recognized
that they were being artificially influenced by Federal Reserve
operations that would at some stage be reversed,
It is doubtful that monetary expansion can be encouraged
and economic activity stimulated if System operations are
conducted with a view to avoiding a decline in short-term rates,
or by artificial action designed to bring about a decrease in
long-term rates. It is normal and necessary in a period of
slack credit demands that a wide spread between short-term and
long-term rates develop as a result of the play of market forces.
During the immediate period ahead, the System faces a task
of considerable magnitude in meeting the very large seasonal
variations in reserve needs. In the next two statement weeks
the needs for reserves will aggregate nearly $900 million. In
the subsequent two weeks there may be a reverse movement of
close to $500 million, followed by another two-week drain of
over $900 million. Except for a relatively small variation due
to the large mid-December float increase, this level of reserve
needs will continue until the beginning of January. In that
month close to $900 million of reserves will have to be absorbed.
These needs are of such large magnitude as to permit the use
of massive doses of reserves through methods other than current
open market operations. Open market sales, and perhaps at times
also some purchases, will be needed at times to smooth out the
effect of the use of the more massive instruments. In view of the
uncertain state of the economy and the large liquidity demands
customary in the period ahead, there should be no worry about hav
ing large amounts of free reserves, particularly for brief periods.
Mr. Hayes commented that he was glad that Mr. Thomas had touched
upon the spread between short-term and long-term rates. He did not agree
with the thesis Mr. Thomas had presented, but the problem was a real one
and he hoped everyone would give the matter serious consideration.
Mr. Marget made the following statement regarding recent develop
ments in the London gold market:
From the amount of headline space given this last week to
the spectacular developments in the London gold market, it is

10/25/60
-13-
clear that those developments are regarded by the financial
journalists as something which is, or should be, of very great
concern to the monetary authorities of the United States. The
general reaction seems to have been one of initial shock, with
some passing away of the initial shock effects as the London
gold market calmed down a bit. But there has unfortunately
also been a widespread lack of understanding as to just why one
should have been shocked by these developments, and apparently
just as little understanding of the issues involved in a
weighing of the alternative courses of action to be taken in
the face of developments of this kind.
If one is to judge by the newspaper accounts, and the kind
of inquiries directed to us by the writers of those accounts,
the shock derived from the apparent conviction that the emergence
of a premium in the free gold market above the official price at
which the U. S. Government is prepared to buy and sell gold
freely to foreign monetary authorities "for the settlement of
international balances or for other legitimate monetary purposes"
may fairly be regarded not only as ipso facto proof of a large
scale flight from the dollar but also as an inevitable prelude
to a raising of the official dollar price of gold (that is, a
devaluation of the dollar). On this, one can only wonder whether
the shock would not have been less, and the conviction apparently
underlying that shock might not have been shaken, if the
journalists had taken the pains to point out that this is not
the first time in the post-war period that gold has sold in the
free market at a substantial premium above the official U. S.
dollar price; and that in the previous periods this kind of
situation neither reflected a large-scale flight from the dollar
nor was followed by a devaluation of the dollar. Specifically:
in the free gold market in Switzerland (Zurich), for the greater
part of the calendar years 1948 and 1949, the price of gold
ranged between $40 and $50 an ounce; and in the free gold market
in Paris, during the same period, the price ranged between $45
and $55 an ounce. There is no evidence whatever of a "flight from
the dollar" during this period, On the contrary, the "flight,"
to the extent there was one, was just as much into dollars as into
gold; and it is hardly necessary to labor the point that, among
the currencies that were devalued in 199, the U. S, dollar was
not included.
The second element of shock that seized commentators on
the developments of the past week seems to have derived from
astonishment, not to say indignation, that the U. S. monetary
authorities, confronted by a situation which, in the eyes of
these commentators, necessarily suggested an impending

10/25/60 -14
devaluation of the dollar, did not rush in to sell gold in
London, if necessary in massive quantities, in order to wipe
out the premium above the official U. S. price, and thereby
discourage all speculation on the dollar's future. Here again,
one can only wonder whether the shock and indignation at this
"passivity" of the U. S. authorities would have been so great
if memories had carried back to the earlier period to which
I have referred. For there was at that time no such selling
action by the U. S. authorities, on even a modest-to say
nothing of a massive--scale; the price in the free gold market
remained quite high, as I have reported, for an extended period;
it fell sharply toward the end of 1949; it rose again, in both
Paris and Zurich, in 1950 and 1951, to a level between $40 and
$45, and then declined fairly steadily until, in 1954, the
premium virtually disappeared altogether. And all this, I
emphasize again, without any selling, massive or otherwise, in
the free gold market by the monetary authorities of the United
States.
I need not take the time here to emphasize further what the
critics of our "passivity" in the face of the developments in
the London gold market seem to have carefully refrained from even
mentioning; namely, that if there are risks to the U. S. dollar
in the existence of a free market premium over the official U.S.
price of gold, there are also very great risks, of a material as
well as a "psychological" kind, in the taking of a commitment to
supply a speculative market-currently, perhaps, very narrow, but
potentially of much broader dimensions--with whateveramounts of
gold may be necessary to keep a premium from emerging. It is
much more to the point to look more closely at the probable
consequences of a continued policy of non-intervention, on the
assumption--which may or may not be realized in fact--that a
significant premium over the official U, S. price will continue
to prevail in the free gold markets, and even to increase in
amount, with the price of gold reaching the $50-$55 range we saw
in the late forties, and possibly even higher levels.
It should be quite clear that the consequences of this kind
of development have virtually nothing in common with the
consequences that would face a country which--like Canada, say
has a flexible exchange rate, if that flexible rate were suddenly
to depreciate in terms of foreign currencies and the monetary
authorities were unwilling to intervene in order to prevent or
moderate such a depreciation. In that case, all export and import
prices would be immediately affected, and the effects on the
economic structure of the country's foreign trade, and therefore
on its whole economy, might be very great indeed. In the case

10/25/60 -15
of a premium on gold in free gold markets above the U, S.
official price, on the other hand, there is literally no
effect "whatever on our commodity price structure, and
therefore none whatever on our foreign trade.
The only consequences that are involved here are possible
consequences in the field of capital movements. It is possible,
that is to say, that the existence of a high, and even rising,
premium on gold in the free gold markets might encourage
speculators to move their dollars abroad into the countries in
which these gold markets are located. Just how long such a
movement, if it started, would continue, of course no one can
say. Speculative bubbles do burst, and when they do the
consequences could be much more chastening than any losses
incurred as the result of selling by a monetary authority on a
scale of which no one was certain, except that it was almost
certainly not unlimited in amount or duration. But there is
no doubt that, while it lasted, this speculative outflow of
capital would be added to that outflow of capital which already
bulks so large in our balance-of-payments position; and to that
extent it would add to our current worries.
It is of some importance to agree, however, as to the nature
of the worries that would be thus created. The central point
here is that, under existing international monetary arrangements,
these U. S. dollars flowing abroad become claims on our gold
stock to the extent that they end up--as they may be expected to
end up-in the hands of foreign monetary authorities. The
question then becomes: on what kind of scale may we expect
that these foreign monetary authorities will convert into gold
the "capital-flight" dollars accruing to them under the conditions
we have assumed?
It is, I think, not unreasonable to assume that the monetary
authorities of the world--unlike the speculators who are assumed
to have started the capital outflow in the first place-have a
clear enough understanding of what will happen to the international
monetary mechanism, in whose stability they, too, have a very
great stake, if they were to set in motion without adequate cause
massive withdrawals of gold from the country that is acting as
the world's principal banker. But is equally reasonable to assume
that these same monetary authorities will not hesitate to effect
such withdrawals if they think that they do have adequate cause.
And that "adequate cause" would be found in a conviction that
the government and the people of the United States were unwilling
or unable to adopt those policies and actions, within and outside
of government, which must be pursued if the balance of payments
of the United States is to be brought into reasonable equilibrim
and kept there,

10/25/60 -16
I tried, at the last meeting of this Committee, to indicate
the nature and dimensions of the balance-of-payments problem of
the United States as it now confronts us. Its seriousness need
not be exaggerated; but neither can it be minimized. It is
unhappily true that we still have a long way to go before we can
say we have solved it. It is to this that our attention must
continue to be directed, not to the spectacular developments in a
highly speculative market, for which the most that can be said,
perhaps, is that these developments may have served to awaken to
an appreciation of the seriousness of our balance-of-payments
problem some of those who would still say that the people who
have been stressing the importance of that problem since 1958
have simply been seeing ghosts.
Mr. Hayes presented the following statement of his views on the
business outlook and credit policy:
I can think of few occasions in the last three or four
years when it was more difficult to decide just what are the
most appropriate specific techniques of monetary policy for current
circumstances, domestic and international. We have recognized
right along, ever since our balance of payments became seriously
adverse in 1958, that although domestic considerations must be
our main concern, we could not ignore the international implica
tions of our actions. It so happened that during much of that
time our policies were well suited to both domestic and inter
national conditions--but this has no longer been true during much
of 1960, and last week's gold episode should serve as dramatic
evidence that we are dealing with a complex and sensitive problem
with respect to our international financial position. Undoubtedly
one of the causes of the gold speculation has been fear that this
country might resort to unduly loose monetary and fiscal policies
in an effort to combat recessionary tendencies.
Turning to the domestic scene, we find that while business
is still on a high plateau, this plateau has begun to sag, largely
because of inventory adjustments. The economy has lost momentum
in recent weeks. Among the specific discouraging elements in the
picture are the September slump in housing starts and mortgage
applications, the leveling of capital spending, lower retail sales,
and declines in manufacturing employment, average hours worked,
and labor income. However, caution, rather than outright
pessimism, is the predominant mood of business and consumers, and
there is no evidence yet of any strong retrenchment in production
or any disorderly program of inventory reduction. Recent
statistical data show relatively small changes and fewer than
usual contradictory currents. Yet there are wide differences of

10/25/60 -17
interpretation in terms of the future course of business. From
our own policy viewpoint, it seems to me unnecessary to choose
now from among these divergent forecasts. It seems sufficient
to recognize that business is sufficiently soft, unused resources
sufficiently large, and prices sufficiently stable to warrant
our seeing to it that ample credit is available, at reasonable rates,
for all legitimate needs.
The record of actual bank credit expansion has been encouraging
in recent months. Largely because of heavy bank purchases of
Government securities, the growth of total loans and investments
was far above average both in September and in the third quarter.
A sharp increase in Government deposits and time deposits has
prevented this rise in bank credit from being reflected in a
comparable rise in the money supply. But there is a good chance
that it will lead to an enlarged money supply in the fourth
quarter. Meanwhile, total nonbank holdings of liquid assets are
showing good gains, as is the liquidity of the banks themselves;
and we have provided the banks with record levels of total
reserves and nonborrowed reserves.
There is less cause for satisfaction when we look at the
level of interest rates and the shape of the yield curve. It
might be argued that long-term rates are still at too high a
level to be appropriate for the current state of business,
particularly with residential construction declining and business
spending on plant and equipment leveling out. But of considerably
greater importance, at least for the present, is the fact that the
sharp decline in bill rates earlier this year-and resumed in the
last few days--has doubtless been a significant factor in the
serious deterioration in the balance-of-payments deficit in the
third quarter.
It seems to me that the balance-of-payments deficit, with
all of the complications which may accompany it in the way of gold
sales and loss of confidence in the dollar, confronts all Americans
with an extremely serious if not almost intractable problem. This
seems doubly true when we reflect that there are some signs of
leveling in the European boom, which may mean less support from
Europe for our exports during the coming year, All of this argues
strongly for our avoiding further overt measures of monetary ease,
such as a discount rate cut, unless they are clearly called for by
the state of the domestic economy--and I do not think they are at
present. It also argues for our trying actively to avoid driving
short-term interest rates to lower levels than those now prevailing.
The imminence of the Treasury's refunding program and of the
national election also suggest the wisdom of our avoiding any
overt or dramatic move.
The period immediately ahead raises some problems for open
market operations, inasmuch as reserve projections indicate a

10/25/60 -18
need for substantial injection of reserves, whereas bill rates
have already been moving down rather sharply and the volume of
90-day bills in the hands of dealers is relatively small. While
I would hope we could continue about the same general policy of
ease we have been following, I believe we should place major
emphasis in the next four weeks on the aim of avoiding lower
bill rates or even of encouraging somewhat higher rates. This
objective should, I think, take priority over both the feel of
the market and the maintenance of any given level of free
reserves. (Fortunately we have succeeded in getting the market
to pay a little less attention to swings in free reserve
statistics than formerly.) With this major objective in mind,
it might be well to broaden our open market purchases to include
short-term securities other than bills, even though the available
supply of such securities is probably not very great. A further
release of vault cash or a narrowing of the central reserve city
differential in reserve requirements might also be a way of
avoiding the impact effect of System purchases on the bill market
and would probably be construed by the public as one more step
in an orderly long-term program rather than as an overt move of
general credit ease.
Beyond this, I think we should remain especially alert to
developments in the long-term capital markets. It may be that
the present heavy atmosphere will clear up once the current
American Telephone and Telegraph financing is out of the way,
particularly if the Treasury refunding is kept out of the long
term area. But if congestion still remains, this may prove to
be one of those comparatively rare occasions when the Committee
should give serious study to the possibility of limited
operations in the longer end of the market to clear the air and
encourage a lower rate level. I am not advocating a decision
today on such action; but I do think it would be well for every
member of the Committee to reflect in the next few weeks on our
oft-repeated assurance to the public that we are always prepared
to consider exceptional cases when such action might be warranted.
The present conflict between domestic and international aims is
perplexing enough to suggest that no stone be left unturned in
our efforts to resolve it.
As for the directive, I would like to see it include some
indication that we recognize an unusually difficult problem with
respect to reconciling domestic and international objectives,
Perhaps some clause such as the following could be added to
clause (b): "while taking into consideration current
international developments."

10/25/60 -19-
Mr. Johns said that in looking at the business situation he found
little to offer encouragement. The search for favorable elements was
becoming increasingly difficult, and some of the factors cited as favorable
in certain resumes did not stand up too well on detailed analysis, From
the point of view of the domestic situation, therefore, the language of
clause (b) of the present directive seemed appropriate. In fact, this
directive and the directive that immediately preceded it appeared more
appropriate now than when they were originally adopted. Accordingly,
he felt that reserves should be made readily available to the banking
system, thus making it possible for the banks to bring about monetary
expansion and encouraging them to do so. It was difficult to see how
this could be done to any considerable degree without some lowering of
interest rates. He said he was not convinced that monetary policy is
ineffective as an antirecessionary measure and that he felt its use
would be desirable in the present circumstances, thinking in terms of
contributing both to economic recovery as a domestic objective and also
to mitigation of the balance of payments and gold problems by limiting
the depth and duration of the recession.
Mr. Johns indicated that he was inclined to agree with Mr. Thomas
concerning the probable effects of attempting to provide reserves by
purchasing securities outside the short-term area. He was not sanguine
that it would be possible to purchase longer maturities in any significant
quantity without considerable effect on the bill rate. However, he would
like to experiment, and this appeared to be a situation in which

10/25/60 -20.
experimentation might be justified. The arguments with respect to the
so-called "bills only" policy had been going on for a long time and it
might be desirable to collect some empirical evidence. It was clear
from the projections that substantial quantities of reserves would have
to be supplied for seasonal purposes, to say nothing of cyclical needs.
He would like to see seasonal needs supplied liberally and additional
reserves made available to encourage monetary expansion, as provided
in the directive.
Mr. Johns said that he would be reluctant to insert in the
directive any reference to the balance of payments or to the international
problem, not because he did not think that a problem existed but because
he thought it would be advisable to avoid advertising the Committee's
concern.
In response to a question, Mr. Johns indicated that if it were
decided to conduct transactions in securities other than bills, his
thought would be to experiment along the maturity curve.
Mr. Patterson reported that such Sixth District information as
had become available since the previous Committee meeting showed about
the same picture as national data. The latest statistics could be used
to support either the contention that the country had been in a recession
for several months or that the present situation was merely a pause, with
a recession pending. In no way did the news point to an impending upswing,

10/25/60 -21
Mr. Patterson went on to say that the rate of insured unemployment
in the District did not show the usual seasonal improvement during
September, which suggested that a decline probably occurred in nonfarm
employment. Only one State (Alabama) had thus far reported actual
employment figures for September, but these showed a further slight
drop after seasonal adjustment. Construction employment was below a
year ago in all District States except Alabama and Tennessee, where
the number of construction workers was about the same. In September
the number of workers employed on farms in the District was substantially
higher than in August, but the total was 5 per cent below the year-ago
level. A recent report showed relatively little change in the labor
situation in the District's 16 major labor markets, the only recent
change being the addition of the Birmingham area to those classified
as having a substantial labor surplus. The low operating rate of the
steel industry was, of course, the principal reason, and the closing
last Saturday of two more open-hearth furnaces would idle several
hundred workers. Chattanooga and Baton Rouge also were listed as
areas with a substantial labor surplus. A member of the Reserve Bank's
research staff who visited six of the largest textile mills in Georgia
found that activity had slackened somewhat recently and, with the
order position having weakened in comparison with earlier in the year,
further curtailment seemed likely, Generally speaking, however, none
of the operators seemed pessimistic; they looked for some pickup in
activity in the next few months.

10/25/60 -22
The rough measure of housing starts available from seasonally
adjusted residential building permit data indicated that the rate of
decline in District housing activity had closely paralleled that of
the nation, and August data on outstanding mortgage commitments of
savings and loan associations in Alabama, Georgia, and Florida offered
little hope for a revival in home building activity in the months
immediately ahead. In the Tampa-St. Petersburg area, which had a large
inventory of unsold homes earlier this year, mortgage commitments were
at a very low level, and such commitments were down sharply from year
ago levels in Orlando and Miami. In the Miami area the number and
volume of mortgage foreclosures, while still relatively low, had been
sharply higher in 1960 than in 1959.
Retail sales, bank debits, bank loans and investments, and
deposits provided about the same picture as nationally, Mr. Patterson
said. Fortunately, farm activity was at a high level in most parts of
the District as the fall harvest season reached its peak. The large
cotton crop in Alabama, combined with the large tobacco crop in Georgia
and Tennessee, the peanut crop in Alabama and Georgia, and the rice
and sugar cane crops in Louisiana were pushing farm output to a record
high. Lower prices were removing much of the enthusiasm generated by
the abundant crops, but income for the year should be close to last
year's level when the receipts were counted.

10/25/60 -23.
Mr. Bopp said that the staff portrayal of national developments
was indicative of developments in the Third District. The economy
of the District showed no evidence to support anything other than a
pessimistic view. Data on employment, production, and construction, and
the latest survey of capital expenditure plans all pointed in that
direction. As to the financial situation, the reserve positions of
banks had shown some tightness at times, and city banks had been
borrowing Federal funds,
Mr. Bopp then commented that at the meeting of the Philadelphia
directors last Thursday the directors felt that the deterioration of
the business picture warranted additional moves toward ease. They
would have voted for a change in the discount rate if he had so
recommended, but for several reasons he did not recommend a change.
A discount rate reduction would create additional pressure on short
term rates, which would be undesirable in the light of international
developments. Also, the ease in the money market had not thus far
spilled over to the capital market, which remained sluggish, and the
Treasury financing suggested maintenance of an even keel in the absence
of compelling circumstances. Nevertheless, if conditions remain
unchanged, he could not assure that the directors would not vote to
reduce the discount rate at their next meeting.
Mr. Bopp commented that this was a difficult period in which
to express judgments, or to form them. However, domestic developments

10/25/60 -24
seemed clearly to call for greater ease. Because of the balance
of-payments problem, which argued against lower money market rates,
and the sluggishness in the capital market, the circumstances
suggested that an exception to the policy of maintaining an even
keel before, during, and after a Treasury financing and also to the
policy of refraining from entering the long-term market might be
warranted. A considerable amount of reserves would have to be
provided in the period ahead, and the purchase of longer-term
securities would coincide with the program of meeting reserve needs.
On the question of maturities, he tended to concur ith the view
expressed by Mr. Johns. Operations should be such as to indicate
that this was clearly an exception to the Committee's operating
policies, although perhaps not in maturities too close to those of
any new securities that the Treasury might offer. The problem of
timing was important, but after examining the arguments pro and con
it was his conclusion that the weight was on the side of going ahead.
Also, since an exception to the normal operating policies would be
involved, he felt that a statement probably should be made in order
to avoid misunderstandings, although he recognized that the prepara
tion of such a statement might present difficulties.

10/25/60 -25-
Mr. Fulton said there was little cheerful news from the Fourth
District, where economic activity had continued to decline for some time.
Although construction, other than residential, was being maintained sur
prisingly well, this factor did not provide the fillip for which the
District was hoping. Auto sales were up quite a bit in the past three
weeks, which was a hopeful sign, but it was not known how long the level
of sales could be maintained. Department store sales had been maintained
rather well except for some weakening in the past week, but insured
unemployment had risen contraseasonally and now stood at the highest
level of the year, a level higher than in the 1953-54 period.
Mr. Fulton said that he was told that steel orders for November
were lower than for October, and that no pickup was in the offing. Some
furnaces were being taken out of production. Takings of the automotive
industry were running about 70 per cent of expectations for sheet and
strip, and about 80 per cent of expectations for bars. Because of the
large overhang of 1960 models, the auto manufacturers probably would
drastically reduce output, and what would happen at that time was a
matter of much concern to the mills. There appeared to be some slackening
of the boom in Europe, and foreign steel was being pressed on the United
States market. Of 49 District economists who expressed an opinion recently,
six thought that economic activity was on a plateau while 43 thought that
the country was in recession.

10/25/60 -26
Mr. Fulton said he was not satisfied with the degree of decline
in free reserves recently. Float fluctuations had been counteracted by
the Desk, which in his opinion was not wholly necessary, and this had
reduced free reserves to a point lower than he would like to see them.
In his view reserves should be supplied freely, but the constant reduction
in bill yields inhibited any massive action through purchases in that
area. A reduction of reserve requirements, or at least action on vault
cash, might relieve the situation more effectively than by going into
operations in the short-term market, since a more permanent and broader
foundation would be provided for the banks than by injecting funds through
the market in New York. In summary, he would like to see free reserves
increased through action that would not have a direct impact on the
rapidly declining bill rate. He would not favor reducing the discount
rate at this time or making any change in the directive.
With reference to the earlier comment by Mr. Patterson that
Baton Rouge had been declared an area of substantial labor surplus,
Mr. King noted that this area was not affected by the previous recession.
Mr. King then indicated that Mr. Bopp had expressed his (Mr. King's)
views effectively. As to the discount rate, he expressed doubt that a
reduction would stimulate activity to any extent, for essentially it was
a matter of people having to decide whether they wanted to go ahead with
their plans. Then, too, a change in the discount rate would exert
additional pressure on the bill rate. As to Account operations, he agreed

10/25/60 -27
substantially with the position stated by Mr. Bopp and previously by
Mr. Johns. He would not be inclined to change the directive at the
present time.
Mr. Shepardson commented that thus far everyone seemed to be in
agreement that this was a difficult situation. Looking at the domestic
problem, the international problem, the Treasury financing, and the
situation as a whole, he was inclined to feel that this was a time to
try to hold quite steady. The System should maintain a condition of
ease, and should provide necessary reserves, but he questioned the
wisdom of flooding the market with reserves at this time. He doubted
whether this was the moment to make a change in either the directive or
the discount rate.
Mr. Robertson referred to a portion of the draft of policy record
entry for the Committee meeting on October 4, 1960, which stated that it
had been the consensus that open market operations should continue to be
conducted along the lines of supplying needed reserves readily, avoiding
seasonal strain on bank reserve positions, and resolving doubts on the
side of ease, with the feel and tone of the market to be emphasized more
than statistical guidelines. It seemed to him that such a course was
appropriate, that this was not a time to be tinkering with the instruments
customarily utilized by the Federal Reserve, and that instead this was a
time to adhere to the principles in which the System believed. Accordingly,
he would not agree with the comments that had been made about going into

10/25/60 -28
longer-term securities. He was not inclined to favor the suggested amend
ment to clause (b) of the directive and would prefer to continue the directive
in its present form. He would not be concerned about bill rates to the
exclusion of pursuing anti-recessionary measures by making reserves readily
available and encouraging growth of the money supply. In summary, he would
continue to operate along the lines suggested by the consensus at the
previous Committee meeting, rather than be swayed from that position by
international events or by prospective declines in the bill rate. He
would not favor changing the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Mills said he joined Mr. Robertson in supporting a policy of
the kind indicated by the statement that the latter had quoted from the
draft of policy record entry for the October 4 meeting. Fundamentally,
he continued, the Federal Reserve System's objective is to exert its
influence through monetary policy to see that there is an availability
of credit sufficient to nourish the economy's existing needs. In his
opinion the System's policy actions had moved satisfactorily toward that
objective, and the supply of reserves made available to the commercial
banking System was adequate to support an expansion of credit. The fact
that the expansion of credit had taken the form of an increase in bank
investments in United States Government securities more than an expansion
of commercial, industrial, and other types of loans was the crux of the
situation, as it would seem to be a reflection of the recessionary
economic influences that had been noted so frequently in the discussion

10/25/60 -29
today. Since he assumed and believed that the supply of reserves and the policy
of the System had been adequate to support a seasonal expansion of credit and
to encourage a greater than seasonal expansion of credit, the fact that there
had not been exactly the type of seasonal expansion of industrial and
commercial credit that had been expected led to the presumption that there
was a lack of demand on the part of the commercial and business community
to employ the credit resources that the commercial banking system could
and would put at their disposal. If the banks cannot find the ordinary
outlets for their credit resources, the result is primarily that those
resources are employed in the Government securities market, thus exerting
a definite and increasing downward impact on short-term interest rates.
The other avenue in which the commercial banks might, under more ordinary
circumstances, expand their credit would be through their investment
portfolios, very possibly by increased acquisition of corporate securities
and by further increases in their holdings of municipal securities. How
ever, under a situation where the liquidity position of the banks continued
to be strained and loan-deposit ratios were high, it was unlikely that
there ould be an expansion of investment portfolios, especially in a
recessionary economic climate. This brought him to the point that a
superfluidity in the supply of reserves could not do more than force down
short-term interest rates at a time when, if wishful thinking could bring
it about, one would much prefer to see a more solid short-term rate.

10/25/60 -30
Events were moving so fast that it was difficult to set any
specific objective, Mr. Mills said. His feeling was that the Desk should
operate in the light of the credit factors that had been mentioned, to the
end of seeing that the supply of reserves available to the banking system
was comfortable but not superfluous, and that such a policy should be
continued until the outlook was more clear.
Mr. Leach reported that business activity in the Fifth District
continued at a level moderately below the peak reached earlier this year,
with signs of further weakening, Employment remained quite high except
for small declines in manufacturing, but man-hours worked had decreased
because of the reduced workweek in some industries, particularly textiles.
Insured unemployment dropped 1.5 per cent during September and the rate
was less than in the United States as a whole in every state except West
Virginia. Activity in the textile industry was fairly stable at the
reduced level of production prevailing since early September. Unless
there was an increase in orders, however, further curtailment of pro
duction might be necessary in view of the determination of producers to
hold down inventories and maintain a reasonable backlog of orders. The
industry was plowing back earnings to modernize machinery further in an
aggressive cost reduction program. Commercial and industrial construction
continued at a high level, largely because of commitments made several
months ago, but contract awards in the past four weeks were 17 per cent
below the previous four weeks and 13 per cent below the corresponding

10/25/60 -31
period last year. Bituminous coal production in September was only one
per cent above the level prevailing in the midst of the steel strike last
year, but there were some signs that the industry was holding its market
better than formerly. The tobacco crop was one of the best on record and
prices were up about 4 per cent. District farmers had sold over one billion
pounds of tobacco for more than $600 million--an increase of about 22 per
cent in gross revenues over the similar period of 1959. There had been
small erratic fluctuations in retail trade, but generally sales had been
running at a level only slightly below that of last year.
The positions of Fifth District banks continued to ease, Mr. Leach
said. Despite a larger than usual seasonal upswing in both business and
total loans in recent months, banks had expanded their investments more
than seasonally, cut their borrowings at the discount window, and
successively increased their net sales of Federal funds.
With respect to policy, Mr. Leach believed that for the next four
weeks the Committee should take no further steps to ease credit and that
it should guard against developments which might force bill rates down
further. Bill rates under 2 per cent, coupled with very large amounts
of free reserves, might well arouse fears here and abroad of an unduly
easy money policy without materially benefiting the domestic economy.
Excessive ease is not beneficial because it drives down money rates and
stores up trouble for the future. He might not be as pessimistic as
some, but he felt that the Committee had eased enough and that the present

10/25/60 -32
position was about right. Because of the bill rate, particularly, he would
not like to see further easing. The forthcoming Treasury financing called
for an even keel policy, but even if there were no Treasury financing he
would recommend continuation of present policy, with precautions against
excessively easy credit. In supplying needed reserves, he would purchase
other short-term securities as well as bills if bill purchases seemed to
be running bill rates down unduly, but he would wait a while before giving
serious consideration to the purchase of longer maturities. He would not
favor changing the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Leedy commented that if the System was going to get the job
done that it was supposed to do, it must exert some effect on long-term
rates. What the System had done thus far had not accomplished too much
in that direction. It seemed to him that the System did not yet know
clearly to what extent the differential between foreign rates, short-term,
and domestic rates, short-term, was contributing to the outflow of gold.
With central banks, as had been pointed out, building up their holdings of
United States Treasury bills, that factor did not seem to be of overriding
importance. While there were various conjectures as to what was underlying
the adverse flow of gold, until the System was in a position to appraise
more accurately the extent to which the rate differential was a major
factor he did not believe that the policy of supplying needed reserves
through the bill route should be too greatly affected by that consideration.
Needless to say, the System should be sensitive to the problem of the

10/25/60 -33
short-term rate and should attempt to do what it could to keep bill rates
from drifting lower, but on the basis of the projections some very substantial
reserves should be made available to the banking system and it seemed appro
priate for the System to provide them. When more light had been shed on the
subject than at present, the Open Market Committee should give consideration
to operating in securities other than bills, but, as he saw it, for the moment
that subject did not have to be decided. For the next few weeks, it seemed
to him that the Committee should undertake to do what it had been doing in
recent weeks, namely, to supply needed reserves while keeping an eye on
the bill rate. In this period he would not make any change in the directive
or do anything beyond meeting reserve requirements. While he would be
watchful and attempt to do whatever was possible on the bill rate, he would
not let the bill rate be the controlling factor.
Mr. Allen reported that at a meeting of area economists held at
the Chicago Reserve Bank on October 19, half of those present did not
consider the present trend a recession "worthy of the name." Their
sentiment was supported by the comment that a continuing heavy demand for
funds was keeping interest rates up, by the statement of the Sears Roebuck
economist that good sales results were being obtained when merchandising
was pushed vigorously, and by a manufacturer of capital goods who described
the current situation as a sideways movement with strength in some lines
balancing weakness in others. Of those who felt otherwise, that is, who
were far from complacent about the situation, a representative of the steel

10/25/60 -34
industry characterized the picture as "bleak." He was not only unhappy
about the present but pessimistic, based on order bookings, about the
months ahead.
Thus the views continued to be diverse, Mr. Allen said, without
a clear majority on either side. Department store sales in the District
showed up well one week and poorly the next. Automobile sales were making
a good showing at the moment; the daily sales rate in the first ten days
of October was 7 per cent above the same period last year and the strong
market was thought to have continued through the second ten days of the
month. However, much of the pickup came from "crash" sales of 1960 model
cars and earlier introduction of 1961 models, and most estimates for the
full month of October placed sales in the 500,000 to 525,000 area, 4 per
cent over October 1959. October production was estimated at more than
600,000 units. Based on the production and sales estimates, inventories
on October 31 would be about 950,000 cars, of which 1960 models should
be less than 200,000. An inventory of 950,000 would be an all-time high
for that date, the closest to it being 607,000 on October 31, 1959.
Although loans at Seventh District banks increased in the three
weeks ended October 12 by $95 million, against $56 million in the same
period last year, whereas loans at all weekly reporting banks in the
country dropped more than $800 million, the large free reserve position
which was permitted to develop had had its effect on District banks.
Daily average borrowing at the discount window dropped to $10 million

10/25/60 -35
in the week ended October 19, and almost none of the borrowing was by city
banks, which were able to fill their needs easily and cheaply in the Federal
funds market.
Mr. Allen said that he would not favor any further move in the
direction of ease at this time. He would not change the directive or the
discount rate. Mr. Marget's concluding comment at the meeting three weeks
ago, to the effect that the range of flexibility of monetary policy was
limited by the balance of payments situation, was a sentiment with which
he (Mr. Allen) agreed. Moreover, apart from the balance of payments and
considering the domestic economy on its own, so far as that was possible,
he felt that monetary policy had been directed in early and substantial
fashion to doing what was in its power to do and that further action at
this time would be needless and excessive. Even if the pessimists as to
the business situation should turn out to be correct, monetary policy had
in his judgment made its play and in sufficient degree. On the other hand,
if the Committee's judgment differed from his, and the Committee wished to
provide additional reserves, his suggestion would be that the Board consider
a further step toward equalizing the reserve requirements of central reserve
city and reserve city banks by lowering the current requirement for central
reserve city banks, since they seemed to be under the greater pressure at
this time.
With regard to the suggestion that the Account deal in securities
other than bills, Mr. Allen felt, like Mr. Robertson, that the present

10/25/60 -36
situation was not one which was appropriate for experimentation. He was
in complete agreement with the statement made by Mr. Thomas on this score.
Mr. Deming reported that good agricultural conditions in the Ninth
District had led to income figures running ahead of a year ago. Relative
to the United States as a whole, however, he was not sure that the District
was quite as well off as two years ago. In a recent survey of expectations,
the attitudes expressed by people in various sections of the District
corresponded closely with agricultural developments.
Turning to policy, Mr. Deming noted that comments had been made to
the effect that the System should avoid overt action at this time. He had
said this himself on previous occasions. It seemed to him, however, that
anyone viewing the pattern of actions taken by the System over the past
couple of months would have to conclude that the actions had been overt,
even dramatic. Thus, while he agreed that no overt action should be taken
on the discount rate, this merely meant that he did not want to reduce the
discount rate at this time. He would not object if overt action were taken
with respect to reserve requirements.
Mr. Deming said he had thought earlier that the System should be
able to supply seasonal reserves without putting further appreciable
pressure on short-term rates. What he had thought on this point, however,
did not seem to be borne out by what was happening. Since he believed
that the System should supply seasonal reserve needs, and be mildly
generous in its appraisal of such needs, he would make this the first

10/25/60 -37
order of business and downgrade the priority on preservation of short-term
rates. It might be that the supplying of reserves, at least in part, could
be accomplished by reserve requirement reductions and that there would then
be a better chance of preserving short-term rate levels. As he saw it, this
would work best if the reserves that were freed went into longer-term
securities; in turn this prospect might be enhanced if reserves were given
to the country banks through the freeing of additional vault cash. He saw
no objection to reducing further the differential between reserve requirements
of central reserve and reserve city banks, but he did not think this would
help the short-term rate picture or that it would supply much in the way of
reserves. The step could be taken, however, as part of a necessary program.
With respect to open market operations, Mr. Deming said he would
favor going out into the longer range of short-term securities within the
framework of the Committee's present operating policy. This might have the
effect of taking some pressure off the very short-term rates. However, he
would not favor going out to the long end of the market at this time. He
would not favor changing the directive.
Summarizing, Mr. Deming said that he would supply reserves to meet
seasonal needs, being generous in the appraisal of those needs, and that he
would let short-term rates go down if necessary. However, if a lowering of
short-term rates could be avoided by technical measures such as action on
vault cash or moving to purchases of maturities up to fifteen months, he
would move in as many different directions as possible.

10/25/60 -38-
In clarification of his earlier statement, Mr. Hayes said that he
agreed with Mr. Deming's views on reserve requirements. He thought that
any change in vault cash provisions and in central reserve city reserve
requirements probably would be construed as a step in a long-range program
and not as an overt action.
Mr. Mangels said that although such Twelfth District data as had
become available in the past three weeks did not indicate great change, the
data were somewhat on the down side. Pacific Coast employment was down in
September, while unemployment had risen from 6.3 to 6.8 per cent, compared
with 5 per cent a year ago. Only two cities in the District, Sacramento
and Honolulu, were classified as having a balance in the availability of and
demand for labor. San Diego had recently been classified as an area of sub
stantial labor surplus due to cutbacks in aircraft production and a substantial
reduction in industrial construction since August 1959. Lumber output and
prices were down and inventories were high, with third quarter shipments
18 per cent below the third quarter of last year. Reflecting the importance
of the lumber industry in those areas, Oregon and Washington showed rates of
unemployment of 7.3 per cent and 8,7 per cent, respectively. Public works
construction in September was 10 per cent higher than in August, and steel
production was holding at 54 to 56 per cent of capacity. Department store
sales were unchanged; for the year to date they were about 1 per cent below
a year ago. Sales of automobiles had been picking up.
Mr. Mangels went on to say that loans and investments of reporting
banks declined in the three weeks ended October 12, while on the other hand

10/25/60 -39
there was an increase in deposits, both time and demand, with savings deposits
increasing almost $100 million. Borrowings at the Reserve Bank were virtually
nil; there had been some days when there were no borrowings on the Reserve
Bank's books. District banks, however, had been fairly heavy net purchasers
of Federal funds, and some banks reported that their positions were still
rather tight. A recent survey indicated that there had been a decline of
about 1/4 per cent in rates on business loans.
Mr. Mangels expressed the view that monetary policy had been quite
appropriate. In the past three weeks, he noted, the Federal funds rate was
under 3 per cent most of the time. Government securities dealers had adjusted
their heavy inventories, and some issues were in short supply. For the
period ahead, he would try to hold free reserves somewhere around $500
million, and he would not be inclined to go beyond dealing in bills at the
present time. If the System went into the longer-term market, those funds
might to a large degree land in the bill market anyway. He saw some merit
in the suggestion for an adjustment of central reserve city reserve require
ments, and he noted that the Board still had considerable leeway for the
release of vault cash. The Board might wish to give some thought to either
or both of those actions in the days to come.
After indicating that he would not favor changing the discount rate
at this time, Mr. Mangels suggested that the Committee might want to consider
amending clause (b) of the directive along lines that would provide for
encouraging monetary expansion for the purpose of cushioning adjustments and
encouraging increases in economic activity and employment.

10/25/60 -40
Mr. Irons said there had been no substantial changes in the Eleventh
District during the past three weeks although on balance the changes that had
occurred probably could be characterized as a slight sliding-off of activity.
While consumers appeared to have money--time deposits had increased sub
stantially--they were being cautious in their expenditures. Department store
sales had been moving somewhat along the lines mentioned by Mr. Allen, with
one week quite strong and the next week not so strong; for the year they were
about 3 per cent under a year ago. There had been no change in the crude oil
situation. The eight-day allowable basis was still in effect, and people
appeared to be getting rather accustomed to it. Even the oil people were
not as critical as they were a few months ago. Despite hail and excessive
rainfall in some areas, on the whole the agricultural outlook was reasonably
favorable. Employment, unemployment, and the industrial production index
had shown no significant change in the past three weeks.
Turning to the financial picture, Mr. Irons reported that District
banks had shown declines in loans, investments, and deposits during the past
three weeks, However, although total loans declined, commercial and industrial
loans increased rather substantially. Reserve positions were much easier than
a few weeks ago, and District banks had been net sellers of Federal funds,
with virtually no buying of such funds except on the part of one bank.
Borrowings at the Reserve Bank were accounted for almost entirely by a
group of banks in West Texas, reflecting seasonal requirements.
Mr. Irons agreed with those who expressed the view that the System
had taken sufficient action in terms of making reserves available. Excessive
ease would serve no useful purpose. Thus, while he would make reserves

10/25/60 -41
available for essential and needed bank credit and growth, he would avoid
undue ease. If he had any criticism of what the System had done in past
periods of recession, it was in easing so much as to force interest rates
down to low levels, particularly in the short-term area. He would like to
see the Federal funds rate in the range of 2-1/2 to 3 per cent and the
bill rate in the area of 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 per cent, and he would try to
avoid further downward pressure on the bill rate. He had a strong feeling
that there should be no change in the discount rate.
With regard to the directive, Mr. Irons said he was inclined to
favor the suggestion of Mr. Hayes because something of that nature would
simply recognize a fact. The System had been taking international develop
ments into account, the problem had been discussed in the press, and it
might be well to have on record that the Open Market Committee was giving
consideration to the international situation. On the other hand, he would
not favor any change in the directive that would point toward greater ease
on the domestic side of the picture,
With regard to the question that had been raised about Account
operations, Mr. Irons said he would favor operating within the limitations
of present operating policies, which indicated that the Committee would
operate in short-term securities, preferably bills. This might be an
occasion when the Account Management would prefer, due to the rate movement,
not to confine operations to bills. If the bill rate should go to 2 per
cent or lower and it was necessary to supply additional funds to the market

10/25/60 -42
through open market operations, he (Mr. Irons) would favor supplying those
funds through the purchase of such other securities as might be available,
within the limitations of the Committee's operating policies. On the other
hand, he would not favor going to the long-term area with the deliberate
intent of forcing down long-term rates. In his opinion, the domestic
situation had not reached a point that would call for such operations.
Mr. Erickson said that activity was still moving sideways in the
First District. The New England index of production was up almost a point
in August from July, and it was higher than in August of last year, and for
the past eight weeks electric power output had been running ahead of a year
ago, although not as much as nationally. Shoe production was at the best
level since March. Favorable construction totals in August had previously
been reported to the Committee, and there were no later figures available,
However, the Engineering News Record reported a 15 per cent increase in
construction contracts for September, the same as nationally. Through the
middle of October, department store sales were 3 per cent above last year.
The employment situation, however, was not good; insured unemployment was
still running well ahead of last year. The September survey showed no
change in the classification of any of the principal labor areas. The
September survey of mutual savings banks showed an increase in deposits
from a year ago of 4.8 per cent; the comparative gain had been increasing
gradually each month since May, when the increase was 4.4 per cent.

10/25/60 -43
Mr. Erickson went on to say that for the period ended October 12
commercial and industrial loans at weekly reporting banks were 5.5 per cent
ahead of last year and stood at the highest point since the week ended July
13. During the past three weeks District banks were substantial sellers of
Federal funds, and the use of the discount window had been more moderate than
at any time since he became associated with the Reserve Bank. One day last
week not a single bank was borrowing, the first time this had occurred in
fifteen years except on end-of-year and mid-year dates.
Mr. Erickson said he would favor no change in the discount rate.
He was rather intrigued by the suggestion of Mr. Hayes for a change in the
directive in view of the international situation; he was more concerned about
that situation than in the past and would like to see the change made.
Being in agreement with those who said that the easing accomplished thus
far had been sufficient, he would not favor more ease. Since it would be
necessary to supply reserves in rather massive quantities for seasonal
purposes, he would suggest that serious consideration be given to reducing
the reserve requirements of central reserve city banks. After the next
couple of weeks, he thought it might be appropriate to experiment with
operations in short-term securities other than bills, with the hope of
keeping the bill rate from going below 2 per cent.
Mr. Balderston said that he would favor a change in the directive
such as Mr. Hayes had suggested. The gold outflow was part of the total
problem; to ignore it would be unwise and might reflect on the System in

10/25/60
-44
the future. He would not like to see the discount rate reduced in view
of the impact of such action on the bill rate.
After noting that the primary problem was to decide what quantity
of reserves to feed into the banking system at this time, Mr. Balderston
reviewed certain developments since the first of the year. Member banks
had paid off their borrowings to the extent of about $900 million, nonbor
rowed reserves had increased about $1 billion, but total reserves were
approximately the same as at the turn of the year and also a year ago.
Despite the reduction in borrowings and despite overt actions taken by the
System, long-term rates had not decreased much, perhaps 10 per cent, the
money supply was at least $2 billion less than a year ago or at the turn
of the year, and banks were still illiquid. Since these results were to
him quite unsatisfactory, he urged that the System continue to press reserves
on the commercial banking system until such time as the banks were liquid
enough to make additional loans. The banks, he thought, would at first
invest the additional reserves, since many of them were out of bills and
felt illiquid. After replacing those bills, however, they would make other
investments and, as opportunities arose, they would make loans.
The question of how to proceed toward the indicated objective without
depressing the bill rate concerned him greatly, Mr. Balderston said. While
he felt that the Committee should instruct the Desk to use the range of $500
to $600 million as a free reserve target, he would favor using such means
as might be available to avoid depressing the bill rate below 2 per cent.

10/25/60 -45
Chairman Martin stated that his general thinking had not changed,
and that he could not get very pessimistic about the domestic picture. He
continued to feel that the biggest shadow was cast by the balance-of-payments
problem. Many, he thought, did not quite realize the magnitude of that
problem in terms of prices, cost relationships, and other factors. Accord
ingly, he would have no objection to changing the directive in the manner
suggested by Mr. Hayes.
As to the domestic situation, the Chairman said that if his premoni
tion was correct the System would have to be careful that it did not feed
fuel to the fires of pessimism by appearing to embark on a cheap money
policy. The System should take every step possible to be helpful to the
domestic economy, but it could not afford to have idle reserves just sit
ting around, for that would give the impression that the System had lost
sight of fundamental factors. Regardless of the tone and feel of the market,
he believed that when free reserves got to the $800 or $900 million level
such an impression began to be created, and it was an impression that might
be warranted. This, he noted, was in the realm of expressing a judgment.
The Chairman pointed out that a Treasury refunding operation was
under way, which suggested that within reason the System ought to follow
an even keel policy. He then said that he was impressed by the statement
Mr. Robertson had read from the draft of policy record entry reflecting
the consensus of the October 4 meeting, and that he did not see any good
reason to change the policy indicated by that consensus at this time. It
was essentially correct at the time, and it was correct now. However, when

10/25/60 -46
it came to the means of achieving the objectives, there appeared to be
differences of opinion,
While one might like to see the markets different than they are,
the Chairman continued, it is not easy to get the markets to perform in
the way that one might want them to perform. The System should not be
frozen in its policies, but he doubted the advisability of tinkering with
open market operations when it probably would not be possible to prevent
the bill rate from going down if the pressures were in that direction, or
to alter substantially the prices of long-term securities. In saying this,
he was expressing a personal judgment. As Mr. Johns had said, perhaps
empirical evidence was needed at some time. In his own view, however, this
would be a peculiarly inopportune time to gather such evidence, for it would
create misunderstandings in the market as to the System's attitude. In other
words, he questioned seriously whether this was an appropriate time to do
much in the way of experimentation unless it was felt that some really im
portant result would be achieved. There might be a question whether the
Committee should change its whole attitude on how to deal with the market,
but that was a procedural problem and he did not think this was the time to
resolve it. In this connection, he noted, however, that dealings in securi
ties within a maturity of 15 months would be within the scope of the
Committee's operating policies that had been in existence right along.
The Chairman commented that it was heard continually that all the
System had to do was to buy longer-term securities and sell bills, in order

10/25/60 -47
to make the bill rate go up and the longer-term rate go down. This was one
theory, but the theory was not necessarily sound in practice. Possibly the
Desk could acquire some long securities, while selling short-term securities,
and long-term rates would come down, but in his judgment that was improbable.
He questioned very much whether this was a course the Committee should be
pursuing, but in any event that was a longer-range consideration.
After commenting that he took quite seriously the comments made at
this meeting to the effect that the Board might be looking at reserve requir
ments, the Chairman remarked that he thought the System had been performing
well on monetary policy and that it had made a good record. Perhaps the
matter had not been presented well to the public, for there did not seem to
be general understanding, but the record nevertheless was good. The System
should be careful about taking the horse to water, pushing his head in the
trough, and drowning him instead of letting him drink.
In his view, Chairman Martin said, unless the balance-of-payments
situation could be gotten into better perspective, there would be a con
tinuing decline in the business picture domestically, and probably inter
nationally. One must pay his bills at some time, and that was the problem
with which the whole world was wrestling. Steps had not been taken that
would lead to the payment of the bills.
Chairman Martin said he came out in his thinking that he would have
no objection to changing the directive as suggested by Mr. Hayes and that
the consensus of the October 4 meeting, as read by Mr. Robertson, was ade
quate with respect to current policy. Although the System should do every
thing within its power to keep the bill rate in a reasonable relationship,

10/25/60 -48
he did not think the System had the power to control the bill rate under
present conditions. He would have no objection to operating in maturities
up to 15 months, or to having the Desk come in with concrete proposals for
something different if the results could be clearly seen, but the System
was dealing with forces that he thought were too big for it to control.
The same problem was involved in the gold outflow. No one could know what
the volume of purchases by speculators would be, and it might be that the
market could be controlled by feeding in a little gold, but in his opinion
the forces at work were bigger. Once anyone started down the path of trying
to make interest rates or to control them, desirable as that might be, he
was playing with a difficult problem.
The Chairman then reiterated his views regarding the directive and
the appropriateness of the consensus at the October 4 meeting as a policy
for the period ahead. There was a declining business picture, whether it
be called a recession or a rolling adjustment, but the economy was not
going over a precipice by any means. There was no sign as yet that the
decline had burgeoned into a major depression. There had been recessionary
tendencies since March, and that was when the System began to ease, so the
System's record had been well attuned to business developments.
Chairman Martin went on to say he could not evaluate whether more
money and lower rates would restore the building industry, but he questioned
it. He felt that such a course might do damage to a revival of the building
industry because some dealers were beginning to take a different look at the
situation, both from the standpoint of the design of houses and the money

10/25/60 -49
problem. That was something that must be taken into account, for such
adjustments might only be made more difficult. In his opinion, to put
these builders in a position where they would have to compete with people
who could get money for nothing would not stimulate the economy under
present conditions.
The Chairman commented that the System would have to take care of
seasonal needs and that it wanted the money supply to grow. It must pro
ceed in an orderly way, and he felt that the job was being done in an
orderly way.
The Chairman then inquired regarding the views of members of the
Committee concerning a change in the directive such as suggested by
Mr. Hayes.
Mr. Shepardson, who had indicated earlier that he would not be
inclined to change the directive, commented that the point had been made,
and he thought well taken, that the System in fact had been taking the
international situation into account. This was appropriate, he thought,
and therefore he wished to change the position he had taken with reference
to the directive.
Mr. Robertson said that he did not consider the matter too impor
tant and that he would have no reason to oppose the suggested change in
the directive.
The Chairman then inquired whether any members of the Committee
would want to be recorded as opposing the suggested change, and there were
no comments to such effect.

10/25/60 -50
At this point Chairman Martin referred again to the language pre
viously read by Mr. Robertson reflecting the consensus of the October 4
meeting, following which Mr. Hayes said that as he listened to the discus
sion today he got the impression that there was considerable concern
regarding the bill rate and a general hope that the System could avoid
driving the bill rate lower. He thought that that point probably should
be mentioned.
Chairman Martin said he would be glad to have that mentioned and
that personally he would like to see the short-term rate stay at 2 per cent
or above. He did not believe that anyone could disagree.
It was noted by Mr. Thomas that there had never been a time in
history when there were free reserves for any extended period and the bill
rate remained above 2 per cent, following which Mr. Hayes suggested that
the System would have to experiment with new techniques.
Chairman Martin said that perhaps this was so. Today, however,
he would put the matter on the basis that he would like to see the bill
rate stay at 2 per cent or above, but that he would not like to see open
market techniques used which involved going beyond 15 months, that is,
beyond the framework of present operating policies, for the purpose of
achieving a higher bill rate. In his opinion, such techniques would not
necessarily work.
Mr. Hayes said that what he had meant to refer to was the concern
expressed about not driving short-term rates lower, and Chairman Martin

10/25/60 -51
responded that it would be appropriate to have that comment included in
the minute record.
The Chairman then inquired whether any Committee members would like
to be recorded as favoring a change in open market operating techniques,
and Mr. Hayes said that although he would not necessarily favor going into
long-term securities now, he had sympathy with the views expressed by
Messrs. Johns and Bopp. He would have no great preference as to whether
the type of experimentation suggested by them should be conducted at the
present time or whether to wait until after the American Telephone and
Telegraph flotation and the Treasury refunding were out of the way and it
could be seen whether the long-term market had improved.
The Chairman then stated that apparently it was not necessary to
take a vote today on the question of a change in open market techniques.
Mr. Balderston suggested that mere repetition of a consensus as
to open market operations that seemed appropriate under conditions exist
ing at the time of an earlier meeting might leave the Committee open to
the charge of failing to give precise instructions to the Desk, following
which Mr. Johns commented that the concern about the bill rate seemed to
cut across what he had understood to be a rather clear consensus, that is,
that seasonal reserves should be provided freely, with some feeling that
they should be provided in excess of seasonal requirements. If, in the
process of supplying seasonal needs, the bill rate should go below 2 per
cent, he wondered whether it was intended that the Desk should stop
supplying reserves,

10/25/60 -52-
Chairman Martin said he had thought it was clear that the Desk
should supply reserves to meet seasonal needs regardless of the course of
the bill rate, if that was the only way in which the reserves could be
supplied. He inquired whether there were any further comments on that
point, and several members of the Committee stated that this was their
understanding.
Mr. Thomas noted that the question was one of providing reserves
beyond the requirements of seasonal expansion in order to stimulate monetary
growth. If free reserves were maintained over a period of time sufficient
to stimulate growth in the money supply, he predicted that the bill rate
would go below 2 per cent. Mr. Johns said he thought that was correct,
following which Chairman Martin repeated he had thought it was clear that
the decision would be to let the bill rate go below 2 per cent, if that
was necessary, in order to supply reserves.
Mr. Deming said that in thinking in terms of supplying seasonal
needs he had had in mind figures from the memorandum of the Board's staff
which indicated a need for about $1.3 billion of reserves, give or take
something in the light of developments. This would contemplate the main
tenance of a substantial level of free reserves, but he would not regard
such a program as going in excess of meeting seasonal requirements.
Mr. Thomas repeated that if, in addition to supplying seasonal needs,
free reserves were maintained at a level high enough to encourage more than
seasonal monetary expansion, he felt that the bill rate would go below 2 per
cent.

10/25/60 -53
Mr. Hayes said that, as he recalled the discussion, the majority
of those who commented today had expressed the strong hope that in accom
plishing the purpose of supplying seasonal reserve needs the bill rate
would not go below 2 per cent. He interpreted those comments as a hope
that the System might be able to use techniques, including operations in
securities other than bills or further releases of vault cash, that would
facilitate accomplishing the dual objectives.
Mr. Robertson commented that, as he understood it, the primary
objective was the providing of needed reserves. He interpreted the
comments on the bill rate as a hope that the supplying of the reserves
would not force the bill rate too much lower.
Mr. Hayes said he thought the comments reflected more than a
hope; that they reflected a suggestion that methods be explored of
supplying reserves without undue impact on the bill rate.
Mr. Robertson then said that if the maintenance of the bill rate
were to be set forth as the primary objective, he would be very much
opposed. On the other hand, if the matter were put in terms of a hope
that reserves could be supplied without having the bill rate go below
2 per cent, he would support such a statement.
Mr. Mills made the suggestion that the consensus of this meeting,
as prepared for the record of policy actions, be drafted in a form which
would make it clear that it was not merely a reiteration of the consensus
at a previous meeting, and agreement was expressed with this suggestion.

10/25/60 -54-
Mr. Shepardson commented that it seemed to be agreed that the
System should provide reserves to meet seasonal needs. However, as he
understood the comment made by Mr. Thomas, this raised the question
whether those needs could be supplied without at the same time maintain
ing a level of free reserves of, say, $500 or $600 million.
Mr. Thomas replied that seasonal needs could be provided at any
level of net free or net borrowed reserves, but that the question was
whether monetary expansion should be encouraged. If a policy were
followed that would maintain free reserves so as to encourage monetary
growth, he predicted that the bill rate would go below 2 per cent no matter
how the reserves were supplied. It was the effect of free reserves in the
market that would determine the bill rate, not what securities the Federal
Reserve bought or sold or what course it followed in supplying the reserves.
Mr. Shepardson then stated that at the previous Committee meeting
he had expressed the view, to which he still adhered, that the slack in
the economy at present was not due to a lack of availability of credit,
but instead to a lack of buying interest. This situation was not going to
be changed by pressing more reserves into the market. Therefore, while he
would not be averse to supplying what reserves were needed, he would not
be too concerned if the free reserve figure should drop somewhat. He would
be more concerned, in the period immediately ahead, if the System tried to
push too hard for expansion of the money supply. The money supply had not
increased as much as some would like, but funds had been going into savings

10/25/60 -55
and time deposits. As he saw it, there was not a lack of credit but a
lack of demand, and the availability of more credit would not help that
situation at the moment.
Mr. Mills said he believed instinctively that a forcing of reserves
into the market under present conditions would amount to pushing on a string
as far as providing any real stimulus to growth in the money supply was
concerned. The real stimulus would come only on those occasions when the
Treasury borrowed new cash through tax and loan accounts. When supported
by reserves, the deposits created in that way would remain in the banks in
the absence of pressure that would force the sale of securities by the banks.
Chairman Martin then said that he thought the Committee was in
substantial agreement on the policy to be followed. It was not in full
agreement on the techniques to be used, but he believed the general course
to be followed could be stated quite clearly in the record in a manner that
would be acceptable to everyone.
Mr. Rouse said he would interpret the discussion as meaning that
there should be free reserves at all times.
The Chairman replied that this was correct, and there was no indica
tion of views to the contrary.
Mr. Rouse said he also interpreted the discussion as meaning that
although no specific target was being suggested, the Committee would have
in mind somewhere from $300 to $500 million of free reserves.
Mr. Rouse then suggested that in view of the volume of open market
operations that was indicated for the next four weeks, the Committee might

10/25/60 -56
want to consider changing the portion of the first paragraph of the
directive which provides that the aggregate amount of securities held
in the System Account (including commitments for the purchase or sale
of securities for the Account) at the close of the date of the Committee
meeting in question, other than special short-term certificates of
indebtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary accommodation
of the Treasury, shall not be increased or decreased by more than $1
billion.
Chairman Martin suggested that the figure be changed from $1
billion to $1.5 billion, and no objection was indicated.
Mr. Rouse then referred to the discussion about dealing in securi
ties other than bills, and to the references that had been made to securi
ties having a maturity not longer than 15 months. In terms of a general
definition of short-term securities, he felt that two years was better than
15 months. The 15-month limitation is generally satisfactory for credit
purposes, but in the past has been applied only to repurchase agreements.
Mr. Mills commented that to go as far out as two years would permit
operations in Treasury bonds if they fell within a two-year maturity range.
By and large, the Committee had not operated in bonds, and he thought it
had been the sense of the Committee to confine operations to bills and
certificates. If the Desk were to go into notes and bonds, its operations
might convey an impression that the Committee would rather not offer.
Mr. Hayes said it was his understanding that a 15-month definition
would permit dealing in any securities maturing within 15 months, including

10/25/60 -57
notes or bonds, following which Mr. Thomas pointed out that there was
nothing in the area beyond one year not already selling at a rate below
the prevailing yield curve.
After some discussion based on that comment, Mr. Robertson
indicated that experimentation in the area up to 15 months would be
agreeable to him if such operations were deemed advisable by the Desk,
but that he would not go further and in any event would hold down the
volume of such operations.
Mr. Robertson also said that 15 months had been ingrained in the
Committee's thinking over the years, to which Mr. Rouse replied that he
had always thought in terms of 18 months or two years. The matter of
deciding on 15 months for loan purposes was something different. In his
view it might prove desirable not to tie the Committee' s hands at some
future date by adopting such a definition of "short-term" securities at
the present time.
Chairman Martin concluded the discussion with the comment that
he thought it was evident that some members of the Committee would feel
easier if operations did not extend to maturities beyond 15 months.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, it was voted unanimously to
direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
until otherwise directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (including
replacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities to
run off without replacement) for the System Open Market Account
in the open market or, in the case of maturing securities, by
direct exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary in the

10/25/60 -58
light of current and prospective economic conditions and the
general credit situation of the country, with a view (a) to
relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs of
commerce and business, (b) to encouraging monetary expansion
for the purpose of fostering sustainable growth in economic
activity and employment, while taking into consideration
current international developments, and (c) to the practical
administration of the Account; provided that the aggregate
amount of securities held in the System Account (including
commitments for the purchase or sale of securities for the
Account) at the close of this date, other than special short
term certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time
for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be
increased or decreased by more than $1.5 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one
or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such certificates held at
any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in
the aggregate $500 million,
Chairman Martin referred to the memorandum from the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York dated September 8, 1960, recommending that the Bank's
Market Statistics Department be authorized to furnish quarterly statistics
on the trading volume of individual Government securities dealers to the
Securities Department, and said that he would like again to defer considera
tion of this item. In this connection, he noted that the Secretary of the
Committee, who was not present today, had some observations on the matter.
No objection to Chairman Martin's suggestion was indicated.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee would be held in Washington on Tuesday, November 22, 1960, at 10:00 a.m.
The meeting then adjourned.
Assistant Secretary