A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, May 3, 1960, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bopp
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Fulton
Mr. King
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Leach, Allen, Irons, and Mangels, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Erickson, Johns, and Deming, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, St. Louis,
and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Brandt, Eastburn, Marget, Noyes, Roosa,
and Tow, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Koch, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Keir, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Hickman, Mitchell, Jones, Daane, Rice,
and Einzig, Vice Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Chicago,
St. Louis, Minneapolis, Dallas, and San
Francisco, respectively

5/3/60 -2
Mr. MacDonald, Assistant Vice President,
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
Mr. Willis, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston
Mr. Holmes, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meetings of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on March 22 and April 12,
1960, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report of open market operations covering the period
April 12 through April 27, 1960, and a supplementary report covering the
period of April 28 through May 2, 1960. Copies of both reports have been
placed in the files of the Committee.
With further reference to developments since the Committee meet
ing on April 12, 1960, Mr. Rouse made the following comments:
I should like to start off with a comment on the change in
the bank reserve situation since the time the Committee last met.
On April 27, at the close of the last statement week, required
reserves were $551 million higher than they were on April 11
and, at the same time, member banks were able to support this
with $250 million less borrowing from the Reserve Banks. The
figures involved in these calculations are tricky and I shall
not attempt to detail them. However, I feel satisfied, on both
an average and a day-to-day basis, that, as suggested be done
during the discussion at the last meeting, natural factors pro
vided the bulk of the reserves that enabled the banks to meet
the higher required reserves at the same time that they were
reducing their borrowing from the System. This is brought out
most clearly in the comparison of April 11 and April 27 figures,
as on an average basis the picture is somewhat obscured by the
special repurchase agreements to aid the dealers on Good Friday.
The action taken by the Committtee to assure Government
securities dealers of System support over the Good Friday week
end was of considerable help in restoring a better atmosphere
in the auction of the special April Treasury bills three weeks

5/3/60 -3
ago. And, while there was an element of good fortune involved,
in that market factors supplied fewer reserves than anticipated
over the week end, this assistance to the Treasury did not in
volve any undue ease in the money market. Although, without
System assistance, the results of the auction could have been
far worse as far as the Treasury was concerned, it is no secret
that the Treasury has been far from happy with its experience
in auctioning one-year bills, and the decline of the rate on
April 15 bills from the 4.60 per cent established in the
auction, with a stopout of 4.74, to close to the 4 per cent
level in a short time did nothing to reassure them on this score.
While on the subject of the one-year bills, I might mention
that the memorandum circulated to the Committee prior to this
meeting comments in detail on the swaps undertaken by the
Account to acquire $10 million of the July 15 bills. Since
this was our first operation under the authorization given by
the Committee and since the subject is to be reviewed later on
in this meeting, we felt that such a detailed description
might be helpful. In the future, however, if the authoriza
tion is extended, we would prefer to report further acquisi
tions of one-year bills on swaps on a more routine basis.
While they would be fully covered in the regular written reports
to the Committee, we would not normally expect to report them
in such detail.
Treasury bill rates moved somewhat lower during the interval
between Committee meetings, but there was very little change in
prices of Government notes and bonds, reflecting the Treasury
refunding of $6.4 billion securities maturing May 15 which is
currently under way. The Treasury's offering in this refunding
of a one-year certificate at 4-3/8 per cent and a five-year
note at 4-5/8 per cent has been well received by the market.
Rights were quoted at a premium at the market close last night,
and the when-issued certificates and notes were both quoted at
par and 2/32 bid to par and 3/32 asked. The Treasury decision
to grant rights to holders of the maturing issues was undertaken
reluctantly, and only after Treasury representatives had can
vassed the market on April 22. It is my own feeling that the
Treasury might have been able to refinance on a cash basis
without excessive difficulties, although there are always un
foreseen problems when an innovation is attempted. Moreover,
it would have been desirable for the Treasury to have had a
larger cash balance as protection against such contingencies.
I might add that one factor involved in the relatively generous
pricing of the new issues being offered was the Treasury's
desire to avoid large-scale attrition and to have the new issues
stand up well in the secondary market. Advisers to the Treas
ury suggested that attrition might be large. There also was

5/3/60 -4
some feeling in Treasury circles that pricing would have to
take into consideration the probability of some improvement in
the business outlook. I believe they had the pending release
of the McGraw-Hill survey particularly in mind.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the open market transactions during the
period April 12 through May 2, 1960,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Supplementing the staff memorandum distributed under date of April
29, 1960, Mr. Noyes made the following statement with regard to economic
developments:
The abrupt transition from winter to spring that took place
in a large part of the United States in April brought with it
impressive improvement in several current economic indicators.
Most impressive, perhaps, was the spectacular rise in sales at
department stores, which probably carried them to a seasonally
adjusted level close to the record 150 index of last July. Auto
sales also improved substantially in the first 20 days, and
scattered reports suggest that in the last 10 days they con
tinued in good volume. The fact that the Board's index of
industrial production will probably hold even, or decline only
one point, in the face of further cutbacks in steel during
April will be regarded by many as an encouraging sign.
The McGraw-Hill survey released on Friday, but widely cir
culated in advance, provided less tangible, but equally welcome,
evidence of underlying strength. Claims for unemployment
compensation declined a little in April, up to the week ending
April 23, but on the other hand they remained at a relatively
high level--a fifth more than a year ago. In fact, the employ
ment situation generally continued to be a major cause of con
cern in many areas, as employment, especially of blue-collar
workers, continued to lag behind expectations.
At the same time, first-quarter profits were generally re
garded as disappointing, and in the last few days the stock
market has slipped back to its March low--about one-eighth
below the January high.
Most of the other information that has recently become
available relates back to March or the first quarter. We know
now that diffusion indices based on leading indicators showed
sharp declines in March and that some dropped to levels that
have heretofore heralded major downturns. However, their poor

5/3/60
showing in one month, strongly influenced by comparison with the
peak of poststrike activity, is not too meaningful.
The early estimates of gross national product for the first
quarter, released by the Council of Economic Advisers, are
already subject to revision as more data for March become avail
able. Inventory data now suggest that the rate of inventory
accumulation was even larger than the $9 billion estimate-
perhaps nearer to $10 or $10.5 billion, thus narrowing the
small gap between the GNP estimates and the $500 billion gen
erally forecast. At the same time, this additional inventory
component in the first-quarter data diminishes the chances that
the second-quarter total will compare favorably, Should in
ventory accumulation drop back to a low figure, it is hard to pin
point expansive factors that would provide $7 or $8 billion of
additional expenditure, at annual rates, to replace it in this
quarter, since a month of curtailed activity in many lines,
especially steel and autos, has already gone by. Hence, even if
final takings expand somewhat in the current period, we may well
find ourselves with a GNP at midyear that does not show sub
stantial improvement over the first quarter. Furthermore, the
prospects for substantial improvement in the employment picture
are not too good. Present rates of unemployment have persisted
despite much smaller additions to the labor force than
demographic factors indicated. Thus, we may see more than the
usual seasonal increase in those seeking employment this summer,
and unemployment rates may push upward in the absence of con
siderable strengthening in the demand for workers.
It is too early yet to expect any reflection of the some
what improved availability of mortgage funds in residential
building, and the decline in new construction put in place in
April was largely a reflection of the lower levels of starts in
February and March. However, the rise in residential vacancies
in the first quarter to a new postwar high was widely noted, and
may temper considerably the pace of any upward shift in resi
dential building, even if mortgage money continues to ease.
Most of the bearish information relates back to the earlier
part of the year, and quite a bit of improvement may show up in
the April data that become available in the next few weeks.
With the coming of spring, some sense of euphoria seems to
spread across the country, but there is little or no real
exuberance. The situation is certainly not one that could be
characterized as a burgeoning economy, straining at the leash
of limited credit availability, and the prospect of developments
that could be so characterized, in the near-term future, seems
very slight.

5/3/60
Mr. Thomas presented the following statement with regard to the
financial situation:
Available information indicates that economic activity is
showing a fairly satisfactory pickup from the first-quarter
lull, but without exuberance. This is evident in the financial
area. In some respects financial developments since the last
meeting of this Committee represent a reversal of trends then
in process. Interest rates, which were then rising following a
sharp decline since January, have again turned down. Total
loans and investments of city banks increased more than usually
in April, after showing a declining tendency for some time. The
increase, moreover, reflected substantial additions to bank hold
ings of Government securities and loans on securities, while
business loans declined somewhat--contrary to previous trends.
Deposits at banks--both demand and time--also increased. As a
result, previous indications of an upturn in the money supply
seem to be confirmed.
These shifts reflected greater bank and less nonbank
participation in the Treasury financing during April than in
other recent operations. City banks acquired a major portion
of the new two-year notes, a substantial amount of the one-year
bills, and some of the long bonds. They also made a large
volume of loans to dealers in Government securities which in
turn substantially increased their positions. The large bank
and dealer acquisitions, together with the marked upturn in
bank deposits, indicate that the prolonged increase in nonbank
holdings of Government securities may have halted or slackened-
at least temporarily. This means that recent Treasury issues,
underwritten by banks and dealers, yet need to be distributed
to other investors.
Federal Reserve operations played an important role in
facilitating the flotation of the Treasury issues. Substantial
purchases of bills in the market and liberal repurchase accommoda
tions to dealers have provided additions to the reserve supply.
In contrast to recent trends, required reserves increased much
more in April then had been projected on the basis of the
estimated increase in Treasury deposits at banks and the usual
trends in other deposits. In addition, Easter currency demands
absorbed more reserves than had been expected, but in the past
week much of this has returned. Continuation of float at a
higher level supplied some reserves. Member banks thus were
able to meet the substantial increase in required reserves and
at the same time reduce somewhat further their borrowings at the
Reserve Banks.
Discount rates on Treasury bills in the past three weeks
have fluctuated somewhat at below the levels reached on April 12,

5/3/60
at the time of the auction of one-year bills, but above the low
points to which they dropped in late March and early April.
Yields on Treasury bonds, after rising in the first two weeks
of April, have steadied. Yields on seasoned corporate bonds
have remained comparatively steady, but those on State and local
government securities have risen some in the past week. Although
new issues have been in moderate volume, some of them have moved
rather slowly into hands of investors and in some cases offering
prices have had to be reduced. Indications are for a continued
moderate volume of new issues in May.
Exuberance in the stock market, which appeared in late March
and early April, was brief, and stock prices are back close to
the lows of the year. Liquidation of stock market credit seems
to continue slowly.
With respect to current and future Federal Reserve opera
tions, it can hardly be said that the System is following a
particularly restrictive policy. Although the discount rate re
mains at 4 per cent, reserves have been made available and member
bank borrowings have declined to a moderate level with a lessening
in the number of borrowing banks. Rates on Treasury bills--except
for the new one-year issue--have remained below the discount rate.
Question may be raised as to how much, if any, credit restraint
is likely to be needed in the near future.
Although economic activity is at a relatively high level and
will probably continue its expanding trend, the expansion is
likely to be moderate and the threat of a boom in this country
does not seem to have much basis, although boom conditions exist
in some other countries. There are many structural elements in
the current economic situation of this country that may serve to
prevent or limit any revival of speculative tendencies, without
the need for credit restraint. Some of them are familiar, some
have been pointed out in the reports presented to the Committee,
others are perhaps less obvious.
The elimination of the Federal Government deficit has re
moved one of the most important factors working toward inflationary
tendencies, but there can be speculative or other unsustainable
developments without a deficit. Evidences of excess capacity and
of some elements of slack in the economy, however, may help to
dampen any such tendencies. Growth in the labor force has not
kept pace with the population of working age, yet reported
unemployment continues larger than at some previous times of high
activity. The margin is not large, but there are growing signs
of successful efforts to economize on the use of labor. The high
level of wages and other labor costs encourages such attempts.
This tendency is likely to continue.
There is also an increased margin of unused productive
capacity in industrial plant and equipment. Capital expenditures

5/3/60 -8
are expected to increase moderately in the year ahead and will
add to that capacity equipment that will help to lower costs and
further reduce the need for labor.
Building activity generally has been reduced from the high
levels reached in 1959, and there may be some doubt whether a
building boom of great proportions could be regenerated even with
an increase in the availability of financing and lower long-term
interest rates.
The poststrike inventory expansion quickly revealed that
stocks of goods were larger than necessary under the circum
stances. Although the adjustment to a more normal rate of
inventory accumulation may have ended or be approaching an end,
only moderate stimulation should be expected from this source
in the near future.
Requisites for further maximum and sustainable growth in
the economy rest primarily in the selling and pricing policies
of business. Demands for the increased supply of goods and
services that industry is capable of producing will need to be
stimulated by attractive pricing and by offering goods that
the public wants. It is to be hoped that growing competition
at home and abroad will foster the adoption of such practices.
The necessary adjustments, however, will not be easy to make in
view of past rising price trends. Failure to make them, and
any tendency toward price increases, will be more of a damper
on the economy than a basis for expansion.
In the meantime, until demands are stimulated, business
profits are not likely to increase much. Continued increases
in wages and other labor costs may offset the effects of
increased productivity and exert a squeeze on profits. For
this reason there should be little reason to fear the resump
tion of speculative tendencies in the stock market.
Interest rates in the past year reached a level that has
encouraged saving and attracted savings into fixed-interest
investments. The current level of saving is probably adequate
to meet the credit and investment demands that will develop
this year. Not only does the current level of interest rates
relative to returns on equities put a damper on stock prices,
but it may also restrain spending for consumption and encourage
certain types of investment. At present there seems to be no
reason to force interest rates any higher.
Slackening in the rate of growth in the money supply was
necessary during the past year in view of the rapid expansion
of the preceding year and the large volume of liquidity being
supplied by the issuance of short-term Government securities to
finance the deficit. Although these liquid assets are still
outstanding, their growth has ceased, and some expansion in
money might safely be resumed.
One limitation on credit and monetary expansion, other
than the availability of reserves, rests in the reduced

5/3/60
liquidity positions of banks. Although no satisfactory
standards are available to measure the possible impact of this
factor, there has clearly been a significant change,
This enumeration of existing structural limitations on
exuberance is not intended to convey the impression that
adequate growth will not occur. Nor should it be interpreted
as suggesting that monetary and fiscal policies should be re
directed toward increasing buying power or stiumulating credit
expansion. It is designed merely to indicate that official
restraints on the use of credit may be less necessary in the
immediate future than they have been at other times of high
activity in the postwar period. The situation may change
quickly and may even now be in the process of changing.
Presently available information and analysis, however, sup
ports the view that the current somewhat more relaxed monetary
policy is not inappropriate.
Mr. Marget commented as follows regarding the balance of payments:
At the last meeting of this Committee, I ventured to
characterize as "impressive" the improvement in our balance of
payments that has taken place since the low point around the
middle of last year. There is nothing in the news of the last
three weeks to warrant a modification of that judgment. The
export figures for the month of March, which are now available
in their preliminary form, did not, to be sure, show a "zoom"
(as an unfortunate headline in the New York Times suggested)
above the already relatively high annual rate of $18-1/2
billion which was represented by the January-February average;
but the March figures do show that the relatively high January
February average rate was being maintained. It was on the basis
of an assumption that there would in fact be "no great change in
exports in March" that I ventured to suggest, last time, that our
merchandise export surplus for the first quarter of 1960 would
turn out to be at an annual rate of about $3 billion--" just about
double the $1-1/2 billion average that we showed during the
second half of 1959," which itself was $1-1/2 billion above the
low point (a virtual zero surplus in merchandise trade) in the
second quarter of last year.
This degree of adjustment in our balance of payments has
taken place within a cyclical environment which, as I have been
emphasizing, has been of just the kind to favor such an adjust
ment: a strong demand situation abroad, which is favorable to
our exports, and a relatively less intense demand situation here,
which would work in the direction of moderating the rate of
growth of our imports. But I think that it would be wrong to
minimize the significance of the adjustment on the ground that
the improvement we have been witnessing has been "merely
cyclical"; and this for several reasons.

5/3/60 -10
In the first place, it must be remembered that, in some
quarters, our balance-of-payments problem itself has been
regarded as a "merely cyclical" problem, which came to us be
cause of a special cyclical constellation and could be expected
to disappear when that cyclical constellation changed, as it has
in fact been changing. This is a view which I do not happen to
share. But it is certainly true that a cyclical element was
involved in the deterioration of our balance of payments; and my
own view is that a failure to recognize this fact was respon
sible for some of the excessively pessimistic views that were
being expressed when our balance-of-payments deficit was at its
maximum. If, now, we have been witnessing developments which
attest to our ability to cope with the cyclical part of our
problem, this ought to be a source of at least moderate satis
faction.
For--and this is my second point--we should not have been
able to deal as well as we have thus far dealt with the cyclical
part of our problem if in fact our general competitive position
were as hopelessly bad as some of the more extreme pessimists
had implied. A strong demand situation abroad means an
opportunity to sell abroad, if and to the extent that we are
competitive; it does not provide a guarantee that we shall be
able to sell abroad regardless of our products' price, quality,
and terms of delivery.
Thirdly, there is independent evidence that our producers
have not been simply sitting back, with their old lines of wares
spread out before them, waiting for a new surge in the cyclical
tide of foreign demand to pick them up at the point at which
they were left when the earlier tide of foreign demand had ebbed.
The most publicized example of this, of course, is the auto
mobile industry, which, after what was undoubtedly too long a
period of complacency, finally managed to respond to the
challenge of foreign competition in a way which has already
clearly affected automobile imports into this country, will
affect them even more when the plans for the still smaller
cars are implemented, and will undoubtedly be able to affect
our exports very significantly, in the degree that we succeed
in inducing foreign countries to put no greater obstacles (such
as tariffs, quotas, and a whole battery of discriminatory
devices) in the way of their nationals buying American auto
mobiles than we now put in the way of our nationals buying
foreign automobiles. The automobile is only one example, even
if it is the most striking one. Our competitive progress in
the field of jet planes is a second example. A third is being
provided, surprisingly enough, in the field of electrical
equipment, where a combination of a change in pricing policy
and a more flexible practice of procurement of components from

5/3/60 -11-
abroad when that is economically preferable has produced some
unexpected results in a field in which it was supposed we were
hopelessly outclassed.
These developments, surely, are more than "merely cyclical."
But what has to be stressed, as always, is that improvements of
this kind, cyclical or noncyclical, do not come about in a
vacuum with respect to general economic and monetary policy. If
we have had the degree of success we have had in meeting the
cyclical problem, for example, that is because our general
economic and monetary policies, oriented though they necessarily
were in the direction called for, in the first instance, by the
requirements of the domestic economy, have also been compatible
with the requirements for continued progress toward a better
balance in our international accounts. We are still quite a
distance away from a position of "reasonable equilibrium" in
our international accounts; it may very well be that, in our
further progress toward such a position, we shall have to pass
through cyclical phases which will be much less favorable than
the current phase obviously is. It would not do to allow our
recent successes, in fields relevant to the problem of balance
of-payments adjustment--and they have certainly been successes
as far as they have gone--to blind us to the hazards that still
have to be traversed on the long road ahead of us.
Mr. Treiber presented the following statement of his views with
respect to the business outlook and credit policy:
The most recent business information indicates the proba
bility of a moderate expansion in business activity. The
principal uncertainty is with respect to the rate of increase
and the timing of the expansion.
Consumer spending shows signs of recovering from the after
effects of the steel strike and the adverse effects of the un
usually unfavorable weather conditions in many parts of the
country.
Despite the substantial increase in inventories in the
first quarter of 1960, due in large part to the restocking by
automobile dealers and steel processors, inventory-sales ratios
in manufacturing and trade continue near record low levels.
While the rate of inventory accumulation will necessarily
decline, especially if inflationary psychology continues low,
it seems likely that consumer demand will call for some further
additions to inventory for some time ahead.
There are increasing signs that the decline in residential
building may be bottoming out. Mortgage funds are becoming
more readily available; this is likely to provide considerable
support for home building, as demand remains basically strong.

5/3/60 -12
State and local government expenditures are likely to
continue their gradual rise. Federal Government spending is
expected to expand during the second half of 1960.
Increased plant and equipment expenditures with a high
portion for modernization will create a demand for a variety
of goods and services,
With the labor force and productivity rising, a sub
stantial reduction in unemployment seems unlikely.
The price picture shows little change, even though the
consumer price index and the wholesale price index both rose
in March; in each case seasonal influences in the food area
accounted for a large part of the rise.
Municipal and corporate bond markets in recent weeks have
been more responsive to the better business outlook than the
stock market. The flow of municipal securities has increased.
There has been some hesitation in the corporate bond markets
with investors expecting somewhat higher yields on new issues.
After a slow start, corporate securities floated during the
first quarter of 1960 came close to the total of the corre
sponding period a year ago. First-quarter corporate earnings
reports are on the whole favorable, although not uniformly so.
The large liquidation of United States Government security
holdings and net repayments of security loans in the first
quarter of 1960 reduced total bank credit substantially. Yet
loans other than security loans rose twice as much as in 1959,
although much less than in 1956.
Bank liquidity positions continued to tighten with loan
deposit ratios up and short-term liquid asset ratios down.
On the other hand, the nonbank public had higher holdings of
liquid assets in relation to GNP than in any quarter during
1959.
The demand upon banks for business loans has continued to
be strong all this year, although it has not been as great as
some exuberant observers expected at the beginning of the year.
Bankers with whom we have talked are expecting the demand for
business loans to increase over the coming months.
The Treasury is in the midst of a large refunding opera
tion.
These various factors counsel no significant change in
credit policy. We see no reason to change the discount rate,
the directive, or open market policy. We think it is no
longer necessary to resolve doubts on the side of ease.
Mr. Johns said he would not discuss developments in the Eighth
District because he saw nothing in them that was significantly different

5/3/60 -13
from the analysis of national affairs that had been presented. His
appraisal of the situation was, he hoped, implicit in the discussion of
policy that he proposed to present. Mr. Johns then made the following
statement:
Open market operations since the last Committee meeting
have moved quite clearly, I think, in the direction indicated
by the Committee. At the April 12 meeting the Committee's con
sensus called for more reserves to be supplied to the banking
system and for the Desk to have authority to permit net borrowed
reserves to reach lower levels in order to provide the indicated
increase in bank reserves. Data available to me show that total
reserves (seasonally adjusted) have risen by about $500 million
from the week ended April 13 to the week ended April 27. While
this was being accomplished, net borrowed reserves declined from
an average of $205 million for the week ended April 13 to an
average of $82 million for the week ended April 27.
The rate of increase of total reserves over the past two
statement weeks was doubtless greater than would be desirable
over a long period of time. In the perspective of the last four
months, however, such an increase may be regarded as having
properly offset in part the decline in reserves since the first
of the year. The adjusted reserve total for the week ended
April 27 is approximately the same as the seasonally adjusted
total for the week ended February 3, but is still roughly $200
million below early January. In the sense of getting back to
where we were three months ago, this increase in reserves may
be considered, in my opinion, as eminently satisfactory.
In the presence of an economic situation currently lacking
boom characteristics, I would recommend that total reserves
continue to be increased at a moderate rate over the next three
week period. Within the framework of existing operating pro
cedures, this recommendation again carries with it the further
recommendation that the Manager of the Account continue to have
authority to permit the net reserve.position of the banking
system to reach whatever level may be necessary to achieve a
continued increase in total reserves.
The disparity between the discount rate and the bill rate
which has prevailed since January continues to place an
unnecessary burden on open market operations in the sense that
more massive injections of reserves may be required in order
to bring about an increase in total reserves. Accordingly,
I would favor a reduction in the discount rate at the earliest
opportunity. At the moment it occurs to me that the amount of
the reduction should be half a point.

5/3/60
As time goes on and business developments are observed,
I am brought around to a position stated by others at previous
meetings, namely, that clause (b) of the directive needs to be
revised so as to eliminate the appearance of single-minded
emphasis upon an assumed necessity to guard against excessive
credit expansion. I think a guard against too little credit
expansion now merits at least a share of the spotlight. But
since a policy directive which wars alike against too little
and too much is hardly more than a timeless platitude, I am
loath to suggest a directive in such terms. However, if the
guard against excessive credit expansion is merely deleted
from clause (b), there is left only another timeless and self
evident intention, that is, to foster sustainable growth, etc.
Therefore, I venture to suggest trying to implement the idea
of "fostering sustainable growth in economic activity and
employment" by saying in the directive what the Committee ex
pects the Management of the Account to do toward that end at
this time. This, of course, will have to await the end of the
discussion today and the derivation of the consensus, but if
the consensus should be, for example, along the lines of the
consensus three weeks ago, it would be appropriate, I think,
to say something like "fostering sustainable growth in economic
activity and employment by bringing about moderate growth in
the total reserves of the member banks." I, for one, would
be willing to add to this the further statement: "with a view
to encouraging moderate growth in the money supply."
Mr. Bryan presented a statement substantially as follows:
A number of new figures are available for the Sixth Dis
trict. On the downside, on a month-to-month basis, are
nonfarm employment, manufacturing employment, construction
employment, bank debits, average weekly hours, manufacturing
payrolls, and--of the same significance--insured unemployment
is up. Year-ago comparisons in these series tend to be less
favorable than they were; and in at least one important series,
namely, average weekly hours, both the monthly and yearly
comparisons are negative.
On the brighter side is a sharp rebound in department store
sales, with some increase in retail sales generally. Also
comforting is an increase--for the second successive month--in
construction contract awards: a circumstance that would be the
more encouraging if awards, even so, were not 22.5 per cent
below a year ago.
Most of these figures, of course, apply to March and were
substantially affected by weather. The business contacts of the
Reserve Bank, and some spot checking, indicate a bit of improve
ment in April in both business and business sentiment. However,
our research department has attempted--on a rather informal

5/3/60 -15-
basis, to be sure--to determine if weather can be accounted the
sole cause for the uninspiring figures from the District. The
conclusion is that the weather explanation does not fit all the
facts and that bad weather, although greatly important, has
been only a partial explanation of economic events in the Sixth
District in the first quarter.
As a sort of "straw in the wind" I will note that our April
directors meeting, for the first time in my memory, received
as a result of the Jacksonville Branch meeting a genuinely
pessimistic report on the Florida outlook. There can be no
doubt that construction in many of the areas of the State has
been overdone, and the construction industry is faced with a
considerable contraction. Moreover, while the number of
tourists in the State seems to be at an all-time high, the
expenditure per person is generally said to be notably lover-
a point apparently confirmed by banking figures. I note this
Florida matter because, while the State may not bulk large in
the national economy, it bulks extremely large in the Sixth
District: a large part of the District's good showing in
the postwar period has resulted from Florida's expansion.
Speaking to the national economic situation:
It does not seem to me that there are clear signs of an
economic downturn. By the same token, I see no signs of out
of-hand economic boom; no speculative fever; no effort of the
economy to expand at an unsustainable rate. Rather the
contrary: the economy seems to have unutilized and growing
supplies of manpower, materials, and plant capacity; and I a
inclined to think that we may be in the period of slow relative
growth generally characterizing the ending phase of an ex
pansionary cycle.
Whatever may be the case as to our position in the cycle,
however, the one clear fact, it seems to me, is that the economy
is not now expanding at an unsustainable rate. My own conclu
sion is thus that we can justify a policy that keeps bank credit
expansion under control, lest we kindle again the inflationary
expectations that have heretofore done the country so much
injury; but we must supply the reserves necessary to permit a
sustainable growth in the economy.
Thus far in 1960 reserves of the banking system are less
than they were at the end of 1959--whether on an actual or a
seasonally adjusted basis, and allowing for no growth of re
serves at all. Accordingly, I think the banking system, and,
through it, the economy, has been under great and, until just
recently, increasing restraint. It is clear that I think this
restraint has been inappropriate and dangerous.
In the three weeks ending April 27 required reserves have
increased massively--by approximately half a billion dollars-
and total reserves have increased by an equal amount. Of the

5/3/60
-16-
increase in total reserves, a minor amount has derived from the
net of System purchases, repurchase agreements, and discounts;
and the larger part by far has derived from other factors. What
has happened in effect is that we have permitted float and such
like items to supply the increase in required reserves.
Attention is called to the derivation of the reserves for
a single reason. We shall need to pay close attention to our
knitting in the next several weeks, lest the reserve gains we
now exhibit disappear in the same way they came. Attention is
called to the increase in required reserves to point out that it
has occurred in considerable part because of the banks' participa
tion in the Treasury's April financing, and to suggest that,
unless we supply reserves, the banks will be compelled to divest
themselves of investments and to extinguish the derivative
deposits--which is, in my judgment, precisely what we do not
want.
Now, with our recent accomplishments in increasing reserve
supplies, where do we stand? Well, although in the weeks just
past there has been a large increase in total reserves, using
daily average figures, there is still a deficit in total reserves
of the banking system, through April as compared with December,
of $362 million--and on a seasonally adjusted basis allowing
for no secular growth of reserves at all. Allowing for even a
modest growth from December, seasonally adjusted, the reserve
deficiency, of course, is even greater.
It seems to me that the economic and banking situation
calls for us resolutely to repair this deficiency--in a minimum
order of magnitude approximating $350 million, and then, naturally,
to consider where we go from there. I would myself greatly pre
fer to see this Committee give a very simple instruction in terms
of daily average total reserves for the month of May, reconsid
ering the instruction, of course, at our next meeting. Since
the money market repercussions of an attempt to repair the
reserve deficiency all at once might be undesirable, I would
like to see the Desk instructed to aim in May for daily average
total reserves of $150 million more than the daily average of
reserves in April of $18,090 million. There is in May a usual
seasonal decline of reserves slightly in excess of $50 million.
Accordingly, this instruction, if adopted,--and with the full
understanding that the Desk is not expected to produce a miracle
by hitting the target right on the nose--would have the effect
of repairing the reserve deficiency by about $200 million in a
one-month period.
On the other hand, if the Committee prefers the infinitely
more complex medium of instruction--I refer to net borrowed
reserves--I would like to see the target set in a range of
$0 to $100 million, with it being understood that the Desk has

5/3/60 -17
latitude to go below this range into the free reserve area in
case required reserves show a tendency to decline.
I see no reason to move the discount rate down at this
time. I would prefer to see a further reduction in the banks'
indebtedness to the System before taking action on the discount
rate. I see some merit in the questions that have heretofore
been raised, and that Mr. Johns raises at this meeting, with
respect to the directive.
Mr. Bopp summarized the Philadelphia Reserve Bank's spring survey
of Third District manufacturers regarding plans for plant and equipment
expenditures, which indicated total estimated expenditures of $410
million, up 15 per cent from expenditures last year and up 8 per cent
from expectations last fall. The estimated total would represent an
all-time high. On an industry-by-industry basis, the results of the
survey fairly well paralleled other surveys except for a significant
decline in petroleum expenditures, Philadelphia manufacturers antici
pated that employment would be up about one per cent in the second
quarter but would return to present levels by the end of the year, and
views on production were similar. Whereas last fall most of the respond
ents expected some increase in inventories, at present as many expected
a decline as an increase.
With further reference to the Third District, Mr. Bopp said that
activity was fairly satisfactory except for steel production. Employment
was better than a year ago, particularly in the hardest-hit areas of the
District. Builders reported more people looking at homes than at any
time in their experience, but sales were said to be sluggish.
Mr. Bopp expressed some concern about capital market developments,
as reported on page 25 of the staff memorandum on the economic and
financial situation distributed under date of April 29, 1960. In view

5/3/60 -18
of the continuing amount of unemployment and the extent of idle produc
tive capacity, the slow movement of corporate and municipal bonds through
the capital market was not reassuring. While he would not suggest that
the Federal Reserve move into the longer-term market, Mr. Bopp felt it
would be appropriate to try to prevent any appearance of tightness in
the short-term market. For the next three weeks, it seemed to him that
the System should make reserves available to take care of any deposits
arising out of loan expansion so that the banks would not have to
liquidate Government securities or come to the discount window. He
would have sympathy with the views expressed by Mr. Johns on the policy
directive, and possibly on the discount rate except for the fact that a
period of Treasury financing was now in process. In the circumstances
it would not seem appropriate to act on the discount rate at the next
meeting of the Philadelphia directors, but action might seem in order
after the ensuing two-week period.
Mr. Fulton said that the only good news from the Fourth District
was in connection with consumer takings. Department store sales were
strong over the Easter period and at the end of that period were 5 per
cent ahead of last year. The department store people felt that the
level of sales reflected a desire for goods more than unusual circum
stances due to weather conditions and the late Easter date, and they
anticipated quite a good year as far as consumer takings were concerned.
New car sales also had increased quite sharply. Insured unemployment
was down throughout the District generally, except in some cities closely

5/3/60 -19
connected with the steel industry. Building activity picked up sub
stantially in the Cleveland area in April, and to a lesser extent in the
Cincinnati area, with the improvement largely in nonresidential con
struction.
Steel operations continued to decline, Mr. Fulton said, and for
the District this week's estimate was 72 per cent of capacity against
74.8 per cent for the nation. The steel mills reported that cancellations
were high and that they were shipping more than was being ordered. Even
with the pickup in auto sales, it was felt that orders were going to be
low almost into September, and that a substantial amount of inventories
apparently was being worked off. Reports from the foundries that supply
the appliance field were similar. The situation in the machine tool
industry was spotty, but new orders were looking up. In summary, the
steel industry felt that the low point had not yet been reached and that
the national rate might go below 70 per cent of capacity in this quarter,
with no material pickup until almost the fourth quarter. Shipments of
pipe and wire from foreign sources were said to be demoralizing American
production. However, there had been some increase in the shipment of
sheets out of the country because European countries apparently were
using more than their capacity to produce.
With regard to the financial picture, Mr. Fulton reported that
bank loans were up, savings deposits had reached an all-time high, and
borrowing from the Reserve Bank was moderate. He felt, however, that
the liquidity of banks had been reduced to such an extent that an in
crease in the availability of reserves would be quite appropriate.

5/3/60 -20
Accordingly, he would like to see the level of net borrowed reserves
reduced to around $100 million or less. He would favor postponing a
change in the directive and, temporarily at least, he would not be in
clined to adjust the discount rate.
Mr. King recalled that when he became a member of the Open Market
Committee about a year ago the economic indicators were generally point
ing upward. Today, however, the picture was different, and many of the
indicators were pointing downward. With reference to the unemployment
situation, he described how, at a plant in the southeastern part of the
country with which he was familiar, there had been a substantial
reduction in the number of employees along with a reduction in working
hours and management was now considering a further reduction of force in
order to increase working hours and retain the more efficient employees.
Mr. King recalled that earlier in the year he had expressed con
cern regarding the trend of corporate profits. Apparently, he said,
there was still need for concern, because it seemed clear from the
historical record that recessions are forecast by a continuing decline
in corporate profits. From a reading of the minutes of the Committee
meeting on April 12, he noted that apparently there was quite a bit of
concern about taking any action that would suggest doubt as to the
System's belief in the underlying strength of the economy. While that
was a point worth considering, he did not believe that a reasonably small
move in a direction of less restraint would cause the economy to go into
a tailspin. Instead, a failure on the part of the Open Market Committee

5/3/60 -21
to recognize the facts of the situation seemed more likely to cause the
economy to go into a downturn. While he did not believe that the
country was in a recession, he thought it possible that a recession
might develop in a reasonably short time. One problem, as he saw it,
was to destroy the idea that if the System moved in a certain direction
the whole economy was going to go in that direction. The psychology
seemed to be that when the System was exercising restraint the economy
was fine, and that when the System moved toward less restraint things
were going badly. It was important, he suggested, to destroy that kind
of thinking, and this seemed a good time to try to accomplish that
objective.
Mr. King said that he would be agreeable to supplying reserves
along the lines suggested by Mr. Bryan, although he did not comprehend
completely all of the details of Mr. Bryan's system. In terms of net
borrowed reserves, he would consider a range of from zero to $100 million
appropriate as a target.
Mr. King agreed with the view of Mr. Johns that it would be
appropriate to remove from the directive the phrase "while guarding
against excessive credit expansion." This was not of too great importance,
but it would indicate that the Committee was as alert to weaknesses in
the economy as to strength. He would be inclined to approve a reduction
in the discount rate of 1/2 point if a majority of the Reserve Banks
wanted to move on the rate.
Mr. Shepardson said that he had been concerned about a possible
recurrence of the fever that was in the air at the beginning of the year.

5/3/60 -22
However, it seemed to him now that the economy had passed that period
and today his views were much like those expressed around the table thus
far. In view of the lack of real strength in a good many areas and
definite lack of strength in other areas, perhaps the System should be
easing further than it had to date. There seemed to be a need for further
expansion of the money supply, or rather a rebuilding of the contraction
that had taken place earlier. Therefore, he would favor a further in
crease in the supply of reserves.
Mr. Shepardson felt that the point that had been made regarding
the directive was well taken, and that the phrase "guarding against ex
cessive credit expansion" could be eliminated. He had no wording to
propose, but would be willing to go along with the idea expressed by
Mr. Johns. As to the discount rate, it seemed to him that the time might
be approaching when the rate should be changed. Since the Treasury
financing would extend through a substantial part of the period until
the next Committee meeting, an immediate change in the rate might not be
appropriate, but, depending on interim developments, such action might
seem in order by the time of the next meeting.
Mr. Robertson commented that those who had spoken thus far
seemed to be putting all the weight on unfavorable factors when just as
many factors were favorable. As he reviewed the economic picture during
the past few months, he felt that the policy followed by the Committee
had been pretty nearly right, and he saw no reason at the moment to change
policy. He did not believe that this was a time for aking errors on

5/3/60 -23
the side of ease, although he would not advocate tightening or adding to
restraint. In his view, this was a time for the System to be almost
neutral, and thus be in a position to move in either direction. Looking
at the economic indicators, he felt the chances were greater that the
economy would move upward than that it would move downward. Conse
quently, although he would not seek greater restraint at the moment,
neither would he seek greater ease.
Mr. Robertson went on to say that for the moment he would not
favor a change in the discount rate. He might come to the point where
he would favor such a change in the relatively near future, but he was
not certain. Neither would he favor a change in the directive at this
time, for he felt that the System was still in a position of having to
guard against excessive credit expansion. Credit demands were heavy, and
apparently would continue to be heavy. As to the liquidity position of
the banks, he felt that the current situation was desirable because it
placed the System in a position where it could exert a greater impact on
the economy than would otherwise be the case. In summary, he would leave
things pretty much as they now stood for the forthcoming three weeks.
Mr. Leach said that economic activity in the Fifth District,
reinvigorated by a spring pickup in most retail markets and by the year's
first substantial batch of new orders received by mills for cotton cloth,
had continued at a high level. There was no evidence, however, that the
recent business improvement was more than seasonal. There were enough
soft spots in the over-all business situation to cause businessmen to

5/3/60 .24
pursue conservative purchasing and inventory policies and to view
prospects with cautious optimism. Circumspect policies were apparent
at the spring furniture market in North Carolina, which was marked by
good attendance, the shoving of many new lines, and considerable interest
on the part of dealers. Nevertheless, sales were not heavy. Dealers
apparently were unwilling to carry anything but the bare minimum of in
ventory since most items could be obtained quickly from manufacturers'
stocks and no price advances were anticipated in the near future. In
line with earlier estimates of increased capital outlays this year, con
struction firms reported that there was plenty of business; however,
profit margins of most contractors were down sharply. In fact, competi
tion among contractors bidding for a given job has been so severe in some
cases that successful bid prices were below cost estimates. Evidence
that pressures on member banks continued to be strong was provided by
higher than seasonal borrowings from the Federal Reserve Bank and by
the fact that Fifth District member banks were net purchasers of Federal
funds in each of the past three weeks.
With respect to policy, Mr. Leach said that he thought the Com
mittee was about where it should be and that he would recommend maintain
ing substantially the position achieved in the past three weeks, resolving
doubts on the side of ease. As to net borrowed reserves, he had in mind
a figure around $150 million as a benchmark. Such a level seemed con
sistent with current economic conditions, and he would not want it higher.
Now that loans and investments and required reserves were again expanding,

5/3/60 -25
maintenance of a fixed level of net borrowed reserves would presumably
mean purchases of securities to provide additional reserves to support
growth in the economy. In any event, the current Treasury financing
called for an even-keel policy for the immediate future.
Mr. Leach noted that he had spoken in the past in behalf of an
improved technique in handling the directive. Inasmuch, however, as the
old form was still retained, he had recommended at the last meeting
elimination from the directive of the expression "while guarding against
excessive credit expansion." Believing that the Committee should be
more flexible with respect to the directive, he would remove the expres
sion now, although its elimination would have been more timely three
weeks ago. He saw nothing in the remarks of Messrs. Noyes and Thomas
that called for guarding against a booming credit expansion in the
near future. He would not favor a change in the discount rate at this
time.
Mr. Leedy said that available Tenth District statistics indi
cated trends quite similar to national trends. Prospects for the winter
wheat crop continued to be good despite the severe winter weather; in
most parts of the District the condition of the wheat was reported from
good to excellent. As of the first of April, the Department of Agriculture
anticipated that the wheat output of the District this year would be
approximately the same as last year.
With respect to policy, Mr Leedy expressed the view that the
Committee had not started too soon in making additions to reserves.
Weighing the substantial number of favorable indicators against the

5/3/60 -26
unfavorable ones, it seemed to him that some further active participa
tion by the System in the direction of making reserves available for
needed expansion was a proper course to follow. While he would not
want to do anything dramatic in that direction, he felt that the course
the Committee had embarked upon should be continued, with net borrowed
reserves trending downward.
Mr. Leedy noted that the existing discount rate was fixed at a
time when the System was aggressively attempting to exert restraint, and
that such a policy was not called for at present. In view of the action
taken with respect to providing reserves, it did not seem to him that
the discount rate level was quite appropriate; he thought this was in
dicated by events in the past few weeks. Therefore, he would favor a
reduction in the discount rate of 1/2 point as soon as that could be
done in the light of the Treasury financing. In this connection, he
noted that a number of the Reserve Banks would have meetings of their
directors on the second Thursday of this month, after which there would
be no other regular meetings until the same time in June, too late to
do the kind of thing that he thought was required quite promptly. Since
a rate reduction was involved, rather than an increase, he assumed that
the period of equilibrium called for by the Treasury financing might be
shorter than would otherwise be the case. He thought there was a mini
mum of danger that a rate reduction would be regarded as reflecting an
adverse appraisal of the economy because short-term rates on Government
securities had declined so sharply and were now so far out of line with

5/3/60 -27
the discount rate. The suggestion of Mr. Johns regarding the directive
appealed to him, and its adoption would be in line with the kind of
program that he (Mr. Leedy) had indicated he would favor.
Mr. Allen reported that unemployment compensation claims for
the first three weeks of April were substantially higher in Iowa,
Wisconsin, and Michigan than last year. The cutback in automotive
employment had begun to result in layoffs rather than merely a reduc
tion in hours of work. Recently, layoffs had been reported also in
farm machinery, construction machinery, and household appliances.
The optimism in Detroit that he reported three weeks ago con
tinued to prevail, Mr. Allen said. The daily sales rate for the last
ten-day period of April was believed to have exceeded 23,500, which
would mean sales of 580,000 in April. Production in April probably
equaled 580,000 so inventories undoubtedly remained above 1,000,000
units. Manufacturers prefer, of course, to continue to produce at a
steady, high rate because of the economies involved, and at the same
time the improved sales made them disposed to gamble that sales in the
weeks ahead would accomplish the dual task of covering current produc
tion and reducing the high inventories.
In steel, the operating rate in mid-April was just under 80 per
cent for the nation, whereas it was 85 per cent in the Chicago area.
The rate in Detroit had been erratic but generally well above the
national average. Department store sales in the Seventh District were

5/3/60 -28
strong, with the year-to-date improvement about the same as reported
for the nation.
Chicago money market banks had recovered the deposits lost over
the April 1 tax date, and their reserve position had improved markedly
since a month ago. However, they were still borrowing, at the discount
window and in the Federal funds market, this being attributable largely
to participation in recent Treasury financing operations.
Mr. Allen commented that he liked the phrase "lean against the
wind." Right now, however, it did not seem that there was much, if any,
wind. Recent developments, particularly the strength of retail trade
in March and April, seemed to have dispelled the concern that a reces
sion might be in process or imminent. However, most forecasts indicated
that the rise in aggregate demand in the months ahead would not be
sufficient to press upon the available supply of labor and productive
facilities. As he saw it, business was good but was running scared,
which was not a bad way for it to be.
For the moment, therefore, Mr. Allen felt that there was little
point in leaning either way and that the System could pursue a neutral
course. On that basis he would not object to seeking a zero position
on reserves, neither net borrowed nor net free. He would not favor a
change in the discount rate at this time. Quite aside from the current
Treasury financing, which argued for an even-keel position for the next
few weeks, he did not think other factors were such that he could
support a lower rate now. Three weeks hence could be another story. He

5/3/60 -29
felt the same way on the policy directive; for the reasons stated by
Mr. Robertson, he would continue to include the phrase "while guarding
against excessive credit expansion."
Mr. Deming said there were two points about the Ninth District
that might be noted. First, there was optimism in the farm areas of the
Dakotas and Montana about crop prospects, mainly because of favorable
moisture and planting conditions. Second, the District might be witness
ing the ending of an unusually deep seasonal deposit decline. Country
bank deposits and city correspondent balances had increased in the past
two or three weeks. The banks were still pressed hard for liquidity,
however. Relative to a year ago, their loans were up $250 million. In
effect, they had financed this loan increase by an equivalent liquida
tion of Government and other securities, and at the same time they had
had to accommodate themselves to a $250 million deposit loss.
At the national level, Mr. Deming said, the general economic
picture, as he saw it, was not particularly impressive or depressive.
Mr. Bryan's characterization of the economy as not expanding at an
unsustainable rate expressed his own feeling very well. Thus, he saw
no reason to take any drastic action to change policy. At the same time,
he saw no danger in following a mildly easier policy with respect to
bank reserves, perhaps aiming at a zero level for net borrowed reserves,
as suggested by Mr. Allen. He would prefer to wait on any discount rate
change, and he would not change the directive at this time.

5/3/60 -30
Mr. Mangels reported that developments in the Twelfth District
were rather mixed. Employment increased in March by a fraction of one
per cent, mostly in the food processing plants, but unemployment also
was up a fraction of one per cent, reflecting reduction of personnel at
aircraft plants offset to some degree, in California, by increased
employment at electronic plants. In the first three weeks of April,
steel production was at 74 per cent of capacity against 80 per cent
for March. Some steel companies had reduced prices on certain items,
with discounts running as high as 11 per cent on items subject to in
tensive foreign competition. Total construction was up, with all of
the increase in the nonresidential category. In the first quarter of
1959, residential vacancies in the West increased to 9.7 per cent com
pared with a rate of 8.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 1959. After
making allowance for the later Easter, department store sales for the
year to date were about even with last year; sales for the four weeks
ended April 23, unadjusted, were up 8 per cent from the same period a
year ago. Automobile sales in California were 12 per cent over a year
ago in March, and the improvement was continuing in April. Reports were
heard that sales of compact cars and expensive cars were strong, while
the intermediate-price models were a drug on the market.
Mr. Mangels went on to say that Twelfth District banks increased
their holdings of Government securities by $300 million in the three-week
period ended April 20, and that loans increased about $265 million in

5/3/60 -31
the same period, with increases in all classifications except real
estate loans. Demand deposits were up more than $500 million from
March 30, and time deposits showed a modest increase, but savings
deposits declined about $34 million. Bankers, particularly those
representing the larger banks, were quite concerned about the continued
loss of savings deposits and expressed the view that they could not
recover the deposits they had lost, or halt the continued decline,
unless something was done about the maximum permissible rate of interest.
Borrowings from the Reserve Bank were scattered and on a nominal basis,
while District banks were net sellers of Federal funds.
With respect to policy, Mr. Mangels observed that apparently
little could be done in the next week or two in view of the Treasury
financing. He noted that net borrowed reserves averaged $82 million for
the latest statement week, and his inclination would be not to go above
that figure. In fact, if it were feasible and practicable, he would
be inclined to go lover, perhaps even to a zero basis. He saw no harm
in going lower at this time for there seemed to be no steam in the
boiler at present. The growth of retail sales had been small, the
decline in steel production was rather extensive, the steel industry did
not seem to expect any major change in that situation, and there had
been an increase in unemployment. Reports were seen in the press of
layoffs in manufacturing establishments and, although those reports
were scattered, they might be indicative of a trend. In the Twelfth

5/3/60 -32
District, price-cutting with respect to autos, home appliances, and
other commodities had been observed. Generally speaking, business had
been good thus far, but there was considerable concern about what the
rest of the year was going to bring and it was not unusual to be asked
whether the country was heading toward recession. With that as back
ground, it appeared to him that the System could afford to be somewhat
on the easier side without damage to the economy, and the directive
seemed broad enough to permit such a course.
Mr. Mangels felt that perhaps it would not be appropriate to
make a change in the directive today, and he had the same feeling with
regard to the discount rate. The next meeting of the San Francisco
directors was to be held on Thursday, May 5, and the directors then
would not meet again until the first Thursday in June. At present, it
was his thought to recommend to the directors that no change be made in
the discount rate.
Mr. Irons stated that conditions in the Eleventh District were
quite satisfactory and that the major factors had not shown much change.
Department store trade moved up sharply in the past month and the totals
were running a little ahead of last year on a cumulative basis. Nonfarm
employment had increased about seasonally, while unemployment had de
creased in about seasonal proportions. Construction activity had moved
upward during the past three weeks, with residential construction
accounting for a good part of the gain; the greatest strength in con
struction activity appeared to have shifted from the Dallas area to the

5/3/60 -33
Houston area. The petroleum situation continued unchanged; allowables
were dropped back to eight days for the current month and probably would
continue on that basis. However, there were no signs of great despair
in the industry, which recognized that it had a problem and was facing
up to it. Some increase was noted in drilling activity within the
past month. The industrial production index for the District was down
a point due to the petroleum situation. With good weather prevailing
recently, the agricultural sectors of the District were encouraged.
While cash farm income was about 6 per cent under a year ago, the out
look for current crops was good.
On the basis of recent visits with bankers and others around the
District, Mr. Irons said that on the whole conditions appeared to be
generally satisfactory. There was no sense of boom or surging activity,
but he got no feeling of pessimism. On the financial side, there had
been increases in total bank loans, business loans, and consumer loans
over the past three weeks. The banks had added to their investments
in connection with their participation in Treasury financing, Deposits
had turned upward and showed a sizable increase in the past three weeks.
City banks indicated that they were still loaned up, that loan demand
was strong, and that they were being selective in granting credit.
Borrowing from the Reserve Bank had increased somewhat and was in about
the usual percentage relationship to the System total. Federal funds
were being used in substantial amount, mostly by a few of the larger
banks with high loan-deposit ratios and no bills to sell.

5/3/60 -34
With regard to the national picture, Mr. Irons indicated that
he leaned toward the views expressed by Mr. Robertson. Some of the
current developments in the economic field appeared to be in the nature
of inevitable adjustments, and the economy might be getting on a
sounder foundation than if the earlier rate of expansion had continued
longer. In steel and autos, for example, it could not be expected that
there would be additions to inventories at the earlier rates over a very
long period of time. In fact, the economy might be moving toward the
growth and stability that the System had been seeking rather than the
other type of development that appeared earlier to be in prospect.
While he did not foresee a surge upward, neither did he see points of
basic weakness that were likely to lead to serious economic difficulties.
In these circumstances, while he saw no need for greater restraint, he
saw no need for greater ease.
Mr. Irons indicated that he would not favor a change in the
discount rate at this time. The rate was only out of line with the bill
rate, and if the System always tried to keep the discount rate in line
with the bill rate it would be likely to have trouble. If one looked
at other short-term rates, quite a good alignment was found. In this
connection, Mr. Irons said that he had usually thought of the Treasury
bill as a bank instrument offering an alternative approach to the dis
count window. Now, however, the bill was hardly a bank instrument; he
had noticed recently that less than 10 per cent of the outstanding
91-day bills were owned by banks. This raised some question as to the

5/3/60 -35
significance of the discount rate being out of line with the bill rate
at the moment.
Mr. Irons also said he would not favor a change in the directive,
although he did not particularly like the wording that related to guard
ing against excessive credit expansion. With the Treasury in the
market and the economic situation as he saw it, he would favor continuing
the existing open market policy. He would not set any particular goals
for the Account, but he would instruct the Desk to come as near to the
conditions of the past three weeks as it could.
Mr. Erickson said that the situation in the First District
differed only slightly from the national picture. Nonfarm employment
was up in March, but only to the same extent as nationally; on the other
hand, insured unemployment was up a fraction of one per cent for the
most recent week. This was the second week this year that the figure
was higher than a year ago. Construction contracts showed an increase
of 2 per cent in March, due primarily to nonresidential construction
being up materially. For the year to date, construction contracts were
6 per cent below a year ago. March was the first month when residential
contracts were down in comparison with last year, and for the first
three months of the year they were up 9 per cent. Department store
sales reflected very good Easter business and were continuing satis
factorily, while auto sales also were favorable. District banks
continued to purchase Federal funds on balance, and borrowings at the
discount window in April averaged just under $25 million, or between

5/3/60 -36
2 and 3 per cent of the System total. A survey of capital expenditures
conducted in collaboration ith the McGraw-Hill survey indicated that
District manufacturers expected to make total expenditures of $634
million in 1960, which would represent an increase of 12 per cent from
1959. Durable goods manufacturers expected to spend 22 per cent more
than last year, and manufacturers of nondurables expected to spend 3 per
cent more.
As to policy, Mr. Erickson said he wished to associate himself
with the view expressed by Messrs. Robertson and Irons that the System
should continue to maintain a neutral position. He would favor postponing
any action on the discount rate or the directive at least until the next
meeting of the Committee. With respect to open market operations for the
next three weeks, he would give the Desk the same instruction as at the
April 22 meeting.
Mr. Szymczak commented favorably with regard to open market
operations during the past three weeks and expressed the view that a
significant contribution had been made by the presentations of Messrs.
Johns and Bryan. He vent on to say that although he would favor supply
ing some additional reserves to the banking system in such fashion as
to bring the level of net borrowed reserves to $100 million or below-
down to zero if necessary--he would not suggest that this be done
quickly. Obviously, there was not the exuberance in the economy that
was anticipated earlier. However, this was only the first week of the
second month of the second quarter of the year, and the Treasury was

5/3/60 -37
now in the market. Therefore, he would be inclined to move slowly.
He would not favor changing the discount rate or the directive at this
time.
Mr. Balderston said that although he considered the description
of the state of the economy given by Mr. Bryan an excellent one, he had
come to the same general conclusions as expressed by Messrs. Leach and
Allen with respect to policy. Continuing, he observed that projections
for plant and equipment expenditures included a contemplated 70 per cent
increase in expenditures for equipment. This would tend to accentuate
the problem of unemployment and at the same time productive capacity,
now excessive, would be expanded somewhat. On the other hand, there
would be the beneficial result that the adequacy of supplies would
diminish the inducement to build up inventories for protective reasons.
Also, excess capacity would provide a brake on increases in the prices
of tangible goods. When he looked at services and unemployment jointly,
he was concerned about what might lie ahead during the next few years.
Prices of services doubtlessly would continue to rise, while unemploy
ment had not receded to the extent that one might have hoped at this
stage of cyclical expansion. Ahead, therefore, might lie what had been
referred to as the dilemma of central banking: rising prices of services
and rising unemployment.
Mr. Balderston indicated that he would favor a change in the
directive such as Mr. Johns had suggested. The monetary policy that he
would favor might be described as one of reluctant ease, the implementa
tion of which would embrace continuation of the present discount rate.

5/3/60 -38
If the Treasury bill rate remained considerably below the discount rate,
the differential would, of course, induce banks to sell Government
securities, to the extent that they had such securities in their port
folios, and to operate in the Federal funds market. Such a tendency
would not seem inappropriate to him because it would tend to relieve
the pressure on the discount window. It would call, however, for open
market action in the direction of a net borrowed reserve target of zero,
In summary, as long as the discount rate was above the bill rate and as
long as there was no real evidence of a change in the active money
supply, he felt that the Committee should move toward a lower level of
net borrowed reserves. He would rather place the stress on open market
operations than force increased use of the discount window.
Chairman Martin said that upon rereading the minutes of the Open
Market Committee beginning with October 1959, he found them interesting
and encouraging. In the past several months, as noted in the minutes,
he had from time to time expressed an optimism that he certainly did
not feel a year ago, for at that time he did not see the answers to a
number of problems. He now saw answers to some of the problems in the
financial field and a reasonable expectancy as to their solution.
Federal Reserve policy, he felt, had been about right.
At the present time, Chairman Martin commented, the System ought
to be struggling for stability. While he did not feel that anyone could
know what the economy was going to do, he saw reason for optimism. Some
concerns were in financial trouble in the midst of good business, as is

5/3/60 -39
always true in a period comparable to the present. Some concerns had
overexpanded, for example, and financing had not yet been found. By
and large, however, the economy seemed quite solid.
The Chairman noted that Mr. Mills had for some time raised ques
tions about the level of reserves. He (Chairman Martin) also had had
some question on this point since the turn of the year. After commenting
on the difficulty he experienced in understanding the money supply, the
Chairman said that at the present time he saw no reason why the System
should not be supplying more reserves to the market, adding that in say
ing this he had in mind the longer trend. He would disagree with Mr.
Treiber's analysis only to the extent that he (Chairman Martin) felt
that the System should be resolving doubts on the side of ease. As he
saw it, nothing had changed in the past six weeks to cause the System to
resolve doubts on the side of tightness. There had been a long period
of decline in the money supply and at the same time a real change in the
exuberance of the economy. Thus, all of the odds seemed to be in favor
of supplying more reserves.
The Chairman said he felt strongly that it would be a mistake
to change the discount rate at this time. A change in the rate would
be a dramatic overt action indicating to many people that the System had
made up its mind that a basic change in the economy had occurred. Per
sonally, he was not ready for that.
With regard to the question that had been raised regarding the
directive, the Chairman indicated that he did not consider the matter

5/3/60 -40
terribly important one way or the other and that much depended on how
one read the language of the directive. It could be said that the
System always guards against excessive credit expansion, and it could be
that unsound credit expansion would develop in the future. In this con
nection, he pointed out that the directive is not made public until
published in the Annual Report of the Board of Governors, Although he
had argued at times on both sides of the question, basically he did
not think that the language of the directive was terribly important
unless the Committee was making a basic change in policy.
Chairman Martin expressed the view that the most recent Treasury
financing had been ell handled. He went on to comment that Treasury
activities had for some time been complementary, if not supplementary,
to monetary and credit policy; debt management policy and monetary policy
had been working closely together.
The Chairman said that he would like to see in the next three
weeks a general approach on net borrowed reserves of trending toward
the zero level. With the start provided by Mr. Bryan, studies were in
progress with a view to the possibility of developing a better concept
than net borrowed reserves, and it was hoped that additional material
would be available before too long as the result of work at the Board
and elsewhere. Using the net borrowed reserve target, however, it seemed
to him that a trend toward zero would be in order at the present time.
In his judgment, that would not call for any change in the directive or

5/3/60 -41
the discount rate. There would be another meeting of the Committee on
May 24, and things might then be clearer; at that time, the thinking
might be in terms of changing the discount rate and amending Federal
Reserve policy. However, it seemed to him that any such action would be
premature at the present time and that the System should take all the
time it could to be sure that System policy was adjusting itself. What
impressed him was the gradual evolution of thinking on the part of the
Committee that had taken place. From January 12 to the present date,
there had been a steady evolution of Federal Reserve policy largely
molded by the economy itself, and this had been a satisfactory way for
things to develop. However, there was enough uncertainty in the economy
today so that it would not seem premature to supply some additional re
serves to the market, and there would be little likelihood of generating
any real speculative enthusiasm by supplying reserves in a modest way.
Chairman Martin noted that some differences had been expressed
during the discussion today, which was a healthy situation. Within the
Committee there appeared to be a slight majority in favor of continuing
the present directive without change, while a large majority favored a
decrease in the level of net borrowed reserves and no change in the dis
count rate. If anyone wished to record a vote, that would be in order,
but it seemed to him that the general discussion had fairly well evolved
into a satisfactory guide for policy without anyone having to take a
strong stand.

5/3/60 -42
Continuing, the Chairman said that his approach to the relation
ship between the discount rate and the bill rate was similar to that
stated by Mr. Irons. The fact that there were now three-month bills
and six-month bills in the picture had changed the situation a little.
Generally speaking, it occurred to him that it would be well for the
System to stay steady in the boat until it was absolutely certain that
a wind was blowing. This point had been brought out well by Mr. Allen.
He (the Chairman) did not know where the wind was at the moment, but
the reserve position was such that the odds seemed to favor what he
understood to be the view of the majority; namely, that the trend of
net borrowed reserves should be toward zero. If the reserves were
not used, the Committee could quickly reverse itself, whereas a change
in the discount rate could not be reversed quickly. In summary, he would
maintain maximum flexibility at the present time, yet be moving in line
with the way that the economy had developed.
The Chairman then said that unless someone wanted to record a
vote he would favor accepting as the consensus of the Committee until
the next meeting moving in the direction of lower net borrowed reserves.
While it was not too desirable to specify figures, he would favor
trending toward zero with the understanding that this did not mean that
the Desk had to get there in three weeks or anything like that. As to
the policy directive, he understood it to be the consensus that there
should be no change at this time. The discount rate is not the subject
of decision at Open Market Committee meetings, but it appeared that the

5/3/60 -43
majority view clearly was against action on the discount rate before
the next meeting of the Committee. He did not know what the Board
of Governors would do if any Reserve Bank should come in with a change
in the discount rate, and he did not want to deter any Banks from
doing so if they desired; if this happened, the responsibility would
be on the Board of Governors. However, he wished to express himself
personally as questioning very much whether the Board of Governors
should approve a change in the discount rate in the near future.
Chairman Martin then asked whether there were any further
comments, and none were heard. Accordingly, he stated that the directive
would be approved in its present form and that the comments of individual
persons would, of course, be included in the minutes.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Committee voted unani
mously to direct the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York until otherwise directed by
the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (including
replacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities to
run off without replacement) for the System Open Market Account
in the open market or, in the case of maturing securities, by
direct exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary in the
light of current and prospective economic conditions and the
general credit situation .of the country, with a view (a) to
relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs of
commerce and business, (b) to fostering sustainable growth in
economic activity and employment while guarding against exces
sive credit expansion, and (c) to the practical administration
of the Account; provided that the aggregate amount of securities
held in the System Account (including commitments for the pur
chase or sale of securities for the Account) at the close of
this date, other than special short-term certificates of indebted
ness purchased from time to time for the temporary accommodation
of the Treasury, shall not be increased or decreased by more than
$1 billion;

5/3/60
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in cases
where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one or more
Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short-term certif
icates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time for
the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the
total amount of such certificates held at any one time by the
Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate $500
million.
Chairman Martin then referred to the action taken by the Federal
Open Market Committee at its meeting on April 12, 1960, authorizing the
acquisition, in the period between that date and the next Committee meet
ing, of up to $150 million of one-year Treasury bills maturing July 15,
1960, either by outright purchase or by swapping other Treasury bills.
The activities of the Desk under this authorization, which
resulted in the acquisition of $10 million of July 15 bills against
swaps or offsetting sales of a like amount of other bills, were reported
in detail in a memorandum dated May 2, 1960, from Assistant Vice President
Larkin of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The memorandum was
distributed to the Committee prior to this meeting with a transmittal
memorandum from Mr. Rouse of the same date. Copies of both have been
placed in the files of the Committee.
Chairman Martin made the comment that he considered Mr. Larkin's
memorandum an excellent summary of developments, following which Mr.
Treiber said that in the opinion of the New York Bank the experience
under the authorization given by the Committee on April 12 had been
satisfactory and continuation of the authorization would be warranted.

5/3/60 _45
It was noted at this point that some of the members of the
Committee had not yet had an opportunity to review Mr. Larkin's
memorandum fully. Accordingly, Mr. Rouse presented a rather detailed
statement of developments under the Committee authoritization, his
comments being based largely on the memorandum that had been distributed.
Mr. Rouse also said that it had been obvious to all concerned that there
were swaps involved in the transactions undertaken pursuant to the
authorization, but that, as far as he knew, there had been no comment
at all in the market. The transactions had all been accomplished at
market prices and without any market repercussions having come to his
attention.
Chairman Martin said that he had heard of no repercussions in
the market. He went on to say that since an experiment was involved,
he would suggest the preparation and distribution of another report along
the lines of Mr. Larkin's memorandum if the April 12 authorization should
be renewed. He then proposed that the April 12 authorization be renewed
for another three weeks from this date, adding that by that time the Com
mittee should be able to view the experiment in a better perspective.
Mr. Robertson said he would like to be recorded as voting against
renewal of the authorization, for reasons of principle that he had ex
pressed at the meeting on April 12 with regard to swap transactions.
He added, however, that in his opinion the Desk had done a good job in
treading lightly and carefully in this field which involved an experiment.

5/3/60 -46
Thereupon, with Mr. Robertson dissenting,
it was agreed to renew until the next meeting
of the Open Market Committee the authorization
given at the meeting on April 12, 1960, to
acquire for the System Open Market Account,
either by outright purchases or by swaps of
other bills, up to $150 million of one-year
Treasury bills maturing July 15, 1960.
Chairman Martin then referred to a letter from Under Secretary of
the Treasury Baird dated April 13, 1960, requesting the views of the Open
Market Committee on an enclosed draft of circular under which refunding
securities would be offered for either cash or maturing securities but
no special subscription privilege would attach to the maturing securi
ties. In the event of oversubscription, there would be allotments. Al
though it was not so stated in the proposed circular, the Under Secre
tary's letter stated that the Treasury contemplated that subscriptions
from the Federal Reserve System, Government investment accounts, and all
subscriptions up to a minimum amount would be allotted in full. In sub
sequent discussions, the Under Secretary had indicated that it was the
intention of the Treasury to allot in full all subscriptions, irrespective
of amount, made by certain other subscribers who would constitute a
substantial group, including, for example, State and local governments,
foreign governments, foreign central banks, international institutions,
and publicly administered pension funds.
A draft of reply and a revised draft had been distributed to the
members of the Committee prior to this meeting. With the first draft
there was also distributed a memorandum dated April 15, 1960, from the

5/3/60 -47
General Counsel of the Open Market Committee expressing the view that
acquisitions by the Federal Reserve Banks pursuant to en arrangement such
as described by the Under Secretary would not be subject to the $5
billion limitation contained in section 14(b) of the Federal Reserve
Act, which states that "the aggregate amount ... of obligations* acquired
directly from the United States which is held at any one time by the
twelve Federal Reserve banks shall not exceed $5,000,000,000." The
revised draft of reply indicated that the Open Market Committee had
reached such a conclusion and that furthermore, since it was contemplated
that a substantial group of other investors would be eligible to refund
on the same basis as the Federal Reserve Banks, the objection indicated
by the Committee to a somewhat similar proposal of the Trearury in 1958
did not apply. (In 1958 the Committee had strongly questioned the
advisability of a debt management move that would distinguish in any way
between the securities held by the Federal Reserve Banks and the securities
held by other investors.) The proposed reply would conclude with the
statement that, subject to usual questions regarding monetary and credit
policy and the terms eventually set for the refunding security, the
Federal Reserve Banks would be prepared to consider refunding some or
all of their maturing securities under such a proposal.
In reply to a question by Chairman Martin as to whether there
were comments on the matter, Mr. Treiber suggested certain changes in the
revised draft of reply to the Under Secretary and stated reasons in sup
port of those suggestions.
* Should read: amount of ... obligations

5/3/60
There being no further comments, it was
agreed unanimously that a letter in the form
of the revised draft distributed under date
of April 26, 1960, as modified to take into
account the suggestions of Mr. Treiber, should
be sent to the Under Secretary of the Treasury
in reply to his letter of April 13, 1960.
Secretary's Note: The letter sent over the
signature of Chairman Martin to the Under
Secretary on May 6, 1960, pursuant to this
action was as follows:
Your letter of April 13, 1960, requests the views of the
Federal Open Market Committee on an enclosed circular under which
refunding securities would be offered for either cash or maturing
securities, but no special subscription privilege would attach to
maturing securities. In the event of over-subscription, there
would be allotments. Your letter also states that you contemplate
that subscriptions from the Federal Reserve System, Government
investment accounts, and all subscriptions up to a minimum amount
would be allotted in full. In subsequent oral discussions you
indicated that it is the intention of the Treasury to allot in
full all subscriptions, irrespective of the amount, made by certain
other subscribers who would constitute a substantial group, includ
ing, for example, State and local governments, foreign governments,
foreign central banks, international institutions, and publicly
administered pension funds.
Presumably the Treasury circular would state that all sub
scriptions by such a group would be allotted in full; it seems to
the Committee that it is important that the market be so informed
in order to be able to evaluate the offering and the prospects of
allotments to others.
The question arises whether, under such a refunding offer,
the Federal Reserve acquisitions of the refunding securities in
exchange for the maturing securities would be "acquired directly
from the United States" within the purview of section 14(b) of
the Federal Reserve Act, which provides that "the aggregate
amount ... of obligations* acquired directly from the United
States which is held at any one time by the twelve Federal Re
serve banks shall not exceed $5,000,000,000."
A substantially similar proposal was presented by the
Treasury for the Committee's consideration in early October 1958.
In a letter dated October 21, 1958, the Committee took the position
that acquisitions by the Reserve Banks pursuant to such a refunding
arrangement would not constitute a direct acquisition from the
United States within the meaning of section 14(b).
* Should read: amount of ... obligations

5/3/60 49
Although the Committee's letter did not so state, the
Committee strongly questioned the advisability of a debt
management move that would distinguish in any way between the
securities held by the Federal Reserve Banks and the securities held
by other investors, and with your letter of October 24, 1958, you
suggested a modified proposal under which there would be no
difference in any respect in the treatment accorded the Federal
Reserve System as compared with any other investor. To that
proposal, the Committee responded that it had concluded that
acquisitions by the Reserve Banks pursuant to such a refunding
would not be subject to the $5 billion limit stated in section 14(b)
of the Federal Reserve Act and that, subject, of course, to usual
questions regarding monetary and credit policy and the terms
eventually set for the refunding security, the Federal Reserve
Banks would be prepared to consider refunding some or all of their
maturing securities under such a proposal.
The Committee has reiewed the proposal in your letter of
April 13, 1960, as modified by your oral statement referred to above,
and has concluded that, like the arrangements proposed in October of
1958, acquisitions by the Federal Reserve Banks pursuant to such a
refunding would not be subject to the $5 billion limit stated in
section 14(b) of the Federal Reserve Act. Furthermore, since it is
contemplated that a substantial group of other investors would be
eligible to refund on the same basis as the Federal Reserve Banks,
the objection to the first proposal made in 1958 would not seem to
apply. (It is assumed that the circular would contain an appropriate
statement regarding the subscriptions to be allotted in full.)
Accordingly, subject to usual questions regarding monetary and credit
policy and the terms eventually set for the refunding security, the
Federal Reserve Banks would be prepared to consider refunding some or
all of their maturing securities under such a proposal.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, May 24, 1960.
At the request of the Chairman, Mr. Young commented on develop
ments in connection with the statistical program on the Government securi
ties market. He reported that the program was moving ahead satisfactorily
in terms of the planning of schedules and relations with the dealers, and
it was intended to request the dealers to begin reporting on May 20, 1960.
However, one problem had arisen. One dealer (Aubrey G. Lanston and Co.)

5/3/60 -50
had raised questions about the access of the Desk to the individual
dealer reports that were to be submitted to the newly-organized Market
Statistics Department of the New York Reserve Bank. These questions
having been raised, it seemed desirable to advise the dealer candidly
as to the pertinent provisions of the plan. Therefore, it was stated
that the individual dealer reports would not usually be available to
the Desk, but that (1) in the extension of repurchase agreements the
Desk could call for and obtain from the Market Statistics Department
certain figures that would be helpful from the standpoint of the extension
of credit, (2) in the event of the declaration of a disorderly market
the Manager of the Account would have full access to individual dealer
reports until the situation was corrected, (3) to provide against con
tingencies the Desk could seek permission from the President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to have access to dealer reports, and
such permission could be granted in certain circumstances. A fourth
provision of the plan, namely, that the Treasury might request compila
tions of individual dealer reports that would be helpful in appraising
underwriting experience over a past period, had not been mentioned to
the dealer because that provision was not pertinent to his inquiry.
Mr. Young went on to say that the dealer later expressed the view
that by and large the statistical program was good and that the firm would
be glad to cooperate, but that in view of the provision for access of the
Desk to dealer reports in the event of contingencies the dealer had
reservations and, unless something was done in that respect, would have

5/3/60 -51
to decline to participate in the program. However, the dealer suggested
exploration of a possible compromise with those concerned, namely, that
this dealer and other dealers would be informed promptly on each
occasion in which contingency access was granted. If such assurance
were given, the dealer indicated that his firm would go along with the
program. Mr. Young added that the Treasury and the New York Reserve
Bank had been kept informed of developments.
It was indicated that efforts would be continued to work out a
solution to the problem that Mr. Young had described.
The Chairman then referred to comments at the April 12 Committee
meeting regarding the likelihood of hearings by a Subcommittee of the
House Banking and Currency Committee on one of several bills pertaining
to the Federal Reserve System that had been introduced by Congressman
Patman, and to the subsequent development, reported to the Reserve Bank
Presidents, concerning a change of plans under which the Subcommittee
had indicated that the hearings would relate to a different bill,
(H. R. 8516), also introduced by Mr. Patman. The Chairman stated that
the Presidents would be kept advised as additional information regarding
the hearings became available.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary