A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Wash
ington on Tuesday, November 22, 1960, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bopp
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Fulton
Mr. King
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Leach, Allen, Irons, and Mangels, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Mr. Johns, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Brandt, Eastburn, Hostetler, Noyes,
Roosa, and Tow, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Koch, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board
of Governors
Mr. Keir, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Hersey, Associate Adviser, Division of Inter
national Finance, Board of Governors
Messrs. Ratchford, Baughman, Coldwell, and Einzig,
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of

11/22/60 -2-
Richmond, Chicago, Dallas, and San
Francisco, respectively.
Mr. Parsons, Director of Research, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Mr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Meigs, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
held on October 25, 1960, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report of open market operations covering the period Octo
ber 25 through November 16, 1960, and a supplementary report covering the
period November 17 through November 21, 1960. Copies of both reports
have been placed in the files of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Rouse commented
as follows:
As the written report to the Committee points out,
System operations were undertaken in large volume since
the last meeting of the Committee to supply the reserves
needed for seasonal and other needs of the economy. It is
probably worth noting that over $0.5 billion reserves were
absorbed by gold and foreign account operations, pointing
up the fact that the balance of payments problem has a very
direct and measurable meaning as far as the System is con
cerned.
System purchases of short-term securities outside the
bill area were generally taken in stride by the market. I
stated at the last meeting that the techniques for operating
in these other short-term securities might have to be somewhat
different than normal. Our initial purchases, in fact, were
made from several of the larger dealers who had made offerings
to us, and this approach was gradually extended to cover all
of the dealer firms. Then we found that dealers were offer
ing short-term securities to the Desk in increasing volume.
Last Thursday we were able to include other short-term
securities on a go-around with Treasury bills, and several
of the dealers commented on the smoothness with which the

11/22/60
operation was carried out even though it took longer than
a go-around in Treasury bills alone.
Treasury bill rates rose generally over the period since
the Committee last met, although unfortunately rates have
declined somewhat in the past few days. Average rates in
yesterday's Treasury bill auction were established at 2.40
per cent for three-month bills and 2.75 per cent for six
month bills, 27 basis points and 18 basis points higher than
in the auction preceding the last Committee meeting. At
these higher levels, and with recent actions by monetary
authorities abroad to lower interest rates, the relation
ship of our short-term rates to rates abroad is somewhat
more satisfactory from the balance-of-payments point of
view. While System actions and attitudes have not been the
whole story in this development, they have certainly helped
to a considerable extent.
Over a good part of the period since the Committee
last met, the money market has appeared tighter than would
normally be expected with free reserves in the $400-$500
million range. The problem of the distribution of reserves
between country and money market banks has continued to be
with us and the New York banks have come under heavily in
creased pressure since the beginning of the month as a
result of heavy deposit drains, part of which relate to
Treasury Tax and Loan account withdrawals and part, no
doubt, to the gold outflow. All of this leads us to view
the high estimated reserve figures in the period ahead
as shown in the spread sheet attached to your supplementary
report--with a great deal of caution. On the other hand,
the pending changes in Regulation D will have a substantial
effect, and perhaps once all vault cash can be counted as
reserves, country banks will put more of their excess reserves
to work. My own feeling is that we will have to approach the
period ahead on an experimental basis, and see how the statis
tical reserve measurements are reflected in the money market.
We would continue to look to the repurchase agreement as an
instrument that provides the System with maximum flexibility
during such an uncertain period--since in an easy money mar
ket we can permit the agreements to be withdrawn or mature
without replacenent. On the other hand, if temporary pres
sures are evident we can make new agreements. In this past
period, we found it advisable, in order to keep repurchase
agreements on the books, to lower the rate to 2-3/4 per cent,
and we may need to do so again.
The seasonal period of expansion in the supply of
bankers' acceptances is under way at a time when the out
standing volume of acceptances is at an all-time high, re
flecting in part the pressure on the reserve positions of

11/22/60
the New York banks and the relative attractiveness of the
bankers' acceptance for both borrowers and investors, The
holdings for foreign central banks at the New York Bank
have also reached a postwar high, and the dealers have had
some success in placing additional amounts with domestic in
vestors. Nevertheless, dealers' portfolios, at around $56
million, have risen substantially since the time we last
met. I would expect to increase seasonally the System's
holdings of acceptances, both outright and under repurchase
agreement, over the period of pressure ahead, as in other
recent years.
With the refunding of mid-November maturities success
fully out of the way, the Treasury is currently engaged in an
optional offer to holders of about $750 million F and G bonds
maturing in 1961 of an opportunity to exchange into an addi
tional amount of $1.3 billion outstanding 4 per cent Treasury
bonds of 1969. While the prices of the 4' s--and some surround
ing maturities--dipped yesterday, mainly as a result of the
dealers' backing their bid prices down as a precautionary
measure, we would not anticipate that these price developments
would greatly affect the success of the exchange, in view of
the nature of the holders of F and G bonds, or that the mar
ket itself should be greatly affected by the offering. If
the Treasury were to get an exchange of $200-$300 million,
the results would be satisfactory.
In response to Chairman Martin's question as to whether there were
comments on Mr. Rouse's report of operations, Mr. Robertson read a state
ment substantially as follows:
In my view the Account was not administered during
the past four weeks in a manner that accomplished the Com
mittee objective, as I understood it, to create additional
ease in the money market. The market was relatively tight
throughout most of the period, when it should have been
much easier. The minutes of the last meeting indicate that
it was the will of this Committee to provide additional
reserves, to more than offset all tightening factors--rather
than to create tighter conditions. There can be differences
of opinion with respect to the degree of easing which was
contemplated but there is no basis in the record for con
tending that the Committee contemplated a tightening operation,
which actually occurred.
Furthermore, without in any way challenging the motives
or intentions of the Manager of the Account, it is my belief
that what was done, was done in the wrong way:

11/22/60 -5-
a. In the first place, instead of "experimenting"
in the area outside of bills for the purpose of
preventing our easing actions from driving the
bill rate below 2 per cent (as was contemplated
by the Committee), the Manager entered this area
in a large way--over $300 million--which was more
than I thought of as an experiment, and was so
great as to accentuate the problem of disposition
when it becomes necessary to absorb reserves through
reverse open market operations. The net effect, I
fear, is a reduction of the liquidity of the System's
Open Market Account. Instead of merely keeping the
bill rate from going below 2 per cent, this operation,
combined with other factors, served to drive the rate
up considerably.
b. In addition, the operation during the four-week
period consisted, in part, of an excessive use
of repurchase agreements, and at rates lower
than the discount rate. This was not done merely
as a means of assuring dealers of adequate financing
to carry their inventories, but was designed to
stimulate the use of repurchase agreements by non
bank dealers.
I regard this massive use of repurchase agree
ments (which totalled over $600 million at one point)
as an inappropriate and even detrimental course of
action for the Federal Reserve System to follow. As
the Comnittee knows, I have always questioned the legal
basis for our repurchase agreements with nonbank
dealers in Government securities. In view of this
legal situation, it seems to me the System at least
should hesitate to utilize repurchase arrangements
unless the prospective benefits are very great and
cannot be achieved in any other way.
As many of you will remember, in my December 1954
memorandum I attempted to demonstrate that the use of
repurchase agreements by the System was difficult to
justify, quite apart from any question of legality.
I asked for answers to specific questions presented in
that memorandum, but there has never been a response to
that invitation.
Since 1955 the New York Reserve Bank, as agent
for the Open Market Committee, has been authorized
to enter into repurchase agreements with nonbank
dealers "subject . .. to the understanding that
the authority would be used sparingly in entering

11/22/60
into repurchase agreements at rates below the dis
count rate." In my view the entering into such
repurchase agreements with nonbank dealers during
the past four-week period to the extent of hundreds
of millions of dollars is not a "sparing" use"
Our authorization on this matter provides that
repurchase agreements "shall be used as a means of
providing the money market with sufficient Federal
Reserve funds to avoid undue strain on a day-to-day
basis." In my judgment, it is not possible to
reconcile this authorization with the recent massive
engagement in repurchase agreements, admittedly de
signed "to encourage dealers to leave Government
securities under repurchase agreements with the System
for longer periods of time,"
Our current action in this respect not only
fails to yield special benefits but it fosters
inequities in the Government securities market and
tends to diminish the strength and independence of
that market. Use of repurchase agreements in lieu
of outright purchases of short-term Governments does
not, in my opinion, materially relieve pressure on
short-term interest rates. The reserves we supply in
this manner flow into commercial banks, and in view
of the temporary nature of these reserves the over
whelming volume inevitably flows into the short-term
market. In other words, the result of our action is
substantially the same as what would be accomplished
by outright purchases, and the latter course would
avoid the detrimental effects of the repurchase agree
ment program.
I suppose none of us will deny that furnishing
reserves to nonbank dealers at 2-3/4 per cent when bank
dealers must borrow at a 3 per cent discount rate
places the latter group at a competitive disadvantage
and consequently is inequitable as between the two groups.
I do not believe we can justify this favoritism to non
bank dealers.
Even more important, our wholesale use of repurchase
agreements, particularly at preferential rates,is in
jurious to the independence and strength of the Govern
ment securities market. It is another step toward
dominance by the Federal Reserve System, with perverse
effects on the market's own strength and reliability.
Such use weakens rather than strengthens the market by
getting dealers into the habit of relying on the Federal

11/22/60
Reserve rather than on commercial banks for
their financing, and in turn unwisely relieves
those banks of the responsibility to finance
dealers and thus help to create a self-reliant
market for Government securities. Perhaps the
most unfortunate aspect of this course is the
danger that our subsidizing of the nonbank
dealers on such a large scale will gradually
diminish our freedom to conduct open market
operations with no considerations in mind ex
cept the welfare of the national economy. If
those dealers should come to rely, with justifi
cation, on Federal Reserve financing of their
inventories, it might prove psychologically
difficult--and dangerous to our relations with
the market--if the public interest should require
abrupt withdrawal of repurchase agreement financ
ing.
As is obvious from the foregoing, I oppose
the use of repurchase agreements except "sparingly"
(a word that does not fit recent practice) and
as required by the authorization to the agent Bank
"solely for the purpose of providing the money
market with sufficient reserves to avoid undue
strain on a day-to-day basis." Furthermore, I
oppose the use of repurchase agreements at rates
below the discount rate except in the unlikely
situation in which there is no other available
means of injecting needed reserves into the
banking system,
I hope these latter comments on the experimentation
in the nonbill area, and the excessive use of repurchase
agreements, will not divert attention from the first point-
that is, my belief that. during the past four-week period,
the objective of ease in the money market was not achieved
to the degree the Committee contemplated.
In the light of the foregoing, I find myself in a
position where although I must vote to ratify and confirm
the transactions of the Account during the past four weeks,
because they have taken place and nothing can now be done
about it, I cannot "approve" them.
Chairman Martin suggested that a copy of Mr. Robertson's statement
be furnished to all members of the Committee for studyw ith the thought
that it might be put on the agenda for discussion at a later meeting of

11/22/60 -8
the Committee. He felt that it would not be desirable to discuss the
statement on a piece-meal basis at this time.
Mr. Bopp said that he thought it might be in order for him to make
a brief observation on Mr. Robertson's paper at this time, since he
happened to have been the member of the Open Market Committee who usually
participated in the morning telephone call with the Desk during the pre
ceding four-week period. This had been an enormously difficult period,
Mr. Bopp said, and on each day one found it difficult to put funds into
the market and to keep them there, especially when it was known that at
the turn of the year the System would be pulling funds out of the market.
He felt that the market perhaps had been a little tighter at times than
the Committee wanted it to be, but he noted that at the meeting on
October 25 several members expressed considerable hope that the bill rate
would not be permitted to get lower. During each of the morning calls
during this period, he had expressed agreement with the intentions of the
Management of the System Account as far as operations were concerned for
that day. Perhaps it would be desirable as a matter of procedure if more
members of the Committee were to participate in this morning call so that
more of them would be fully aware currently of the problems confronting
the Desk and the operations that were proposed. At any rate, Mr. Bopp
said, he had received no indication from any member of the Committee
during the past four weeks that the actions being taken to carry out the
decisions at the October 25 meeting were in any way unsatisfactory, and
he was not aware that any indication had been given to the Management

11/22/60 -9
of the System Account by any Committee meber that operations should
be different than those conducted.
Chairman Martin commented that he felt this was well said and he
was glad that Mr. Bopp had expressed his views as one who had participated
in the calls during this period. For himself, he had said on many
occasions that he completely disagreed with Mr. Robertson on the use
of repurchase agreements. He felt that repurchases represented a very
useful instrument in the operations of the System Account and that their
value had been well demonstrated over a period of many years. For the
Committee to give up the use of this instrument would in his opinion be
a step backwards. As far as the past four-week period was concerned,
Chairman Martin said that he had not studied in detail the use of repur
chase agreements in the operations of the Account, but generally speaking
he would subscribe to their use. The Committee had many problems that
it should be studying and he would commend to all the necessity of
spending more time in examining what was involved in handling the System
Account. This was a fundamental activity for all of us to have in mind.
He then asked Mr. Rouse whether he had any comments he wished to make
at this time.
Mr. Rouse said that, as suggested by Mr. Bopp, he had received
no previous indication that any member of the Committee was dissatisfied
with the operations carried on in the Account since the last meeting.
He felt that some of the comments made by Mr. Robertson were rather
extreme, but he would prefer to prepare before the next meeting of the

11/22/60 -10
Committee a paper dealing with the points that had been raised rather
than to comment on them now.
Chairman Martin stated that he felt this would be a desirable
way of handling the questions that had been raised by Mr. Robertson,
and it was understood this procedure would be followed,
Mr. Robertson stated that he wished to make one further comment
at this time. It was rare for a member of the Committee to call upon
the Manager of the Account, he said, and he believed it would be
improper if he were to do so, indicating dissatisfaction with the way
the Account was being handled. He thought that the Management of the
Account should not be influenced by the views expressed by one member
of the Committee.
Mr. Rouse stated that he has had such calls in the past, although
they have been rare. On such occasions, if he felt that the member's
views were at variance with the consensus of the Committee, he has had
to make a judgment as to whether to disregard those views or to request
a telephone meeting of the Committee, Mr. Rouse said that he is pre
pared to take the responsibility for making such a judgment.
Chairman Martin suggested that, unless there were further
comments, the transactions in the System Account since the last meeting
be approved, ratified, and confirmed, noting that in the case of Mr.
Robertson he would vote to ratify and confirm but not to approve the
transactions.

11/22/60 -11
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the open market transactions dur
ing the period October 25 through November
21, 1960, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed, Mr. Robertson voting to ratify and
confirm but not to approve the transactions
for the reasons he had stated.
Mr. Balderston said that, in view of Mr. Robertson's statement,
he would be interested in having Mr. Thomas comment on what the figures
showed with respect to whether the System recently had supplied reserves
over and above seasonal expectations.
Mr. Thomas said that the projections of needed reserves that were
presented to the Committee at its preceding meeting, measured on the
basis of a normal seasonal pattern, would have given total reserves of
about $18,600 million. Actually, total reserves for the current week
would be close to $18,800 million, or about $200 million more than
would have been projected to take care of the seasonal pattern and to
maintain free reserves of around $400 million. Mr. Thomas went on to
say that during this period there had been much heavier drains on
reserves because of market factors than had been estimated at the time
of the October 25 meeting. For example, gold outflow had put a much
greater strain on the market than had been anticipated and the Manage
ment of the System Account had found it necessary to meet that factor.
Actual growth in required reserves had been a little larger than would
have been projected, indicating that there had been somewhat more than
the usual seasonal growth in deposits during the past four weeks. Mr.
Thomas said he thought this was in accordance with the aim of the

11/22/60 -12
Committee, and he felt that the figures indicated a movement toward
the objectives that the Comittee had set. Whether the operations
had accomplished the objectives as adequately as might have been done
was another question; the results might have been different had there
been no concern as to what happened to the Treasury bill rate during
this period. In sum, however, it seemed to Mr. Thomas that System
operations had progressed in the direction desired by the Committee at
its preceding meeting.
A staff memorandum on recent economic and financial developments
in the United States and abroad had been distributed under date of
November 18, 1960, and a memorandum on projections for member bank
reserves also had been distributed to the Committee under that date.
With further reference to economic developments, Mr. Noyes made the
following statement:
It would be a mistake, I think, to take too much comfort
from the more nearly horizontal course of economic develop
ments in October. While this was clearly preferable to a
continuation of the increased slippage that appeared in
September, there is little reason to suppose that the scattered
gains signal any fundamental change in the situation. The
apparent improvement in retail trade was largely associated
with the weather and special conditions affecting automobile
sales. The rise in housing starts was from a sharply cur
tailed rate, and there is some indication from the high
percentage of permit use that November will see another
decline.
The rise in unemployment to 6.4 per cent is foreboding,
especially in view of the likelihood that the high current
level of employment in the automobile industry will not be
maintained for long. As pointed out in our memorandum, if
the underlying situation does not improve, normal seasonal
trends will carry the number of persons actually unemployed

11/22/60
-13-
to over five million by February. Put another way, the
seasonal factors which have been working recently to mini
mize the number of persons actually unemployed will be
operating in reverse from now until early spring. Hence,
the human and financial problems stemming from a relatively
high seasonally adjusted rate of unemployment will become
more intense even if the rate itself does not increase further.
A similar observation might be made about the steel in
dustry, where no more than seasonal declines are likely to
add to the gloom already prevalent. Thus, while confidence
may be maintained for a while by the usual seasonal bulge in
retail trade, we are likely to see increased concern, and
perhaps nore outright pessimism, as the winter progresses,
even if the seasonally adjusted measures of aggregate per
formance hold at or close to their present levels.
Neither consumers' nor businessmen's expectations, as
reported in recent surveys, provide a basis for optimism
regarding the near-term future. If presently reported ex
pectations are borne out, consumer purchases of durable goods
in the next six months will be below year-ago levels. For
the first time since the bottom of the 1958 recession, less
than half the businessmen responding to the Dun & Bradstreet
survey expect sales to increase in the quarter ahead. Dif
fusion indexes of so-called leading indicators are still at
low levels, well below 50 per cent.
Having said these rather discouraging things about the
prospects for any immediate upturn in economic activity, I
should remind you that the declines in activity which have
occurred thus far have been very small, and that as yet there
is no evidence of any acceleration in the rate of decline.
The prospects are that gross national product in the
current quarter will be little changed from the third quarter
perhaps even up a little. For what it is worth, the evidence
of future plans suggests that the further declines will be
less precipitous than in any other postwar downturn. For
example, the McGraw-Hill survey of expectations with regard
to plant and equipment expenditures shows an expected decline
of 3 per cent, while in October 1957 they reported an antici
pated decline of 7 per cent for 1958. Similarly, consumer
durable goods purchase expectations are off only very
moderately for new automobiles, the item which bulks largest
in terms of dollar volume of expenditure. Builders are
expecting some improvement in residential housing activity
in 1961 and, despite the misgivings some of us have felt
about the continuing strength of housing demand, survey
figures seem to indicate that there has been only a very

11/22/60 -14-
moderate decline in the number of families who say they are
actively interested in house purchases.
Certainly, the downward drift in the economy so far is
not the sort of decline that has generally been associated
with a recession in business cycle analysis. It has led to
a profusion of new and refurbished descriptive phrases--and
I can see no harm in offering still another. I would like to
suggest that this might be termed a "moderated recession."
An important goal of monetary policy--and, in fact, of all
economic policy--is to moderate economic fluctuations. The
Executive, the Congress, and the Federal Reserve have all
avowedly been working in pursuit of this objective. It should
not come as a complete surprise if we succeeded, at least in
some small measure. In 1959, for the first time in recent
history, bank credit expansion in a boom year was limited to
about the amount of increase in time deposits. Fiscal policy
inevitably lagged, but the shift from the fiscal 1959 budget
to the fiscal 1960 budget was dramatic. The cost-price
spiral was checked abruptly as it became clear to all con
cerned that they could not rely on further inflation to
validate wage and price increases not justified by underlying
demand/supply relationships. Hence, most of the excesses
generally associated with a boom never appeared in 1959 or
early 1960. Monetary policy was eased progressively--even
while the total output of goods and services was still
climbing--and later fiscal policy shifted away from the
substantial surplus projected in the early budget estimates.
In the light of all these facts, the moderate nature of the
downturn so far, and the prospect that aggregate measures of
activity, such as gross national product, will decline less
this time than in 1954 or 1957-1958, seem altogether reasonable.
Mr. Koch presented the following statement with respect to credit
developments:
The main point I would like to make today is that we
have been achieving the bank credit and monetary expansion
sought in the Committee's current directive. In the four
months ending with October, total loans and investments of
all commercial banks increased over seven billion dollars, or
almost four per cent.
The June through October growth in bank credit was concen
trated in holdings of Government securities, as the rise in
loans was quite moderate, particularly considering that this
was the season of the year when loans usually show their greatest

11/22/60 -15-
strength. Business loans, for example, the largest component
of the loan portfolio as well as the component with the most
clearly defined seasonal movement, were down about $300 million
from the end of June through October this year as compared
with an increase of almost a billion dollars on the average
over the same period in most recent years. Despite the
greater relative increase in Government securities holdings
than in loans in recent months, loan-deposit ratios of banks
continue high and have declined only slightly from the peak
reached earlier in the year.
Thus far in November, credit and deposits at city
banks have declined rather sharply. This is to some ex
tent seasonal and may also be a reaction to the large bank
purchases of Treasury bills last month. Nevertheless, the
current decline bears close watching.
The active money supply, demand deposits and currency,
has also grown during the current half year but much less
sharply than bank credit. Over this period, growth in the
money supply on our new daily average basis has been about
two billion dollars, or four per cent at a seasonally adjusted
annual rate. You will note that this percentage growth is
seasonally adjusted and expressed at an annual rate, whereas
the percentage figure I cited for bank credit expansion was
not seasonally adjusted and covered only four months. This
is because seasonal adjustment factors are not available for
the credit figures and, therefore, annual figures based on a
particular season's data would not be very meaningful,
But even after allowing for a lack of direct compara
bility of the bank credit and the narrowly defined money supply
figures, the money supply has grown less rapidly than bank
credit, mainly because of the sharp rise in time deposits
that has occurred in recent months. Since May, time deposits
at all commercial banks have risen $3-1/2 billion, or over 14
per cent on a seasonally adjusted annual basis. Foreign inter
bank time deposits, however, have risen only moderately in
recent months.
Looking at the reserve position of the banking system,
free reserves have continued between $400-500 million, and
member bank borrowing fron the Reserve Banks around $150
million. Available reserves continue to be somewhat maldis
tributed, with country banks possessing the lion's share of
them. The relatively tight reserve position of the city
banks, however, is only partly due to the failure of country
banks to channel a normal proportion of their resources into
correspondent balances with the city banks. It has also been
due to the behavior of the city banks in putting new funds

11/22/60 -16-
that come into their possession to use very promptly, mainly
by purchasing Government securities.
The recent course of the outstanding total reserves of
member banks also clearly reflects the System's credit-easing
actions. Such reserves totaled $18.9 billion on a seasonally
adjusted daily average basis in October, as compared with $18.1
billion in April, an increase of almost 4-1/2 per cent over the
six-month period.
Regarding the outlook for bank reserves and based on the
free reserve figure, the pattern table before you shows that
most of the large volume of seasonal reserves required by
banks in late November and early December may already have
been provided for by the vault cash and reserve requirement
ratio actions taken by the Board last month. Even assuming
no further System open market operations, which is the
assumption underlying the second last column of the table,
free reserves would likely fluctuate between $450 and $800
million between now and the next meeting of the Committee in
mid-December.
These free reserve figures, however, may be quite mis
leading over the next couple of weeks. In the first place,
the reserves already provided for will at first be available
in the main at the country banks. Their flow to the cities
may very well be slow, as has been the case several times in
the recent past. Secondly, seasonal liquidity needs are ap
proaching and these tend to be concentrated at city banks.
Therefore, it would seem the part of wisdom over the next
three weeks for the Desk to make sure that money market con
ditions and city bank reserve positions are kept quite comfort
able, lest financing knots develop that threaten the desirable
bank credit and monetary expansion that seem to be in progress.
It is undoubtedly too early to assess convincingly the
results of the Account's recent actions in buying short-term
certificates, notes, and bonds as well as Treasury bills. A
few tentative judgments on the operation, however, may be in
order.
First, as to the facts about recent System open market
operations, in the four weeks ending November 16 the Account
provided over a billion dollars of reserves through net pur
chases of Government securities. Roughly half a billion were
through repurchase agreements with dealers, a quarter of a
billion through direct purchases of Treasury bills of varying
maturities, and another quarter of a billion through purchases
of short-term certificates, notes, and bonds. Over the same
period, the main reserve drains were a gold outflow about half
a billion dollars and an increase in currency in circulation
of a quarter of a billion,

11/22/60
As for our recent operations in short-term securities
other than bills, both their market interpretation and ob
servable results underline their modest character. They have
been taken in stride by the market as a minor change in
practice. In general, the operations seem to me to support
the "bills preferably" policy, at least in so far as the policy
applies to the short-term area of the Government securities
market. Short-term Government securities other than bills
have been available only in relatively limited quantities
and it has apparently been more difficult to buy them on a
"go-around" basis, thus raising questions not only of equity
in doing business with the various dealers but also of being
sure of getting the best price. The question of buying on a
best price basis also becomes difficult to accomplish when
it is necessary to compare prices of what are in effect two
different commodities, say a 3-month bill and a 13-month
bond. In such a case, the determination of best price neces
sitates a judgment about the appropriateness of a given
yield curve.
On the other hand, it does seem possible, by buying
different types and maturities of securities, even those
concentrated in the short-term area, to achieve some differ
ential effects on their interest rates, at least in the
short run. This is undoubtedly due in part at least to
expectational or psychological reasons, which may be becloud
ing to some extent real market forces.
The evidence of the differential effects of our recent
open market operations on interest rates of various short
term Government securities is by no means clear, however,
for this is the season of the year when short-term bill rates
usually rise. Nevertheless, it does seem likely that such
rates have risen more recently than they would have if open
market operations had been confined to bills. I hasten to
add that the differential effects on rates, if they have in
fact occurred, probably have been small, indicating that
private arbitrage in the short-term area has been quite
effective.
As a final note on these operations, outside observers
have commented quite generally that they bear witness to
the flexible character of the System's actions and its
willingness to try different techniques to achieve the maxi
mum contribution of monetary action to economic stability.
This is all to the good, for comment on the manner in which
we conduct our operations in the Government securities market
has gotten way out of hand and has brought upon us much
undesirable and exaggerated criticism.

11/22/60 -18-
Mr. Hersey presented the following statement with respect to
the United States balance of payments and related matters:
Indirect evidence suggests that the fairly large miscel
laneous outflows of private capital from the United States
that began earlier this year, and increased after the British
and German discount rate increases in June, have been con
tinuing. Much of this flow has to be estimated as a residual
from known items in the balance of payments: we suppose that
it includes such things as leads and lags on commercial pay
ments, withdrawals by foreigners of money previously held in
various types of assets in this country outside banks, and
movements of U. S. nonbank funds to other countries.
Tentative estimates for the balance of payments in the
July-to-September quarter suggest that unrecorded capital
outflows exceeded one-half billion dollars in that period.
These unrecorded outflows, taken together with something
less than one-half billion of recorded outflows of U. S.
private short-term loans and investments abroad, and blown
up to annual rates, explain all but a small part of the
over-all deficit in the third quarter, now estimated by the
Commerce Department at a little under $4-1/2 billion (annual
rate).
In addition, there have been net withdrawals of foreign
private deposits and other known liquid assets in August,
September, and October. Declines in foreign private dollar
holdings result in larger additions to foreign official re
serves, and these official reserve gains have been leading
to large purchases of gold from the United States.
Foreign gold purchases this month have been very large,
about $400 million thus far, after about $300 million a month
in both September and October. However, this month foreign
official dollar holdings at the New York bank have declined,
through the first half of November, so that the net addition
to official gold and dollars together has been less rapid
than in October. The general impression to be gotten from
these changes during November and from the more inclusive
figures now available for October is that the over-all deficit
in the balance of payments has stayed at a high rate. (The
over-all foreign gain of gold and dollars in October was
about $500 million, according to a very preliminary count,
and as private dollar holdings declined, the official gold
and dollar gain was about $600 million.) To create this
deficit, it is pretty clear that miscellaneous capital out
flows have been continuing pretty heavily.
Whatever the causes of these private capital movements
have been, there is a real danger that the movement might

11/22/60 -19-
snowball into much larger dimensions than we have seen yet,
and with much larger participation by Americans, if a flight
psychology should really take hold. A sidelight on this,
which may or may not mean anything, is that the price of gold
on the London market has now come down to about $35-1/2.
Meanwhile, the merchandise trade surplus in the third
quarter exceeded $5 billion, annual rate, and though a level
ing off seems to have begun last summer, we anticipate that
no great change will occur in the present quarter. At this
rate, the United States has been very close to a temporary
equality of its international receipts and payments, apart
from recorded short-term capital movements and the outflow
of unrecorded capital.
However, many people understand that a really satisfactory
balance in our basic international accounts--a balance that
would hold over an average of good and bad years--is not going
to be achieved in a matter of months, but is going to take a
few years at best. Also, many people realize that a lot lies
out of our hands: it is essential that we avoid inflation in
this country, but it is also necessary that other countries,
with surpluses in their balances of payments, take actions
to reduce those surpluses.
Given all these circumstances--a persisting underlying
lack of balance, requiring adjustments abroad as well as here,
and an uneasy psychological situation--the Presidential
directives issued last week served two purposes. (1) They
were fairly drastic actions to show that the United States
has no thought of devaluing the dollar. (2) They were a
forceful reminder to countries with balance-of-payments
surpluses, like Germany, where Secretary Anderson and Secretary
Dillon are conducting talks this week, that we expect greater
efforts on their part to get back to balance in international
payments.
The German balance of payments this year has been in many
respects the opposite of ours. Despite extreme boom conditions,
they still have a small surplus on current and long-term capital
accounts combined, and their earnings from foreign military
expenditures are a very important factor in this surplus. On
top of this there has been a very large inflow of capital, much
of it unidentifiable--like our outflow.
While the German boom continues, and credit conditions
remain tight, it is too much to hope that the German discount
rate reduction twelve days ago, from 5 to 4 per cent, will change
the situation drastically. Similarly, the British bank rate
reduction on October 27, from 6 to 5-1/2 per cent, though it was
made explicitly to reduce international rate differentials,
did so only to a small extent.

11/22/60 -20-
In both Britain and Germany, and in Europe generally, there
has been some easing of conditions in automobile and textile
markets, and an approach to balance at a high level in steel
markets. Nevertheless, denand has continued extremely strong
for capital goods. For example, in the machinery and equipment
field excluding autos, British new orders have exceeded deliveries
by an average of 14 per cent over the first eight months of 1960,
and in Germany the corresponding rate of monthly buildup in order
backlogs during the first nine months equalled 20 per cent of
monthly deliveries if you take the whole machinery and equipment
sector including autos, and 30 per cent if you limit it to non
electrical machinery.
Another feature of the German situation-not paralleled in
Britain--has been the accelerating rate of growth in retail sales,
excluding autos. Whereas year-over-year gains in retail sales in
1959 averaged 5 per cent, they averaged 7 per cent in the first
half of 1960, 8 per cent in August, and 11 per cent in September.
Given this strength in important focal centers of demand
abroad, I would not expect any marked weakening in world trade in
the next few months. Moreover, taking into account also the
British failure so far this year to keep their exports from sag
ging while their imports remain high, and the very important part
interest-induced capital movements have been playing in British
reserve gains, I would not expect any further cuts in British or
German discount rates in the near future.
Mr. Mills said that Mr. Hersey had spoken in terms of a gold out
flow that recently had been running at a rate of $4.3 to $4.5 billion during
the year. He pointed out, however, that the net gold outflow during the
calendar year 1960 would be substantially less than $4.5 billion and that
use of the annual rate of outflow might result in misunderstandings.
Mr. Hersey stated that the annual rate of net transfers of gold and
dollar liquid assets from the United States during the first half of 1960
was under $3 billion, whereas in the third quarter it was running at a rate
of approximately $4-1/2 billion. If the balance-of-payments deficit
continued at the recent rate to the end of 1960, the total for the year
would be somewhere between $3 and $4 billion.

11/22/60 -21-
Mr. Treiber presented the following statement of his views on
the business outlook and credit policy:
The state of the domestic economy is not yet encouraging.
There is little evidence of a probable pick-up in the near
future. Since consumer spending is such a large part of
gross national product, and since an early revival of economic
expansion may well hinge on a resurgence of consumer spending,
it is a little disturbing that consumption expenditures in
the third quarter of 1960 showed the first drop since the
1957 recession. While there was a good recovery in retail
sales in October, automobile "clearance sales" played so
large a part that we cannot rely on the one-month figure as
indicative of a trend. The expected seasonal rise in
unemployment in the winter months may prove to be a deterrent
to spending.
Inventory changes seem more likely to act as a drag on
the economy than as a stimulus in the next few months. However,
changes in total inventories this year have not shown any
unhealthy aspects of cumulative decline. Some further
realignment of inventory positions should still be consistent
with continuation of the same general business climate that
we have been living with most of this year.
Although private housing starts rose in October, the
easing of mortgage credit has been modest. A sustained
upturn in housing may still have to await a further easing of
credit terms.
Business spending on plant and equipment is leveling off
under the influence particularly of declining corporate profits.
But we can take some comfort in the McGraw-Hill survey which
suggests that there may be no significant decline in the offing.
As for the stimulating factors, we can probably look
forward to a continuing uptrend in State and local government
spending, and to higher Federal expenditures.
Significant bank credit developments in October included a
pronounced weakness in loan activity (reflecting in part a
sizable shift in sales finance company financing from the banks
to the commercial paper market), but a marked rise in securities
holdings and in total loans and investments. While the money
supply rose sharply in October, the absence of any additional
Treasury cash financing programs until late next spring
indicates that a major source of increases in total bank credit
and the money supply will be missing in the next five or six
months. Also, Treasury deposits are likely to remain at a high
level through the remainder of the year. However, we have at
least achieved continuing sizable gains in total bank reserves,

11/22/60 -22-
in bank liquidity, and in the total liquid assets of the
nonbank public.
On the international financial front we can see some
glimmer of light for the first time in several weeks, with
the dollar showing greater strength in the exchange markets,
the London gold market tending toward lower prices and
diminished activity, the establishment of a helpful trend
of interest rates in Europe, and clear signs that effective
steps are being taken by the U. S. Government to reduce our
balance of payments deficit. However, it is much too soon to
cheer, and we should continue to give very careful attention
to international considerations in the formulation of credit
policy.
It seems to us that domestic economic conditions, and
especially the substantial and growing unemployment figure,
fully warrant our maintaining the current policy of ease and
would in fact justify some leaning toward greater ease, if
this can be accomplished without forcing short-term market in
terest rates below current levels. In some respects the task
for open market operations seems less difficult than a month
ago, for the gap between interest rates here and abroad has
narrowed. Furthermore, the projections now suggest that few
open market purchases will be needed in the next three weeks,
thanks to the prospective release of reserves through the
vault cash and reserve requirement changes. Should these
latter sources of reserves prove unavailable, repurchase
agreements could probably be used to make up the difference.
I should think the Manager might be instructed to maintain,
and preferably to increase moderately, the degree of ease
prevailing in recent weeks, with primary attention to the
feel of the market rather than to free reserve levels, and
with the proviso that strong efforts be made to prevent a
decline in Treasury bill rates. Incidentally, free reserve
figures may become even less significant than usual after the
changes in requirements become effective, since country banks
are slow to make use of newly freed reserves.
I would think it unwise to reduce the discount rate at
this time. To do so would tend to dissipate the important
psychological benefits to the dollar which have resulted
from the cuts recently initiated by the monetary authorities
of Britain and Germany. The directive seems satisfactory in
its present form.
While there do not seem to be any great difficulties for
credit policy in the next three weeks, the dilemma between
domestic and international objectives could become seriously

11/22/60 -23
aggravated over the coming months, if recessionary tendencies
here should gain strength and if our balance of payments
problem should prove recalcitrant. In that event, it might
be necessary to think of new techniques to add reserves without
depressing short-term interest rates unduly. The suggestions
made by a couple of members of the Committee at the last
meeting for experimenting with open-market transactions
over the whole maturity range might well offer one very
worthwhile approach. Under present conditions we are certainly
justified in maintaining as flexible a view as possible of all
alternatives for solving this perplexing policy dilemma,
Mr. Irons said that business conditions in the Eleventh
District had been a trifle more favorable since the meeting on October
25 than he had reported at that time. Changes ranged from moderate
declines in some areas, to no tendency toward deepening of earlier
declines, to slight gains in some fields of activity. Conditions in
agriculture were good. Unemployment as a percentage of the labor
force was lower than the national figures, with most of the unfavorable
trends centered in the manufacturing area. Attitudes were good,
After reviewing the financial picture, Mr. Irons said that he
had been quite pleased with operations directed toward carrying out
the Committee's policy during the past three or four weeks. He felt
the Account Management had handled the situation satisfactorily and
had achieved what he believed to have been an adequate degree of ease.
Mr. Irons said that he would like to see the Committee's objective
for the next period maintained about as it had been during the past
four weeks. He did not feel the System Account should attempt to
force further ease in the market. Operations had been accomplishing

11/22/60 -24
some of the things the Committee had desired such as an increase
in bank credit, an increase in the money supply, and a better
situation in the short-term rate structure. While the situation did
not call for forcing further ease, Mr. Irons noted that the distri
bution of reserves had been uneven and that some of this might be
corrected as vault cash was released. It would take several weeks
for the effects of the vault cash release to extend from the country
banks to the money centers, he said, and the free reserve statistics
that would appear in the next few weeks would not be entirely
meaningful. He would be pleased if the System Account could continue
to hold about the degree of ease that had been attained, not being
guided too much by free reserve statistics and taking into
consideration the distribution of reserves. Mr. Irons said that
he hoped the short-term Treasury bill rate could be held somewhere
near the 2-3/8 per cent level, that he would be pleased if the
Federal funds rate would range between 2-1/2 and 3 per cent, and that
he would not be disturbed to see banks using the discount window for
some of their current needs up to the $250-$300 million area for
the System as a whole. He hoped that it would be possible to
avoid substantial direct open market operations and would prefer
that the System make reserves available to the market by repurchase
agreements as far as possible in order to relieve any pressures that
might occur on banks.

11/22/60 -25-
Mr. Mangels said that Twelfth District conditions continued
to be spotty. Steel production had dropped below the 50 per cent
rate and steel operators anticipated no improvement in the immediate
future. Residential construction had been lagging and during the
first nine months of 1960 had been 14 per cent below a year ago,
although total construction contracts in September were 4 per cent
higher than a year earlier. The lumber situation was weak, and
unemployment continued fairly severe in both the Pacific Northwest
and California.
Mr. Mangels said that operations for the System Account,
both as to what was done during the period since the last meeting
and the way in which it was done, had been handled excellently
in his judgment. A few inquiries had come to the San Francisco
Bank regarding a change in Committee policy as to purchases of
securities other than bills, but those inquiries had not been
pressed. The only reservations he had in connection with
operations had to do with the use of the preferential rate on
repurchase agreements for nonbank dealers in Government securi
ties. He recognized, however, that there undoubtedly were
circumstances that made the offering of such a rate desirable in
this particular instance.

11/22/60 -26
With reference to policy, Mr. Mangels said that it might not
be easy to maintain the bill rate between 2 and 2-1/2 per cent during
the next few weeks as would be desirable. In these circumstances he
felt the Manager of the System Account should have considerable leeway
in operations directed toward carrying out the Committee's policy during
the next few weeks. Mr. Mangels felt it would be necessary for the
Manager to base his operations on the feel of the market to a considerable
extent. He would go along with the use of repurchases to the extent that
that was necessary at rates below the discount rate, but as a practical
matter he felt it likely that most of the operations would be directed
toward absorption of reserves that might result from the release of vault
cash rather than the supplying of additional reserves in this period.
Mr. Mangels concluded his remarks with the comment that he would try to
keep free reserves around the $500 million level and that he would make
no change in either the discount rate or the directive at the present time.
Mr. Allen presented the following statement:
The business news in the Seventh District is again mixed.
Production cutbacks are underway in television, construction
machinery, and autos, all important in our area. But con
struction contract awards remain strong, particularly in the
case of large public and private jobs. And consumers appear
to be more willing to spend than in the third quarter.
The rate of steel operations in the District has for
some time been a few points higher than the national average.
The differential continues but is not what it was. Our
friends in the business estimate that steel poured in the
fourth quarter will be no more than 20 million tons, the
same as in the third quarter. And their projections for the
first half of 1961 are now 40 million tons, the same as the
second half of 1960, which would imply a further letdown of

11/22/60 -27-
total industrial activity. Possibly these people are as
excessively pessimistic as they were excessively optimistic
a short time ago.
Department store sales in the Seventh District were
7 per cent below last year in the week ended November 12,
compared with 2 per cent less for the nation.
On the other hand, total construction contract awards
in the third quarter were 5 per cent higher in our area than
a year ago--2 per cent higher in the nation, Residential
awards continued weak but public works and public utilities
combined were up 43 per cent over last year in our district
30 per cent higher in the nation. And there is evidence
that awards continued in large volume in October,
The number of automobiles sold in October was the highest
for that month in history. November has started off so well
that it should come close to the record November thus far,
that of 1955. But production has been at such a high level
that the large inventories are bringing reduced production
schedules, despite the good sales. It is estimated that
inventories at the end of November will be about the same as
on November 10, 963,000 cars. One factor which I have
mentioned before is that this year there are 24 different
makes of cars compared to 18 a year ago,
The normal seasonal pattern of loan expansion has not
occurred in our district either. And the only noticeable
evidence of pressure is in our two dealer banks. Their
deposits have held up, and their tighter position reflects
mostly increased bill holdings. Our other central reserve
city banks and our reserve city banks are in an easier
position and many of them are sellers of Federal funds. Our
country banks have followed the national pattern of higher
excess reserves and lower borrowings.
In the matter of monetary policy I feel that we should
endeavor to continue with about the same degree of ease as
that of the past several weeks. To repeat what I have said
before, monetary policy has done its job and I fail to see
how greater ease would make a desirable contribution at this
time. As a matter of fact, I have had qualms about whether
the present degree of ease, although appropriate to the state
of the domestic economy, is proper in the light of the inter
national situation. I have partially resolved those doubts
on the theory that, even though our relatively low interest
rates are contributing to the gold outflow, that outflow has
dramatically brought attention to the fundamental causes of
our balance-of-payments deficit, whereas a higher rate
structure would have meant less loss of gold immediately but

11/22/60 -28
would have delayed public concern and action and thus have
postponed the evil day, and an even more evil one. That
justification of what we are doing may appear to be
circuitous reasoning, but it helps me to the conclusion
that we can properly continue on our present course. I
would not suggest any change in the discount rate or in the
directive.
Mr. Leedy said that there were a few signs in the Tenth
District of improvement in the economic situation but that they were
not very strong. Generally nonfarm employment was showing some
improvement but was overbalanced by slackening in manufacturing.
Mining employment in Oklahoma was at the lowest level since 1951.
Construction had been exceeding the levels of a year ago with strong
gains in public works, utilities, and other nonresidential construction
accounting for these gains. Residential building continued well below
levels of a year earlier. Harvesting operations in the Tenth District
were progressing rapidly with both wheat and corn crops large. Fall
sown wheat was doing well and pastures in most parts of the District
were in good condition. Retail trade appeared to have shown a fairly
sharp increase during the past few weeks as compared with a year ago.
Business loans had increased seasonally, although there had been some
lessening in loan demand in other categories in the past four weeks.
A considerable part of the loan expansion this fall was in commodity
and food lines. At the Reserve Bank, borrowing continued relatively
higher than in most other Districts with fairly active demand from
country banks.

11/22/60 -29
Mr. Leedy said that he would align himself on policy for
the next few weeks with those who would, if it were possible, add
some further ease. He would not force reserves into the banking
system but to the extent that reserves could be put in without driving
interest rates, particularly on the short end, lower, he would conduct
probing operations with a view to making additional reserves available.
He would be concerned about placing too much reliance on net free
reserve figures because of doubts as to whether they represented the
actual degree of ease. This was particularly true because of the
unequal distribution of reserves among country banks.
Insofar as the past four weeks were concerned, Mr. Leedy said
that it seemed to him that the accomplishment of what appeared to be
two incompatible results had been of importance. The System had
injected very large amounts of reserves into the banking system but at
the same time the downward drift in interest rates, particularly in the
short-term area, had been reversed. At the time of the October 25
meeting he had been concerned as to whether these two objectives could
be accomplished; that is, whether the System could provide the reserves
needed for the domestic economy and at the same time not intensify the
condition in short-term interest rates that was encouraging an outward
movement of funds. This had seemed to be an almost insurmountable
problem, but as he now saw it the desired results had been accomplished
to a considerable degree and the System had moved as it should have

11/22/60 -30
moved. Whether this could continue indefinitely was another matter.
The projections of needed reserves now before the Committee indicated
that perhaps any additional needed reserves could be supplied through
repurchase arrangements. Mr. Leedy said that he would subscribe to use
of this procedure. He also said that while departure from transactions
in bills and the extension of repurchase arrangements at rates below
the discount rate were matters that normally he would not subscribe to,
it did seem to him that in the situation that had confronted the System
the liberal use of these alternatives had been justified. He would
make no change in what had been done during the past four-week period
other than, if possible without adversely affecting short-term rates,
to attempt to provide more reserves,
Mr. Leach made substantially the following statement:
The general level of Fifth District business activity
continues in a slight decline. Seasonally adjusted non
agricultural employment has declined only a little since its
May peak, but manufacturing activity, as measured by seasonally
adjusted manhours, has decreased about 5 per cent. The
furniture industry was fairly well satisfied with the fall
market and expects to finish this year close to last year's
record level. The lag in new orders for textile products has
been met by reductions in output so that inventories have
remained fairly well under control, prices soft but resistant
to sharp declines, backlogs fairly strong, and prospects good
that the current adjustment period will be fairly brief and
moderate. Public and industrial construction continue at high
levels, and new contract awards in these areas are increasing.
With considerable numbers of unsold houses in existence in some
parts of the district, home building and the lumber industry
show substantial declines. Consumption of cigarettes, 80 per
cent of which are produced in the Fifth District, is still
increasing at an annual rate of about 5 per cent.
In spite of a more-than-seasonal rise in business loans,
total loans of district weekly reporting member banks moved

11/22/60 -31
irregularly downward over the four weeks ending November 9,
exhibiting considerably less strength than in the comparable
period of any of the five previous years. Average daily
borrowings at the discount window continued well below the
levels of like periods of previous years, and district banks
remained net sellers of Federal funds,
In implementing open market policy during the next three
weeks, I suggest in view of the large release of vault cash
that we lean relatively more heavily than usual upon the tone
of the market, with particular attention to short-term rates.
Experience has indicated that country banks are slow to use
additional cash reserves and consequently the volume of free
reserves is likely to indicate more ease than actually exists.
I see no reason to change the degree of ease that we have been
aiming at and I would not want a sloppy market, but I would not
be hasty in mopping up temporary bulges in free reserves if
they should occur. I have been happy about the level of the
90-day bill rate during the past several weeks and hope we can
continue to do our job in the period ahead without causing a
sizeable reduction in the rate. In general, I think monetary
policy has made a useful and appropriate contribution in recent
months and no further moves will be needed until there is a
further change in economic conditions.
Mr. Mills said that from now to the end of the year the first
call on the Committee's thinking might properly be how to devise ways
and means to prevent a contraction in the active money supply in the
first quarter of 1961, Although there has been a less than normal
seasonal expansion in bank credit this fall, there should nevertheless
prove to be a seasonal contraction of bank loans during the weeks
immediately after the turn of the year that would have a depressing
effect on the active money supply. This should be forestalled,
Mr. Mills said, so as to prevent even a remote possibility of touching
off a deflationary spiral in bank credit. As to means for preventing
any such possibility, thought might be given to placing less emphasis on

11/22/60 -32
the absorption of reserves after the year-end than has been the
Committee's practice in other years. Similarly, thought might be
given by the Treasury to advancing its projected cash borrowing from
April to some earlier date in the first quarter of 1961 so as to provide
a springboard for maintaining or increasing the money supply and as a
means of absorbing some of the reserves that would automatically develop
after the year-end. Lastly, attention might be turned to the fact that
two elements that have given most strength to the improvement in the
active money supply have been the Treasury's two issues of tax
anticipation bills, one of which will mature on March 22 and the other
on June 26, 1961. Some of these securities are still in the portfolios
of the banks and, particularly in the case of the March 22 bills, there
could be a downward kink in the money supply at that time, if not
forestalled by advancing the date of the Treasury's contemplated cash
borrowing on a tax and loan account basis.
With respect to current policy, Mr. Mills said that he would be
among those who would be content if the supply of reserves between now
and the end of the year developed pretty much in line with the weekly
average figures submitted in the projection handed to the Committee this
morning. There should not be an oversupply of reserves, but banks should
be kept in a relatively comfortable position. With respect to the
imminent release of vault cash that will supply reserves, Mr. Mills said
that he was not as concerned about the lag between their availability at

11/22/60 -33-
the country banks and their becoming available in money market centers
as he might have been in the past. This was because country banks are
to be subjected to an increase in their reserve requirements of 1
percentage point simultaneously with the release of vault cash which
would give them an automatic stimulus to put the reserves that became
available through the release of vault cash to effective use. Mr. Mills
said that he would not favor a change in the discount rate at the present
time,
Mr. Robertson made the following statement:
In the light of prevailing economic conditions as sketched
by Mr. Noyes, and in order to give monetary policy a chance to
perform whatever it can do in swinging the economy back into a
moderated upward position (rather than a moderated recession
point), I believe we should permit the total volume of bank
reserves to rise further. I suggest we should strive for a
level of free reserves in the neighborhood of $550 to $650
million. This means that we will have to absorb from $250 to
$350 million of reserves, over the next three weeks, through
the sale of securities from our portfolio. I would think this
would permit bill rates to range above 2 per cent but not as
high as they have reached during the past two or three weeks.
I would expect the Federal funds rate to be lower than the
recent average level.
In this period (and the next one) perhaps it would be well
to continue our experiment, but in reverse. Why not try to sell
some of the securities - other than bills - we have acquired
during the past four weeks? I would not expand the "experiment"
into longer-term securities over the whole range of maturities
as suggested by Mr. Treiber.
In addition, although it is not a part of the Open Market
Committee function, in order to get more people thinking about
the subject, I suggest that the System should take advantage of
this "no pressure" interval to lift the ceiling on interest rates
on time and savings deposits to perhaps 5 per cent - so high
that it would not indicate a belief on the part of the System
that banks should pay that rate, a rate that would not be

11/22/60 -34
approached by any commercial bank. This would free commercial
banks to set their own rates in the light of their ability to
pay, and the competitive conditions prevailing in their
respective areas.
It would certainly enable commercial banks to compete with
other types of financing institutions for savings. It might tend
to increase total savings. It might even tend to start a return
flow of foreign funds back into American banks and perhaps have
an impact on the gold outflow.
Such an action should be accompanied by a carefully worded
statement showing clearly that the action was experimental and
that the System would remain in a position to lower the ceiling
if speculative or unsound tendencies developed which threaten
ed the banking system.
Mr. Shepardson said he was in complete agreement with the position
that had been expressed by Mr. Irons. The country seemed to be in a good
credit position at the moment and the degree of ease currently was
sufficient. With the release of vault cash, there might be some deviation
in the figures that would disclose the need for a change in the free
reserve level, but he would not like to see any added ease pressed on
the market as compared with the level that now existed. For that reason,
Mr. Shepardson said that the views expressed by Mr. Irons as well as
Mr. Allen seemed to him to describe the appropriate credit policy to be
followed, both in terms of the domestic situation and the international
situation.
Mr. King said that with free reserves in the neighborhood of $500
million, the position in the market should remain comfortable for the
next few weeks. While the bill rate could not be controlled in minute
degree, a range of from 2.20 to 2.30 per cent would seem to him to be
desirable in this period. During the past few weeks there seemed to have

11/22/60 -35
been more problems to be handled by the Desk than in any similar
period since he had been a member of the Committee, Mr. King said,
and he felt the rebound of the bill rate to around the 2.50 level
during that time had been desirable. This would go a long way toward
discouraging any notion that the Federal Reserve was going to press easy
money in order to deal with problems that could not be cured by money.
For this reason, he would echo the thoughts expressed by Mr. Allen and
he would add that he saw no reason for a change in the discount rate at
the present time.
Mr. Fulton said that no significant change in the over-all economic
picture of the Fourth District had appeared in the past four weeks. New
model automobiles were selling fairly well but department store sales had
weakened during this period. Unemployment was slightly less on a
seasonally adjusted basis but it had increased in actual numbers.
Construction had been holding up fairly well other than in the residential
area. The steel industry is still running at about half its capacity,
and people in the industry look for a continuation of the present rate of
production almost to the fourth quarter of 1961.
Mr. Fulton said he looked upon the activities of the Desk as having
been very good in the past four-week period. A large volume of reserves
had been supplied without upsetting the market so far as the rate
structure was concerned. Looking ahead, the earlier degree of ease should
be maintained, disregarding the statistics of free reserves. Great
difficulties existed for the Desk in trying to maintain any particular

11/22/60 -36
target of reserves, particularly in view of the early release of vault
cash. For this as well as other reasons, Mr. Fulton said he believed
the Desk should operate with as great latitude as could be given to it
in carrying out the Committee's policy. He would make no change in the
discount rate or in the Committee directive at this time.
Mr. Bopp said that there were no encouraging economic developments
in the Third District to be reported. Final demand was no more than
holding its own. He would not favor a change in the Committee's directive
nor in the discount rate at this time and a comfortable reserve position
should be maintained in the market for reasons already mentioned.
Particularly because of the prospective release of vault cash, no special
attention need be given to the level of free reserve figures during the
period immediately ahead. With respect to Mr. Robertson's suggestion as
to the maximum rate of interest on savings and other time deposits, Mr.
Bopp said that he was sympathetic with the suggested approach to the
problem. The Reserve System was concerned with money rates, but it
seemed to him that to regulate a specific rate in the market was not
consistent with the general position of having the market deermine the
price of money.
Mr. Bryan said that the economic situation in the Sixth District
did not differ materially from national trends. As he looked at the reserve
figures, it seemed to him that the System was moving in the right direction
and he believed that it should continue to move in the same direction. It

11/22/60 -37
appeared that free reserves in the week ending November 16 averaged
$445 million. It looked to him as though maintaining that figure would
bring about approximately $18,949 million of total reserves for the next
three weeks, which would be around $200 million more than last week's
level. He did not think this would be excessive. Mr. Bryan said that he
would advocate that the Committee aim at maintaining the free reserve
figure as a general target without requiring that the Manager of the
System Account hit or pretend to hit the figure on the nose. Mr. Robertson
had advocated a figure somewhat higher than the one he (Mr. Bryan) had
cited, and he would not argue much about that figure if it appealed to
the Committee. Mr. Bryan said he could agree also with those who saw this
as a particularly difficult time, one in which any particular figure
should not be given as a single guide for the operation of the Desk. At
the same time he believed that the Committee had a fundamental and basic
and moral responsibility to give guidance figures and that the Committee
should not abdicate this responsibility merely because it happened to be
in a difficult situation.
Mr. Johns said there was nothing in the Eighth District business
picture so different from the country as a whole as to warrant comment.
So far, the St. Louis Bank had not been called upon to accommodate the
Memphis cotton banks at the discount window, which was quite unusual at
this season of the year. After commenting upon the reasons for this,
Mr. Johns said that he anticipated that a demand for accommodation would

11/22/60 .38
develop sooner or later and that when that time arrived he would regret
the necessity for charging the Memphis banks a discount rate having the
present relationship to other short-term interest rates. However, he
would not suggest a change in the discount rate at this time.
With respect to the operation of the System Account during the
past four weeks, Mr. Johns said that he doubted whether a tight condition
in the money market was consistent with the consensus at the meeting on
October 25, at which time the conclusion was to supply seasonal reserve
needs on a liberal basis with doubts to be resolved on the side of ease
and with emphasis on the tone of the market. Apparently the tone of the
market said that the market was tight. Mr. Johns said that he doubted
that it would be practicable to expect the Manager of the Account to
derive a consensus from comments by individual members of the Committee
between meetings that differed from the consensus at the most recent
meeting. So long as the intervals between meetings were not so great as
to risk dire consequences, he felt the best procedure was to assume that
operations would be carried on by the Desk from one meeting to another,
and to bring up at a meeting any questions regarding operations during
the preceding period. Mr. Johns recalled that at the October 25 meeting
he had indicated that he was not sanguine about buying securities other
than bills as a means of keeping the bill rate from going down, although
he was willing to experiment. He did not think the experimentation in
the past four weeks had proved anything in that regard. The bill rate

11/22/60 -39
had gone up, but he doubted that this was related to the fact that the
System Account had purchased securities other than bills,
Mr. Johns went on to say that, for the next few weeks, the Board
of Governors had taken action to inject a substantial quantity of reserves
into the market through the release of vault cash. In view of this action,
which he felt was wholly appropriate, the question was not whether the
Committee should force additional reserves into the market. Rather, it
was whether it should try to offset the reserves that would be made avail
able by the release of vault cash. Mr. Johns said that he would prefer
the Committee should not take action to offset these reserves. This would
mean that the free reserve figures were going to be all over the lot. He
hoped the Committee would not become frightened if this happened or if
free reserves went to a figure beyond the range of any target that had
been spoken of by the Committee at any recent meeting. He would let the
reserves from vault cash stay in and would not try to offset them. In his
view, the economic situation in this country was such as to call for
continuation of a policy of monetary ease.
Mr. Szymczak said that in the light of the deficit in the balance
of payments and considering all other factors, his judgment was that
monetary policy had been about as nearly correct as it could be in recent
weeks. He thought that no change was called for at this time in the
directive or in the discount rate or in operations for the System Account.
He would have as a target a free reserve figure more or less in line with

11/22/60 -40
the staff projections, but he would not allow such a figure to be a
definite guide nor would he permit the amount of free reserves to go too
high. The System Account should continue to watch the reserve supply
from day to day and from week to week, and to the extent that it was
necessary to put in any additional reserves at any time he would favor
doing this through the use of the repurchase agreements much as was
done during the past four weeks.
Mr. Balderston said that the System was walking a narrow path
between domestic slide in the economy and a foreign outflow of gold. On
one side, there was need for an increase in bank reserves to fortify the
money supply still further as an antidote to unemployment. On the other
side there was a need for maintaining the bill rate sufficiently so as
not to encourage a movement abroad of short-term funds. Mr. Balderston
said that his feeling was that seasonal factors between now and December 21
would help to maintain bill rates. One might conclude that any additional
reserves that could be supplied to the market should be supplied between
now and December 21. On the other hand, any redundancy of reserves would
add to the problem with which the Committee would be faced in January.
After commenting on changes in the money supply during the past few months,
Mr. Balderston said that his conclusion was that the Committee should
keep the degree of ease indicated by the staff projections placed before
the Committee this morning. In short, as Mr. Mills had intimated, market
forces should be permitted to operate unchecked by offsetting System

11/22/60 -41
actions until the next meeting of the Committee, If, however, the bill
rate were to drop to or below 2 per cent, Mr. Balderston said that he
would hope that the Desk would then intervene. He would make no change
in the discount rate at this time. In response to a question as to the
significance of December 21, Mr. Balderston said that in years past bill
rates had tended to rise between the latter part of November and about
December 21 and he was using that period for his comments,
Chairman Martin said that he felt System policy had been about
as good as could have been expected over the past period. He continued
to believe that the balance-of-payments problem was the most important
problem for the country to deal with at this time. This was because he
believed it to be the most significant shadow in the domestic business
picture, and the only way that he could point this up was to say that the
credit of the United States was now in danger. This had not happened for
a very long time. It represented a real shadow for the planning of or
making capital expenditures. This truth must be recognized. The dollar
had been stronger recently, partly because of measures that had been
taken publicly, but this should not mislead the members of the Committee
into thinking that the problem was not very difficult. Until the whole
world had a clear understanding of what the new Administration contemplated,
it could be anticipated that there would be great difficulty in following
a proper course. Unquestionably the new Administration would engage in
some increased spending. The budget was already precariously in balance.

11/22/60 -42
If increased spending occurred with a declining business picture, there
could easily be a substantial deficit to deal with. The System should
keep itself in position to be helpful in whatever way it might help.
One word of caution on this, the Chairman said, was that more and more
he got the impression that there was a conviction on the part of a good
many people that all our problems--the budget, the cost-price relationship,
debt management policy, and the like--could be solved if the System would
just raise short-term interest rates and lower long-term interest rates.
While this might be an overstatement, it represented the approach that
some people were taking. In the Chairman's opinion, there was a very
real question whether the System could operate in longer maturities for
more than a very brief period of time without running into difficulties,
The real point was that, when an attempt was made to determine the
short rate against the long rate except for a very short period of time,
the System would be in trouble. This was a problem that all members of
the Committee should be studying carefully in the course of the next
several months. The System did not wish to fall back into a pattern of
rates or a partial pattern of rates,
Chairman Martin said that so far as today's meeting was concerned,
it was perfectly clear that Committee policy was proceeding in a generally
satisfactory way. There was no suggestion for a change in the discount
rate nor for a change in the Committee's directive. So far as instruc
tions to the Account Management were concerned, Chairman Martin said
that he would suggest that Mr. Rouse be guided by the discussion that
had taken place. Mr. Mills and others had made a good point on not

11/22/60 -43
trying to offset the reserves that would become available from vault
cash, and in the Chairman's opinion there was certainly no need to try
to be precise in any such offset when the Committee was thinking in
terms of generally continuing a policy of ease in the money market, He
then inquired whether there were any other comments with respect to
instructions to the System Account and no comments were heard.
Chairman Martin then inquired of Mr. Rouse whether he had any
comments to make, and Mr. Rouse suggested that the limitation of $1.5
billion approved for the first paragraph of the directive at the meeting
on October 25 be restored to $1 billion.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, it was voted unanimously to
direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
until otherwise directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (including
replacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities to
run off without replacement) for the System Open Market Account
in the open market or, in the case of maturing securities, by
direct exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary in the
light of current and prospective economic conditions and the
general credit situation of the country, with a view (a) to
relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs of
commerce and business, (b) to encouraging monetary expansion for
the purpose of fostering sustainable growth in economic activity
and employment, while taking into consideration current inter
national developments, and (c) to the practical administration of
the Account; provided that the aggregate amount of securities held
in the System Account (including commitments for the purchase or
sale of securities for the Account) at the close of this date,
other than special short-term certificates of indebtedness
purchased from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the
Treasury, shall not be increased or decreased by more than $1
billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion in cases

11/22/60 -44
where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one or
more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time
to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such certificates held at
any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed
in the aggregate $500 million.
Chairman Martin referred to a memorandum from the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York dated September 8, 1960, recommending that the Bank's
Market Statistics Department be authorized to furnish to the Securities
Department quarterly statistics on the volume of individual Government
securities dealers, stating that he had discussed this subject with
Mr. Hayes and that, with Mr. Hayes' agreement, he would suggest that the
matter be tabled. There was no disagreement with this suggestion.
Chairman Martin stated that unless there was objection the next
meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday, December 13, 1960, and
that the following meeting would be scheduled for Tuesday, January 10,
1961. No objection to the fixing of these dates was indicated.
Mr. Treiber stated that he would like to join in the suggestion
that Mr. Robertson had made regarding the desirability of raising the
maximum permissible rate of interest payable on time and savings
deposits under the Board's Regulation Q, Payment of Interest on Deposits.
Mr. Leedy said that he would be happy if the Board could be
relieved of the responsibility now provided under the law for fixing
maximum rates of interest on time and savings deposits. He felt that
an attempt to regulate the level of interest rates on time deposits

11/22/60 -45
should not be lodged with the Board. However, it would be unrealistic
to fix a rate far above a figure that any bank might pay and say that
the Board was administering the existing legislation. Therefore, in
Mr. Leedy's view the Board should be relieved of responsibility for
fixing any such rate by legislative action.
Chairman Martin said that this was an appropriate subject for
discussion. He also commented with a smile that of course a good case
could be made for permitting banks to pay interest on demand deposits.
Mr. Mangels commented that, as a matter of interest, share
accounts at savings and loan associations in the Twelfth District had
risen sharply in both 1959 and thus far in 1960, whereas investments had
increased by a lower percentage. This suggested that it might be only a
question of time until the savings and loan associations in the area
would not be able to pay the increased rates on share accounts that
they had been offering as a means of attracting savings to their institutions.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary.