A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, July 26, 1960, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bopp
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Fulton
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Messrs. Allen, Irons, and Mangels, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Erickson, Johns, and Deming, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, St.
Louis, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Brandt, Eastburn, Hostetler, Marget,
and Tow, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Koch, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board
of Governors
Mr. Yager, Economist, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Messrs. Ellis, Baughman, Jones, and Einzig, Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Boston, Chicago, St. Louis, and San Francisco,
respectively

7/26/60
Mr. Garvy, Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York
Messrs. Parsons and Coldwell, Directors of
Research at the Federal Reserve Banks of
Minneapolis and Dallas, respectively
Mr. MacDonald, Assistant Vice President,
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
Mr. Holmes, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
held on July 6, 1960, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report of open market operations covering the period July
6 through July 20, 1960, and a supplementary report covering the period
July 21 through July 25, 1960. Copies of both reports have been placed
in the files of the Committee.
With further reference to developments since the Committee meeting
on July 6, 1960, Mr. Rouse made the following comments:
In the period since the last meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee, the money market has reflected about the same
over-all atmosphere .,; in other recent periods despite the higher
free reserves. If anything, the money market has been a bit
tighter due largely to the impact of Treasury borrowing operations
with resulting churning and dislocations which created pressures
centering on the New York City banks. The New York banks took
sizable amounts of both the new tax anticipation bills and the
new one-year bills during the period and were called upon to
finance a substantial portion of the enlarged bill holdings of
Government securities dealers. Although bill rates fluctuated
widely during the period, the swings were less extreme than
previously, relating early in the period to expectations of
higher rates of discount for the two special bill auctions but
in the past week moving up as the dealers found difficulty in
reducing their swollen portfolios. In the last day or two the
dealers have been able to move bills and yesterday's auction
went quite well, the average rates being 2.40 and 2.70 per cent,
respectively, for 3 and 6-month bills.

7/26/60
Market expectations have leaned toward easier money or at
least no higher interest rates. The figure of $210 million free
reserves for the statement week ended July 13 inspired considerable
talk of a sharp shift in credit policy toward more ease and some
speculative activity developed. With the publication of the
lower average of $93 million free reserves for the week ended
July 20, the market seemed to place less emphasis on policy
change. Nevertheless, prices of intermediate and long-term
issues continued to move up, with gains in various issues running
to more than a point. The strength in the long-term area has
continued despite growing expectations of an advance refunding
in the area of the 2-1/2 per cent optional or "tap" issues.
Several members of the Committee have been especially
interested in the trend of the total money supply. It is
encouraging to see that so far in July required reserves, total
reserves, and "non-borrowed" reserves have all increased,
suggesting that possibly a modest growth of the money supply is
taking place.
According to the statement issued yesterday afternoon, the
Treasury has made public its plan to do its August refunding
through a cash offering. In addition to the $9.6 billion of
Treasury notes maturing August 15, 1960, $800 million of Federal
National Mortgage Association notes maturing August 23 will be
refunded. However, as against this aggregate of $10.4 billion
maturing issues, the Treasury will only borrow about $9 billion,
relying on its unusually large cash balances for the remainder.
The exact terms of the offering will be announced on Thursday,
with the subscription books opening next week. The cash refunding
technique is a new departure and, as the Committee is aware,
arrangements are being made to permit the roll-over of the $5.5
billion of maturing August notes in the System Account. The
arrangement will be that full allotment will be made on all
subscriptions from States, political subdivisions, or instrumen
talities thereof, public pension and retirement and other public
funds, international organizations in which the United States
holds membership, foreign central banks and foreign states,
Government investment accounts, and the Federal Reserve Banks.
The maturing notes will be accepted at par in payment for the
new securities allotted. This will be consistent with the
understanding reached with the Treasury in May when a cash
refunding was considered. Applying the full amount of the
paydown of about $1.4 billion to the amounts remaining after
allotting the above holders in full should put the new issues
in a very favorable position marketwise. The market is expecting
that the offering will consist of an 11-1/2 month certificate and
a bond, perhaps in the 7-10 year area. If that is the case, the
Manager plans to limit the System Account subscription to the
certificate.

7/26/60
Finally, I should like to call your attention to the fact
that in addition to the $79.5 million Treasury bills purchased
in the market yesterday, as reported in paragraph three of the
supplementary report, the Account also purchased $500,000 from
a foreign account for cash. This purchase was included in the
total purchases set forth in the written report but was omitted
in the more detailed description of yesterday's operations.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded and by unanimous vote, the open
market transactions during the period
July 6 through July 25, 1960, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Supplementing the staff memorandum distributed under date of July
22, 1960, Mr. Koch made the following statement with respect to economic
developments and related matters:
At the last meeting of this Committee, I concentrated on
recent economic developments. Since only limited new informa
tion has become available over the past three weeks, and since
numerous questions have been raised about the current inventory
and unemployment situations, I shall say a bit more than usual
about these matters today and only touch base briefly on the
new information.
As for the current economic situation, it looks to me a
little weaker today than it did three weeks ago, although part
of this seeming weakness can probably be attributed to an inade
quate discounting of the summer doldrums. Economic activity
continues at a high level, but with sizable amounts of unutilized
plant capacity and labor, and without exhibiting any significant
upward thrust.
As for evidences of weakness, our industrial production index
in June turned out to be 109 per cent of the 1957 average, as com
pared with 110 per cent in May and 111 per cent in January. The
July figure is not likely to be any higher and may be a bit lower.
The seasonally adjusted rate of unemployment, about which I shall
have more to say later, rose to 5.5 per cent in June, up from
4.9 per cent in May and from 5.0 per cent a year ago. No signifi
cant improvement seems likely to be taking place in July on the
basis of weekly data on claims for unemployment insurance. New
orders for durable goods fell off further in June to a new low
for the year, and the unfilled order backlog for these goods
declined to a level near the 1958 recession low. Liabilities
of business failures increased very sharply last month, and

7/26/60
stock prices have declined since early June. Several of these
signs of current weakness are components of the leading indi
cator series but the significance of short-run movements in
these series for current cycle analysis is by no means clear.
Looking at the brighter aspects of the current economic
scene, the consumer continues to make good news. Retail sales in
June approached the April record level, and sales for the second
quarter as a whole were 3 per cent above the previous record
level reached in the first quarter of this year as well as in the
second quarter a year ago. Department store sales in July appear
to have increased somewhat further. The nation's personal income
increased again in June to a record seasonally adjusted annual
rate of $406 billion, and income receipts correlate closely with
personal consumption expenditures. Housing starts apparently
ceased their decline in the second quarter, and applications to
the FHA for mortgage insurance, and to the VA for appraisals of
new homes, both barometers of consumer spending on housing, in
creased in June. Also, net exports continue strong, and State
and local as well as Federal government expenditures are stable
or rising.
Turning now to the special problems I have chosen for some
what lengthier discussion, in the case of inventories our staff
feels that although they are ample, they are not generally high
in relation to sales unless one assumes the imminence of recession.
When one looks at inventory/sales ratios for particular industries,
he finds them high only for industries producing durable industrial
materials like metals, lumber, stone, clay, and glass, and for
auto dealers and other retail outlets for durable goods. In most
of these areas, output of the product concerned has been curtailed
substantially since the beginning of the year in an effort to
correct the inventory situation.
In judging the appropriateness of the current level of in
ventories, one has to take account of the fact that there are
many differences between the current economic situation and
that prevailing in the recent past, say in late 1956 and early
1957. Thus, the supply and delivery situation is much easier
now; industrial prices have not been increasing; the cost of
borrowing has been higher; and techniques have been flowering
which permit the economizing of inventories. Under these
circumstances and with dampened sales and price prospects, there
has been little incentive to expand inventories, and businesses
have been pursuing a cautious policy.
In view of this caution, some part of the recent rise in
inventories can no doubt be considered involuntary, and in
that sense, excessive, but this development in itself has

7/25/60
induced efforts to curb such accumulation. The seasonally
adjusted monthly rate of accumulation of all durable goods
inventories at manufacturers, for example, was reduced from
almost $700 million in January to an average of less than
$200 million in April and May. Since the end of May, steel
consumption has apparently been well above steel output
and auto sales have remained favorable, suggesting that
whatever excess in current inventories exists in these
lines is likely to be dealt with successfully.
As for unemployment, the sharp jump in the unemployment
rate in June to 5.5 per cent occurred despite an accompanying
rise in total employment. This June development empahsizes
the fact that a continuing high level of unemployment for
this phase of the business cycle is one of the most worrisome
aspects of the current economic situation. As a matter of
fact, when one looks at a chart of the rate of unemployment
over the past decade, it is not difficult to see in the
configuration a striking step-up effect, with a somewhat
higher rate of unemployment occurring in the prosperous
phase of each of the last three business cycles.
Turning back to the June figures, perhaps half or more of
the one million increase in the unemployed can be explained by
the usual seasonal influx of students seeking employment. This
year's influx was larger than usual for two reasons. First, the
week in which the survey was taken occurred somewhat later than
normal and consequently found more teenagers out of school and
looking for work. Second, it also reflected a longer-run upward
trend in the teenage population which is not adequately taken
account of in the seasonal adjustment factors.
But even after taking these considerations into account,
there remained a greater than seasonal rise in adult unemploy
ment in June. The current level of adult unemployment is per
haps 600,000 persons higher than in 1957. It reflects both the
growth in the number of middle-aged women in the labor force and
lower employment levels in manufacturing, mining, construction,
and transportation.
On a somewhat more pleasant, even if less significant note,
total unemployment rates usually reach their seasonal high in
June and then decline each month until the seasonal low is reached
in October. If changes over the next four months were to be
influenced only by seasonal factors, total unemployment would
decline from 4.4 million persons in June to 3.1 million in
October. This decline would not, of course, affect the seasonally
adjusted rate of unemployment.

7/26/60 -7
Since this is my last substitute appearance before this
Committee for the present, let me indulge in a concluding
personal comment on the relevance of current economic develop
ments for monetary policy. Assuming the evidence that is
accumulating is not solely due to the summer doldrums, we
may be facing another period of limited economic growth. In
such a situation, a further easing of monetary policy would
seem to hold little hazard. There may be more question,
however, as to how much a further easing in monetary policy
in itself would contribute to a speeding up of growth.
Staff memoranda on the outlook for member bank reserve positions
and on the outlook for Treasury cash requirements had been distributed
under date of July 22, 1960.
With further reference to the current financial situation, Mr.
Thomas presented the following statement:
In financial markets during July, the most striking develop
ments have been a further decline in long-term interest rates
along with a sharp drop in stock prices. Credit demands are not
particularly vigorous and may have slackened somewhat. Whether
these movements are indicative of the true state of the underlying
economic situation or merely the views or uncertainties that exist
in the minds of market participants remains to be seen. The
review of economic developments gives some basis for the conclusion
that the changes reflect real and not imaginary influences.
The decline in stock prices in the past two weeks has so far
been the largest since the early weeks of this year, when the drop
started from a higher level and extended over a longer period.
Price averages are again close to the low level reached early in
March. Volume of trading has also declined from the fairly high
levels reached in late May and in June when prices were rising,
but some drop in activity often occurs in July. These movements
can be explained as the result of a growing realization that
corporate profits have not increased commensurately with stock
prices in recent years and have little prospect for enough
increase to provide adequate returns at current prices.
Yields on long-term Treasury bonds, which declined sharply
in June, have fallen further this month and are now lower than at
any time since 1958. Corporate bond yields have declined only
moderately, and those on State and local government issues have
continued firm, reflecting the recent large volume of new issues

7/26/60
and the increase in dealer inventories. The calendar for new
issues, however, indicates some seasonal falling off in the
weeks ahead and dealers seem content with their holdings.
Yields on medium-term Treasury securities have declined below
those on long-term issues and are likewise at the lowest levels
since late 1958. This may reflect the prospect that the Treasury
might reduce the supply of such issues by advance refunding or at
least will not have to increase the supply as it did in the past
year or more. Treasury bill rates, which declined sharply in June,
have been steady or higher this month, particularly in the longer
term issues. This change in trend reflects in part additions to
the supply of longer-term bills by offerings in July. It may also
reflect the effect of an increase in dealer holdings of the longer
term issues of bills to a relatively high level. Banks also have
increased their bill holdings in the past three weeks. Thus
market absorption of the longer bills is yet to come.
Results of the Government's budget for the fiscal year just
ending and prospects for the year beginning indicate that the
dramatic shift from large deficit to moderate surplus has probably
been completed. Indications are that the cash surplus for fiscal
year 1961, though somewhat larger than that for the past ficcal
year, will be no greater than for the current calendar year-
between $2.5 and $3 billion. Seasonal borrowings needed in the
last half of this calendar year, however, are much less than
those for the same period last year, largely because of the build
up in the Treasury cash balance to an exceptionally high level
at the end of June. The Treasury is in a position to retire
debt on balance in August. With the present state of the market,
it could also effect an advance refunding operation into long
term securities sometime soon without exceeding the interest
rate ceiling.
Bank credit continues to show little tendency to expand.
The record for the first half of this year now reveals that
total loans and investments of all commercial banks, which
declined more than usual in the first quarter of this year,
increased in the second quarter about in accord with the usual
seasonal pattern. City banks showed a larger decrease in the
first quarter and also a larger increase in the second quarter
than did banks outside leading cities, according to estimated
data for the latter. In fact, at the banks outside leading
cities there seems to have been a net decline in total loans
and investments for the first half of the year as a whole,
whereas some increase is usual; loans increased about as usual,
but these banks continued to reduce their holdings of U. S.
Government securities in the second quarter. City banks
increased their holdings of Governments, along with their loans
in the second quarter, after showing marked declines in both
during the first quarter.

7/26/60 -9
The position of banks outside the cities is also indicated
by the sustained level of borrowings at Reserve Banks by country
member banks during the first half of the year, in contrast to
the sharp reduction in the borrowings of city banks during the
period. There are also some regional differences in this respect
that may be significant. Explanation for these differences
between city and other banks and their significance is not clear.
They may relate to the change in the Treasury position. When
the Treasury has a deficit and is a substantial net borrower,
funds seem to move from the large cities to smaller places through
out the country. A Treasury surplus, however, accompanied by
debt retirement and particularly by a build-up in the Treasury
cash balance, tends to draw funds from all areas. Perhaps as
the Treasury reduces its balance and needs to borrow during
the months ahead, the funds will become more widely distributed
away from financial centers.
Partial data for city banks for the first three weeks of
July show a marked increase in total loans and investments,
reflecting bank purchases of the new Treasury bill offerings.
Loans on Government securities also increased as banks helped
to finance the larger additions to dealer holdings. Business
loans, in contrast, declined, as did real estate and other loans.
These types of loans all increased during the same period of
1959. Data for other years, however, indicate that some decrease
in business loans is customary for the period, though perhaps
not as large as that occurring this year. Loans to finance
companies changed little in the three weeks, in contrast to
declines in other recent years except 1959.
Deposits at city banks, after increasing more than season
ally in June, show no pronounced trend during the first three
weeks of July. Daily average data for all member banks show a
further increase, seasonally adjusted, in the first half of July
over June. U. S. Government deposits increased further at the
time of the cash financing but are now in the process of declining
rather sharply. It is still too early to determine whether these
Treasury payments are going to enlarge private deposits or to
provide funds to be used to reduce loans or purchase Government
securities from banks.
Banks have needed additional reserves in July to meet the
increase in required reserves related to Treasury financing, to
cover a larger and more prolonged than usual currency drain
early in the month, and to cover an accelerated gold outflow.
These needs have been covered by an increase in the System port
folio of about $400 million. Most of these purchases were
made, however, at the beginning of the month, and later large

7/26/60 -10
reserve needs were covered by the post-holiday return flow of
currency and the mid-month float increase. There were some
reductions in System holdings. The supplies and the needs did
not mesh completely and many banks found it necessary to borrow
at times from the Federal Reserve and to purchase Federal funds.
The money market continued to have a feeling of pressure, not
withstanding the maintenance of an average level of free reserves
of close to $100 million or more.
Seasonal factors will necessitate supplying rather sub
stantial amounts of reserves during the next two statement weeks,
in addition to those already provided by operations in the
last few days. In the middle weeks of August reserves will
become available from the usual float increase and from a
reduction in Treasury tax and loan accounts which will result
in a decline in required reserves. At the end of August and
early in September reserve needs will increase and again be
followed by a temporary increase in reserve availability in
mid-September and a drain at the end of the month.
In summary, reserve demands, though erratic, will mount
on balance during the remainder of the year. The projections
presented allow for a gold drain of about $100 million a month,
which would build up to a substantial amount by the end of
the year. They make no allowance, however, for any more than
seasonal growth in the money supply.
A number of important decisions will need to be made in
the period ahead. One question to be faced is whether in
supplying reserves some allowance should be made for greater
than seasonal growth in the money supply. In view of the
moderate pace of economic activity and the clear evidence of
lack of speculative or inflationary tendencies, not to mention
the possibility of undue slackening, a strong case can be made
for making reserves more freely available. If credit demands
do not expand accordingly, such a policy would probably result
in further interest rate declines, but that result should not be
feared under the circumstances.
Decision also has to be made as to how these reserve needs
will be supplied--whether entirely through open market operations
adjusted to the weekly variations in reserve needs or whether
some reserves shall be made available through release of vault
cash, together with alterations in reserve requirement percentages.
It may be desirable, in order to foster moderate credit
expansion, to increase somewhat the average amount of free
reserves and permit member banks to reduce borrowings somewhat
further. Perhaps free reserves of as much as $200 million
would be appropriate until there is evidence of credit expansion.

7/26/60 -11
In view of the wide spreads that have again developed
between bill rates and the discount rate, which make banks
more reluctant to borrow for temporary reserve adjustments,
and particularly in view of the reduced liquidity position
of banks which makes it difficult for them to obtain reserves
by selling bills, consideration may also need to be given
to a further reduction in the discount rate.
One factor in the situation that has elicited some
discussion and question is the renewed gold outflow. It is
evidently due in some part to a movement of capital attracted
by higher interest rates in other markets. It is doubtful
that the movement for this reason alone will be sufficiently
large to justify failure to adopt a monetary policy called
for by domestic considerations. Such a decision would be
appropriate only if a righter policy were essential to bring
about more fundamental adjustments that may be needed to
keep our international payments in balance. Under existing
circumstances, it is doubtful that such a policy is needed
or desirable. The adjustments that should be made lie mostly
outside the financial area, they seem to be in process, and
they will take a long time to complete.
Mr. Marget presented the following statement with respect to
the United States balance of payments:
A week ago today there was a meeting of a group of
technicians who assemble at fairly regular intervals for the
purpose of forecasting probable developments in the U. S.
balance of payments. This is the Balance of Payments Group
of the National Foreign Trade Council. The group is generally
very highly regarded, and I think rightly so, since it
includes virtually all the individuals of standing, inside and
outside Government circles, who are working continuously on
the problem. All the more reason, however, for prefacing a
report on the current forecast of this group as to what is
likely to happen to our balance of payments for the rest of
the calendar year with a report on how accurate their fore
casts have turned out to be in the recent past.
The first thing to be said about the forecasting record
is that it really hasn't turned out to be very accurate so
far as the concrete figures are concerned. This is not
said in criticism--if for no other reason, because there is
no other comparable group I know of who have done any better.
The first conclusion, I think, should therefore be rather
one of humility with respect to this business of forecasting

7/26/60
or "projecting," in the field of balance-of-payments projections,
as in the field of economic forecasting generally. One does
the best one can; but one retains, it is to be hoped, a saving
sense of awareness that one might, after all, turn out to be
wrong.
The second comment to be made about the forecasting record
is that, during the period to which I have reference, the
forecasts erred almost invariably on the side of pessimism:
that is, the balance of payments almost invariably turned out
better than the forecast said it would. Specifically, for
example: the forecast of the Group for the calendar year 1959-
as I duly reported to this Committee at the time--was for a
balance of payments deficit of $4.5 billion. Actually,
as you know, it turned out to be around $3.8 billion.
The third comment I should like to make about the
forecasting record may throw some light on why, during
this particular period, the errors seemed so consistently
on the side of pessimism. My comment is simply this. Quite
apart from differences in temperament and the kind of bias
which may derive from nothing more basic than a general
conviction that observers are likely to be less bitter in their
comments if a pessimistic forecast goes wrong than they are
likely to be if an optimistic forecast goes wrong, most
"forecasts" and "projections" tend to assume that what has
been happening ill continue to happen, simply because the
factors that will make for change are not yet discernible.
Thus, in calendar 1959, what was happening in the first part
of the year was that our balance of payments was deteriorating:
as you know, in the second quarter it reached a low of a
deficit of $5 billion, annual rate. Taking into account the
relatively better performance of the first quarter of last year,
the projection of $4.5 billion for the calendar year 1959, as
against the $3.4 billion deficit realized in calendar 1958,
really amounted to a missing of the turn for the better which,
despite all the fog which the steel strike created at the time,
we now see occurred around mid-year in 1959, while we were still
belatedly receiving the delayed statistics telling us that
our balance-of-payments position was still deteriorating.
This was no longer true, of course, by January of this
year, when the Balance of Payments Group made its first
projection for calendar 1960. At the time, one was a little
amused by the air of precision which was given by the
announced figure for the projection--$2.9 billion; but the
general order of magnitude was clear enough: around $3 billion,
as against the $3.8 billion deficit realized in calendar 1959
and the $3.4 billion deficit realized in calendar 1958, the

7/26/60 -13
first of the big deficit years. The latest projection of the
Group for calendar 1960 represents a further revision down
ward of the expected deficit: it is now expected to be
around $2.5 billion, instead of around $3 billion as forecast
last January.
It is interesting to observe--apropos, at least, of my
comment on how projections in economics tend to assume that
what has been happening will continue to happen--that this
figure of $2.5 billion is just about the level, in terms
of annual rate, at which our balance-of-payments deficit will
probably turn out to have been running for the first half of
the current calendar year. But it is much more interesting,
I think, to ask just what part of the earlier projection
went wrong. What was it that had not been adequately foreseen?
Mainly, it would appear, the degree of improvement in our
exports. The January forecast had, to be sure, assumed an
appreciable rise in our exports above the $16.2 billion level
realized in 1959, to a figure just over $18 billion. Actually,
however, by April and May of this year our exports had reached
a seasonally adjusted annual rate of around $19-1/2 billion.
It will be interesting to see whether the new projection for
1960, at $18.8 billion (again it is easy to be amused at the
degree of precision suggested by that decimal figure) will
also turn out to have been on the somewhat pessimistic side,
particularly in view of the replies to one of the questions
circulated to National Foreign Trade Council members before
the meeting, according to which over a third of the respondents
reported that they had already revised upward their expectations
with respect to their company's exports in the course of the past
half year, while fewer than one-tenth had revised their expec
tations downward.
But I have said enough, I think, about the perils of fore
casts and projections in the field of balance-of-payments figures,
as throughout the field of economic statistics, to make it clear
that I am not prepared to substitute a private guess as to the
actual magnitudes that are likely to be realized in 1960 for the
collective guess of this able and extremely well-informed group
of expert specialists. I do think that the record of adjust
ment in our balance of payments that we have had since the low
point in the second quarter of last year--from a merchandise
export surplus of zero to the current annual rate of around $3.5
billion--is ground for a reasoned optimism as to developments
in the near future, particularly if the cyclical constellation
as between this country and abroad continues to remain as
favorable to the improvement of our trade position as it seems
to be likely to on the basis of present evidence. But in the

7/26/60 -14
end the basis for optimism here, as in any field involving
economic policy, is not so much what the statistics of the
moment happen to show as it is a belief in the efficacy of
market processes in bringing about adjustment, provided that
our policies are such as to favor, and not hinder, the working
of those market processes. Danger comes when this proviso with
respect to policy is forgotten. To judge by the degree of
adjustment we have had thus far, the proviso has not yet been
forgotten. But the adjustment itself is still very far from
being complete.
Mr. Hayes presented the following statement of his views on the
business outlook and credit policy:
This is unquestionably a period of low visibility
with respect to the business outlook. While there has
been little change in the statistical position of the
economy in the last three weeks and business activity
continues strong in most sectors, there has been a marked
deterioration in business sentiment. This reflects such
factors as the lag in new orders, the dwindling orders
backlog, a considerable involuntary accumulation of
inventories, and signs of a squeeze on profits--besides
concern over domestic and international political develop
ments. The steady 10-day decline in stock prices may be
considered both a contributory cause and a reflection of
this growing disappointment with business prospects.
Purchases of final users actually increased from the
first to the second quarter (according to the preliminary
GNP estimate made by the Council of Economic Advisers).
The trend of consumer buying is favorable but not
exuberant. Construction may have bottomed out, and aggre
gate Government expenditures are more likely to rise than
to decline in the coming months. But despite these factors,
and in view of the fact that the rate of inventory accumu
lation will probably decline further, there seems to be less
and less likelihood of a strong new forward surge in the
economy. The prospect appears to be for an economy moving
along on a high plateau, but with a considerable volume of
unemployed human and physical resources.
There is more encouragement to be found in bank credit
statistics, which suggest that our policy of relaxation
over the last six months is beginning to bear fruit. Although

7/26/60 -15
the banks' liquidity is still very low and their loan-deposit
ratios exceptionally high, bank borrowings have been sharply
reduced and the banks are no longer being forced to liquidate
Government security holdings rapidly in order to meet loan
demands. Demand for business loans and for total loans has been
running a little behind seasonal expectations; but total bank
credit (loans and investments) showed a larger growth in the
second quarter than in any recent year, whereas the comparison
with earlier years was unfavorable in the two preceding quarters.
As for the money supply, the rise in June was accomplished in
spite of the fact that Government deposits remained at a very
high level. The potential for a further money supply increase
is strong as Government deposits are drawn down from present
levels. Over the year ended June 30, the money supply would
have shown virtually no decrease ha, it not been for a $2
billion rise in Government deposits.
In contrast with the money supply itself, other nonbank
liquid assets declined in May after increasing for many
months. This, together with the possibility that the
improved Federal budget may lead to further declines, suggests
that we may not be able to rely in the future as much as we
have in recent months on upward flexibility in the velocity
of money, accompanied by an increase in the volume of money
substitutes, to permit rising over-all expenditures on goods
and services. Under these circumstances it would become all
the more important to encourage a rise in bank credit and
the money supply. It is distinctly encouraging to note that
during the last few weeks total reserves, nonborrowed reserves,
and required reserves rose substantially more than in the same
period in recent years other than 1959. And if free reserves
are kept around their present level, I would expect nonborrowed
reserves to drop much less in the first three weeks of August
than in recent years.
It seems to me that we are fully justified in maintaining
a policy tilted toward ease, symbolized by free reserves of
$100 to $200 million, with any errors on the side of ease
and with ample leeway to the Manager to take into account the
feel of the market. Another way of expressing this objective
would be to instruct the Manager to provide reserves a little
in advance of seasonal needs.
Although I feel very considerable concern over the still
unsolved balance-of-payments problem, I believe that this
problem runs much deeper than the mere flow of short-term
funds in response to rate differentials; and while I would
hope to avoid any forcing of interest rates to still lover

7/26/60 -16
levels, in the final analysis we should give priority to
the needs of the domestic economy. However, on neither
domestic nor international grounds do I think it advisable
to reduce the discount rate any further for the time being.
An increased willingness and ability of the banks to lend
represents our major goal, and this can be attained better
through affecting their reserve position than by cutting
the discount rate. The imminence of the Treasury's refunding
announcement also points to the wisdom of deferring any
consideration of a lower discount rate until the next meeting.
The tight reserve position of country banks and the
reduced liquidity of banks in general might appropriately be
dealt with through a further release of vault cash and
through a reduction in central reserve city requirements.
By reducing the need for open market purchases, such measures
might minimize downward pressure on bill rates. It might be
well to announce in advance a schedule of reserve requirement
changes to provide for seasonal expansion of credit in
the autumn and to avoid any seeming change of policy in the
midst of the Presidential campaign.
I see no need to make any change in the directive at
this time.
Mr. Hayes also presented a statement, as follows, on the question
of open market operations in other short-term securities in addition
to bills:
I read with a great deal of interest the staff analysis
of July 13 of the suggestion made by several people, including
myself, at the last Open Market Committee meeting, and
elaborated upon in a memorandum subsequently distributed by
the New York Bank, that the Committee authorize the Account
to conduct open market operations in other short-term
securities in addition to bills. It seems to me, however,
that the staff analysis answers questions that were not
raised, for I do not suggest that a major proportion of open
market operations required during a given period in any
substantial size be conducted in securities other than bills.
Yet this is apparently what the staff analysis assumes the
proposal to have been, as indicated at several points
throughout the analysis and as further indicated quite
explicitly in the first sentence of the conclusion on page 7,

7/26/60 -17
which says that "Under existing circumstances System
purchases of certificates or notes rather than bills to
supply reserves for seasonal needs in any substantial amount
would seem inadvisable."
The staff analysis reviews many points about the long
run, ultimate effects of large-scale purchases of securities
other than bills. While I do not agree with many of those
points, I do not propose to debate them here, first because
they have been debated many times before, but most importantly
because our suggestion was addressed not to the ultimate
effects of large-scale operations in securities other than
bills, but rather to immediate advantages to be gained
through limited operations in such securities under certain
kinds of conditions.
Specifically, we had in mind that, as on many occasions
in the past, there will be periods when the market supply
of bills is temporarily scarce, and to supply all reserve
needs at such times through purchases of bills would tend
to drive bill rates sharply lower. We have in mind that
if on such occasions there is available in the market a
supply of other short-term securities--and this is often
the case--it would seem to make good sense to avoid
concentrating all our purchases in bills, and to purchase
some amount of these other securities in addition to bills.
Furthermore, there is no reason to assume that other short
term securities, which would be purchased in modest amounts
on such occasions, could not be sold in modest amounts on
other occasions when we wished to absorb reserves and when
the market was showing a good demand for such issues,
as is usually the case in the early part of the year. They
may also be allowed to run off in reasonable amounts at
maturity. We do not have to roll over total holdings of
certificates or notes any more than we do Treasury bills.
Moderate run-offs of such securities, in addition to
outright sales under appropriate conditions, should be
quite in order.
Our suggestion is thus a modest one, and indeed fits
quite well the language of the conclusion stated on page 8
of the staff analysis: "Purchases of securities other than
bills to cover seasonal needs might be undertaken if
purchases were made in relatively moderate amounts and only
at times when bills were temporarily stronger than usual and
in case similar securities would be sold to absorb releases
of reserves in January and February or at other times." Our
suggestion also fits the language of the staff analysis in

7/26/60 -18.
the second part of paragraph 8 on page 6: "To be sure, it
would be appropriate to conduct System operations in other
securities so as to avoid adding to market distortions due
to temporary influences. If operations in other securities
than bills are conducted with this point in mind they need
not be harmful and might be beneficial, but they would
probably be relatively small and in any event should be
reversed at times to avoid a gradual distortion of the
portfolio."
This, again, is what we have in mind.
Mr. Johns made a statement substantially as follows:
I am gratified to observe that in the week ended July 20
total reserves of member banks, on a seasonally adjusted basis,
were $300 million more than in the five preceding weeks.1/
This increase put reserves for the moment back to the level
where they were at the beginning of the year. This was, in
my opinion, in accord with the action of the Committee on
May 24 when the directive was changed to provide for "fostering
sustainable growth in economic activity and employment by
providing reserves needed for moderate bank credit expansion."
I entertain the hope that this new level of reserves will not
be permitted to fall off and that continued growth will be
achieved.
The trend of business and employment conditions is, and
has been, I think, such that we have need of stimulative or,
if you will, less restrictive monetary policy and policy
action. In order to stimulate economic activity I think
we need to increase reserves and the money supply. With
respect to the money supply, it appears that there was an
increase in June, but the figure at the end of June, about
$138 billion, was well below the figure of $139.5 billion
at the end of April and the end of March. It was also below
the $140 billion of early in the year, and below the $141
billion of a year ago. In the period from last summer
through March of this year the money supply was declining at
a rate of about 2 per cent a year. Since March, the decline
has been at a rate of about 3 per cent a year.
It seems to me especially desirable to increase reserves
and money in view of recent developments with respect to near
monies or liquid assets. The amount of U. S. Government
1/ In deriving these figures, we used our own seasonal adjust
ment; although it differs somewhat from those of the Board's
staff and the Atlanta Bank, the differences are not significant.

7/26/60 -19
securities maturing within one year, held by the public, which
rose so rapidly during much of 1959, increased little after
the beginning of this year, declined greatly in May, and, I
expect, declined again in June. The public's holdings of
total liquid assets, which increased rapidly from mid-1958 to
mid-1959, have risen but moderately in 1960, and most recently
have declined. In mid-August the Treasury has a $9.6 billion
issue maturing, of which about $4.0 billion is held outside
the Federal Reserve System and Government investment accounts.
Expected lengthening of maturities of the Federal debt
incident to this refunding would of course reduce further the
public's holdings of close-money substitutes. Considering
all this, it seems to me that proper economic stabilization
policy calls for a somewhat greater supply of money than
might otherwise be considered appropriate.
The turnover of money, which increased so greatly in the
first part of this year, now appears to be rising at a much
slower rate, if at all. Possibly, it may be said that a
decline in reserves and money was appropriate when near monies
and velocity were increasing rapidly, but, if the growth of
near monies and the increase in velocity have greatly slackened,
it may be imperative that we strive to bring about growth of
reserves and money.
During the second quarter of 1960 the Federal Government
operated at a cash surplus of about $4.4 billion. By
contrast, in the April-June quarter of 1959, there was a cash
deficit of about $0.4 billion. In view of the magnitude of
this shift, which is a significant depressing factor on
economic activity, it would seem to me appropriate that
monetary policy actions be more expansionary than would
otherwise be necessary.
Interest rates on money market instruments have declined
sharply in recent months, it is true, but this need not cause
us concern in view of the current lack of ebullience in the
business situation. The decrease has probably reflected a
contraction in the demand for borrowed funds, chiefly by the
Federal Government. Had the monetary authorities not permitted
the money supply to contract, or, if they had increased the
supply moderately, interest rates might have fallen even
further. I question the System's taking a position of
deliberately dampening the downward adjustment of market rates
of interest at a time when business activity is not ebullient
and total demands for credit are slackening.
After all, the recent and current levels of interest rates
are not particularly low when viewed in perspective. Despite
declines, interest rates are still quite high to borrowers.

7/26/60 -20-
Current rates on long-term Government, corporate, and municipal
bonds, as well as on mortgages, are higher than at any time
between 1945 and 1959. The prime bank rate has not been changed
from the peak rate of 5 per cent reached last fall. It seems
to me that interest rates might well be permitted to adjust to
an even lower level than has occurred up to now.
Coming back to the increase of reserves which took place
last week, I observe that it was similar to the increase which
took place at the time of the Treasury financing in April. At
that time the loss of total reserves which had occurred since
January was largely restored, but attrition was subsequently
resumed and continued until early July. I hope that now there
will not be another such attrition, but rather some further
increase. I hope we ill not let some preconceived notion
of a level of member bank borrowing or of free reserves deter
us from maintaining the level of total reserves which we have
achieved or from continuing to increase reserves.
The difficulty of getting and keeping an increase in
reserves and money in recent months has been the greater,
I think, because of a penalty discount rate. Since the
cost of borrowing from us has been greater than the return
on liquid short-term assets, banks have had a motive to
avoid borrowing from us. Accordingly, borrowings from
Reserve Banks have continued to decline and this has been
an offset to our open market purchases. Even now we might
somewhat arrest the decline of borrowing and enable further
open market purchases to increase reserves if we were to
reduce the discount rate substantially, e.g., by one
percentage point, to 2-1/2 per cent.
But if we do not reduce the discount rate, we can
still maintain our new reserve level and achieve a further
increase in reserves and money if we have the resolve to
do so. Borrowings have recently been about $400 million.
If they were to decline to $150 million, a figure which has
been about the seemingly irreducible minimum since the
accord, open market purchases of about $250 million would
be necessary to prevent total reserves from declining
further. Purchases beyond that would probably increase
reserves, and I propose that if such purchases are necessary
to maintain an increase in total bank reserves they should
be made.
Not only do I believe that recent and current business
and employment conditions call for monetary expansion, but
I believe it may be that the failure of reserves and money
to increase during the past year may have a cumulative
effect upon the economy which we are yet to feel in full.

7/26/60 -21-
There is opinion to the effect that monetary action may act
with a lag of varying and uncertain length. While this
idea may not be so well established or precise as to have
great weight in our decisions, I think it needs to be borne
in mind. Reserves and money have declined for a year. If
there is anything to the lag idea, we may discover later
that we have been more restrictive than we thought we were
being or wanted to be. This, I think, furnishes a further
consideration arguing for bringing about some monetary
expansion. Certainly, I see no reason for any fear that the
increase of reserves last week was too great or that moderate
bank credit expansion, in accordance with the directive,
should not continue to be our policy objective.
Mr. Bryan presented substantially the following statement:
The Sixth District is still operating at a high level of
economic activity, but considerable diversity of movement is
exhibited by various economic indicators, with few, if any,
showing much strength in upward thrust. Borrowings from the
Federal Reserve Bank remain disproportionately high, although
commercial bank loans indicate a stable to declining trend,
and bank investments are being rapidly liquidated. It can
only be concluded that the banking situation in the District
is far from easy. If there is banking ease anywhere in the
country, the Sixth District is not the place.
As for the national scene, it seems obvious that the
economy is still operating on a high plateau and has thus
far shown a remarkable facility for taking some massive
adjustments in stride. It seems equally obvious that the
economy is not currently in a boom-like phase of an
expansion cycle. Indeed, we are bound to note that nearly
all of our expanding statistical measures have in recent
months been recording diminishing rates of change. Many
others have recorded figures well below the peaks of the present
cycle or are below year-ago comparisons. We may note in one
or the other category: manufacturing employment, department
store sales, bank debits, construction contracts, construction
employment, money supply, average hours worked, industrial
production, new orders; and, to the same tenor, we have
insured unemployment and unemployment as a per cent of the
labor force at levels that are substantially above a year
ago. All of these figures, plus many others, add up to the
conclusion that the economy is presently underemployed, both
with respect to manpower and material; and, in recalling that
the present expansionary cycle is now old when measured by

7/26/60 -22
historical precedent, we must bear in mind, I think, the quite
real possibility that the underemployment of manpower and
material might get worse before it gets better.
In my judgment, no dramatic measures of policy are now
called for; and, in order to reduce the chances that dramatic
policy measures might later on be required at some tragic
point in time--say middle October--I believe, as has been my
view at recent meetings, that we should steadfastly adhere to
the intention expressed in our current, recently changed
directive, wherein we recorded our considered intention of
fostering:
". . . sustainable growth in economic activity and
employment by providing reserves needed for moderate
bank credit expansion. . ."
That is what we have done in a modest way and that is
what I believe we should continue to do.
Now, since the resultant of Account actions and market
factors is a reserve figure, I will try to state a figure that,
with appropriate allowance for the practical administration of
the Account, would seem to me--as of now but subject to
modification as the meetings of the Committee roll around--a
reasonable level of total reserves to aim for. This effort to
state a figure will at least--or, rather, it would if the effort
became general around the table--have the merit of assisting
the Account Management in understanding verbally-expressed
intentions of the Committee without the Account Management's
presently necessary resort to exhausting exercises in intuition,
revelation, and auto-suggestion.
I start with a daily average of total reserves for June of
$18,294 million (revised). Thus far in July we have attained a
daily average figure of approximately $18,511. Last year in
August the daily average of total reserves was $18,613, a
difference of roughly $100 million of reserves between present
levels and August levels of last year. I can see no reason in
the present state of the economy and the present banking situ
ation for our heading in this August for a daily average of
total reserves less than the same figure last August, so that
the first component of the target figure I would assume to be
reasonable would be an addition of, roughly, $100 million of
reserves to our present level of approximately $18,511 million.
Then, I believe we should have a component for the secular
expansion of the economy, say $47 million--at a 3 per cent
annual rate. This brings me out with a reasonable daily
average target of $18,658 million for August.
I wish to express congratulations and appreciation to the
Board's staff for the recently-issued seasonal adjustment
figures on total reserves. Atlanta will hereafter use the

7/26/60 -23
Board's figures rather than its own series. We are glad that,
vhile there are some conceptual differences between the Atlanta
series and the Board's series, the figure differences are
essentially small and do not affect significantly any conclusions
that might be made regarding the recent reserve situation.
Mr. Bopp said there was little new to report from the Third
District. Business activity continued much the same as it had been
recently; one of the Reserve Bank directors characterized it as sluggish
at a high level. Employment was looking a little better, but the
unemployment picture still was not good. New claims for unemployment
compensation were above 1959 and 1958, and continued claims were above
1959. So far as the banking situation was concerned, there had been
some suggestion of slightly reduced pressure on reserve positions, and
some evidence of a slow upswing in the total of loans and investments.
However, Philadelphia banks were still under considerable pressure as
to their basic reserve position.
Mr. Bopp expressed the view that on balance there was less danger
of a renewed burst of inflation than of continuation of the current lull
or a turn downward. Therefore, he said, he would favor a slightly greater
provision of reserves. As to the discount rate, he rather wished the
System were operating under a procedure similar to that discussed by
Mr. Knipe in recent papers whereby the discount rate would be lower with
out the necessity of an overt move. Under existing procedures, however,
he would go along with a reduction after the current Treasury financing
was out of the way. He would not change the directive.

7/26/60 -24
Mr. Fulton said there was little of a happy nature in the Fourth
District that he could report. The expected increase in steel orders
had not yet materialized, and the date when it might materialize was
being pushed further ahead into the year. In fact, it appeared that
the year might end before any real improvement actually got under way.
Buying on the part of the auto industry had not made its appearance as
yet. An increasing variety of quality steel was being shipped abroad,
but on the other hand imports of the garden variety were still running
at the rate of 4.5 to 5 million tons a year. The outlook for use of steel
by the auto industry in 1961 was not too heartening on the basis of
confidential estimates of production and in the light of the anticipated
higher proportion of compact cars. Steel prices had begun to soften in
terms of discounts to distributors and charges for extras being waived.
One manufacturer of steel pipe had notified its customers that it would
carry substantial inventories of all sizes and types and would promise
delivery in four days. Wage costs in the steel industry were to go up
between 10 and 11 cents an hour in December, and probably there would be
no increase in prices at that time, so the effect on profits would be
substantial.
Mr. Fulton went on to say that shipments of the machine tool
industry were now in excess of the volume of new orders, which suggested
that a new look was being taken by many of those who had contemplated
plant and equipment expansion. The stock market decline had had an effect
on the decisions of businessmen, and there were indications that plant

7/26/60 -25
and equipment expenditures were being postponed, or at least scaled down,
in the light of adequate capacity at the present time.
Mr. Fulton said that the unemployment situation in the District
had worsened. Insured unemployment had increased sharply and
contraseasonally in the past few weeks, while total employment had
increased less than expected. Electric power output for industrial use
had slipped further below a year ago. New car sales, which were running
well earlier in the year, had continued to slip back in comparison with
a year ago. Department store sales were well maintained, but sales of
consumer durables were in the doldrums.
Summarizing, Mr. Fulton said there seemed to be little about which
to be heartened. In his view, there had been an actual deterioration in
the economy that must be faced by the Open Market Committee. There
seemed every reason to expand the reserve base, and he felt that this
should be done as quickly as possible. In his opinion, the easing of
the banking situation should come more through reduction of reserve
requirements than through purchases of bills in the open market because
of the pressure that would otherwise be put on bill rates. Also, the
sooner bank reserve positions were eased, the less would be the prospect
of having to make massive moves later in the year because of having
waited. He would be favorable to reducing the amount of pressure on the
banks by making available to them reserves in greater quantity than the
Desk had been providing. He thought it would be appropriate to reduce
the discount rate, which was out of touch with the bill rate and had

7/26/60 -26
been for some time. This might also have a favorable effect on bringing
down other money rates.
Mr. Shepardson noted the comments that had been made about the
low visibility at the present time. He suggested that this was inherent
in the season of the year and that the situation was aggravated in an
election year. Thus, the difficulty of trying to estimate what might
happen in the future was compounded. Some factors admittedly were not
too favorable, for example, the underemployment of both manpower and
material, and everyone would like to see some improvement in that situation.
Mr. Shepardson said he had been concerned over a period of time
that when there was some easing of inflationary pressures and movements
there had been a failure to obtain desirable corrections. However, in
the present situation he felt that some corrections were being achieved.
For instance, Mr. Fulton had mentioned certain unofficial price adjust
ments. While there had not been much change in list prices, he (Mr.
Shepardson) had seen several accounts of fringe adjustments in prices,
and he felt this indication of response to market forces of supply and
demand was constructive. Also, Mr. Thomas had mentioned adjustments in
the stock market in terms of price-earnings relationships, and this
might not be a bad thing in the long run. Such factors tended to dampen
the prospect of further inflationary pressures in the foreseeable future.
Thus, it seemed to him that the System could properly provide for some
further growth in the availability of reserves. The question of the
most appropriate method was, of course, a matter of concern.

7/26/60 -27.
As to the discount rate, Mr. Shepardson said it had been correctly
stated that the rate was technically considerably out of line. However,
it seemed to him that it would be well to defer any discount rate action
until after the Treasury financing, at which time it might be desirable
to consider a change. The directive seemed appropriate and he would
not favor any change in it.
Mr. Robertson said it seemed to him that in the light of the
economic picture System policy had been about right recently. However,
since it seemed fairly evident that inflationary tendencies were dormant
for the most part, he agreed with those who suggested that the System
could afford to move further in the direction of ease without untoward
results. He thought it advisable to do so through open market operations,
in the absence of other System actions to provide reserves, to a point
where the banking system as a whole could show a free reserve position
in the neighborhood of $200 or even $250 million during the next three
week period. He hoped that this would be done on a gradual basis and not
in a way that would seem to indicate backing and filling without rhyme or
reason; rather that the System was moving steadily toward an easier, but
moderately easier position. This would seem to be in line with the
outstanding directive, and therefore the directive would not need to be
changed.
Mr. Robertson suggested that serious consideration should be
given to moving the discount rate down so that it would be more nearly
in line with the bill rate, and thus preclude any sense of reluctance on

7/26/60 -28
the part of banks in borrowing to meet loan demands. Since the discount
rate was out of line with other market rates, there was an encouragement
for banks to meet their needs through other means, with less desirable
effects than would flow from use of the discount mechanism. Then too, if
the economy, which now seemed to be moving on a high plateau, should begin
to move forward in the fall on a basis which indicated a resumption of
inflationary tendencies, the System should have the discount rate in such
a position at that time as to permit upward adjustments to be made not
only rapidly but, if necessary, in quite large jumps so as to be effective
in resisting inflationary pressures. In other words, this would seem to
be a time in which the System could get into a position from which it
could effectively use adjustments of the discount rate. However, since
Treasury financing plans involved an announcement on Thursday of this
week, with payment on August 15, it was unlikely that any discount rate
action could be taken before then. Accordingly, it would appear that the
System should wait until after the financing had been completed and move
on the rate at the appropriate time thereafter.
Mr. Mills said he believed the Committee could take reasonable
satisfaction from the results of policy actions in recent weeks. Those
actions had, of course, been through the open market and, such being the
case, they had focused their effects on the money market banks. Those
effects had been particularly evident in the picture of the central
reserve city banks, who had been able to expand substantially their

7/26/60 -29
holdings of United States Government securities and to increase their
loans to a degree, while at the same time experiencing an increase in
their deposits. An important collateral effect of recent policy actions
had been to bring back as participants in the Government securities
market a considerable number of banks who, due to tightness of their
positions, previously had been foreclosed from that type of participation.
Now they were again factors in the market, and they were a stimulating
and stabilizing market influence at a time when such influences were
needed.
The question that arose, Mr. Mills said, was whether, in moving
toward a further injection of reserves into the commercial banking
system, it would be inadvisable to be too aggressive in moving in that
direction through the open market. The question was whether, as had
happened in the past, the injection of reserves through open market
purchases at a time like this would not reflect itself too largely in an
interest rate reduction rather than in an expansion of bank loans. With
the economy apparently sliding off from earlier levels, and with banks
continuing to have high loan-deposit ratios and obviously having become
reluctant lenders until they have worked themselves into a position of
improved liquidity both by adding investments in Government securities
and curtailing loan commitments, it was quite probable that further
stimulating injections of reserves through the open market could,
undesirably, drive short-term interest rates down to an unrealistically

7/26/60 -30
low level. This would perhaps hold back the adjustment which would come
through more moderate actions and which, in due course, might be expected
to work into a lower rate structure in the long end of the market and
bring about whatever stimulus might come from long-term borrowing at
lover rates.
Question had been raised, Mr. Mills noted, whether the actions
taken to this point in supplying reserves could be expected to permeate
from the money market banks into the reserve city and country bank
categories and serve as a stimulus to the expansion of loan and investment
positions. There was persuasive logic in the point that had been
raised that when the Treasury comes into a surplus position, this has a
centrifugal influence on the money supply and tends to draw funds out
of the more remote areas to the central areas. This logic could be
extended, in the light of recent experience, to conditions where, with
a slackening of business activity, there is a tendency toward reduction
of borrowings on the part of the more important industrial and commercial
entities. If those entities should reduce their loans--and there was
some indication that this was occurring--very probably the effect in the
near future, as it had been in the past, would be to draw funds out of
the more remote areas of the country into the money market banks. If there
was substance to that reasoning and one could not expect a permeation of
reserves and a movement of deposits brought about by open market operations
to flower out into the reserve city and country bank areas in the same way

7/26/60 -31
that beneficial effects were induced by actions in past weeks to inject
reserves into the money market, with effective results on money market
banks, the application of that same kind of reasoning would give at
least a foundation for arguing that action in supplying reserves to reserve
city and country banks should preferably take the form of some type of
adjustment in their reserve requirements.
Mr. Leedy said there had been one important local development
in the Tenth District in the past three weeks; namely, settlement of the
paralyzing construction strike in the Kansas City metropolitan area. As
he had previously reported, about 17,000 workers were involved. During
the first five months of the year, total District residential and non
residential construction awards were down about 20 per cent from last year,
some of this having been due to the strike. However, public works and
public utility construction showed an increase of about 50 per cent over
the same period last year.
Mr. Leedy went on to say that the winter wheat harvest had about
been completed. As forecast earlier, production was estimated to be
about 20 per cent greater than last year. Country bank deposits had been
affected materially by the harvest. Figures of the country banks for the
period were not yet available, but interbank deposits at weekly reporting
banks rose $130 million during the two weeks ended July 13, and were about
$100 million above the peak Wednesday figure in June. Loan demands had
remained moderate in the past three weeks; real estate and consumer loans

7/26/60 -32
showed little change, and a slight increase in business loans was counter
balanced by a reduction in loans to nonbank financial institutions.
Borrowings of weekly reporting member banks had declined sharply with the
pickup in their deposits and had reached the lowest level on a reporting
date since January. Department store sales during the four weeks ended
July 16 showed a 3 per cent increase, perhaps reflecting the harvest in
some part, but sales since the first of the year continued under the same
period last year, the cumulative figure being 1 per cent.
Mr. Leedy said he assumed that for the period between now and
the next meeting the so-called even-keel policy would be required in view
of the Treasury financing. However, he subscribed to the view that, to
the extent it could be done, additional reserves should be injected into
the banking system. In view of the fact that free reserves had reached
a level around $200 million, he would surmise that some figure in that
area might be regarded as maintenance of an even keel. He subscribed to
what Mr. Mills had said about the matter of injecting reserves through
an adjustment of reserve requirements. In his opinion, this should be
given serious consideration, along with some further adjustment in the
use of vault cash. For the time being, it seemed to him that no change
in the discount rate was called for, although he would assume that unless
the picture should change the System would want later to give some
consideration to a further downward adjustment.
Mr. Allen reported that Seventh District department store sales
in the four weeks ended July 16 were 2 per cent higher than a year ago,

7/26/60 -33
compared with one per cent for the nation. This showing was regarded as
favorable because sales of last year were at a high level and thus far the
summer had been relatively cool. The higher temperatures of the past week
were said to have provided a strong stimulus to sales. Prospects for crop
production were not as favorable as in other recent years because of cold,
wet weather. The only exception was Indiana, where the corn prospects
were excellent. On the other hand, cash receipts for farm marketings in
May were substantially higher than last year and brought total cash
receipts for the first five months to slightly above last year's figures in
each State in the District. New claims for unemployment compensation in
the six weeks ended July 9 were 48 per cent above last year in Seventh
District States, compared with 24 per cent for the nation.
With respect to automobiles, Mr. Allen said that a few assembly
lines had stopped the 1960 model run. Most lines would be down by August 15,
and production of 1961 models would start shortly thereafter. On July 10,
inventories were 1,056,000 cars, not far below the record high in June.
The drive now was to clean up the stocks of 1960 cars and, based on sales
and production forecasts in Detroit, it was hoped that inventories on
October 1 would be down to 780,000 cars, divided 255,000 in 1960 models
and 525,000 in new models.
Mr. Allen commented that rates on home mortgage loans in the
Chicago market began to show definite signs of easing in June. Two of the
largest lenders reported 1/4 point reductions in their rate schedules

7/26/60 -34
toward the end of the month. Loans equal to 80 per cent of appraised value
were being offered at 6 per cent, 75 per cent loans at 5-3/4 per cent, and
50 to 60 per cent loans at 5-1/2 per cent. The most active demands,
however, were in the low down payment categories.
The trend toward lower rates might act as a stimulus to home build
ing, Mr. Allen noted. For the first five months of 1960, home building
permits were below last year by 21 per cent in the Chicago area, 23 per
cent in Detroit, 5 per cent in Indianapolis, and 32 per cent in Des Moines.
Milwaukee reported a 6 per cent increase.
Business loans had again shown three consecutive weeks of decline
in the weekly reporting banks. Chicago banks reported a net decline of
$46 million by business borrowers in the period ended last Wednesday, the
biggest single week's drop since the fall of 1958. The large banks as a
group continued to show a substantial basic deficit position, but the group
figures are heavily affected by a large increase of bill holdings by one
dealer bank.
Mr. Allen said that although he would not favor changing either
the discount rate or the directive at this time, he would suggest that
monetary policy in the next three weeks trend in an easier direction, with
the goal for net free reserves in the area of $200 to $300 million.
Mr. Deming said that contrasting trends in the Ninth District added
up to a somwhat better average picture, particularly in relation to a
year ago and in relation to the country as a whole. In both cases, however,

7/26/60 -35
these developments must be viewed as favorable only when qualified by
recognition that the District entered a weakened economic situation about
this time last year and that the rate of expansion nationally had weakened
somewhat. The District had about caught up with the nation, partly because
the national picture was not as exuberant, and showed gains against last
year partly because last year in the District was not so good.
At the same time, the favorable developments should not be mini
mized, Mr. Deming said. As of July 1, the official estimates for the 1960
District small grain crop were excellent. Much of the winter wheat had
since been harvested or was in process of being harvested. Spring wheat
production might be cut back by a developing drouthy situation since
July 1, but total wheat production should be at near-record levels in most
areas. The 1960 District wheat crop on July 1 was estimated at 3 per cent
above that of last year, with oats and flax production up an estimated 48
per cent. This situation, along with favorable livestock marketings this
summer and fall, might soon, if it had not already, push farm income to the
plus side compared with the year-ago statistics. This would be a stimulus
to business generally. In fact, some of the economic data just becoming
available for June and early July showed modest improvement. Department
store sales in Minneapolis, for example, in the four weeks ended July 9,
were up 6 per cent from the comparable period a year earlier. For the
United States, the figure was a plus 2 per cent.

7/26/60 -36
District employment in June also showed a healthy improvement, and
the number of insured unemployed dropped from 35,134 in May to 25,527 in
June. This latter comparison represented a greater improvement from May
to June than for the country as a whole. Personal income in Minnesota
during June showed a 4.4 per cent gain from a year earlier, and farm
income in May was only about 5 per cent less than a year ago. In previous
months of 1960 the decline from year-ago levels was substantially larger,
ranging up to a minus 15 per cent in February.
The major depressing developments of recent weeks were associated
with iron ore mining. A Reserve Bank visitor who had just returned from
extensive calling in the iron range reported greater pessimism than he had
encountered in a long time, and the reasons were not hard to find. Ore
shipments in June were smaller than in May for the first time since prewar
days, except for 1952 when there was a strike. They were likely to be down
in July and August. Presently, there were 45 ore carriers laid up, out of
a total fleet of 232.
The District banking picture seemed to be getting somewhat easier
at last. The seasonal deposit upswing finally seemed to be developing,
borrowing from the Reserve Bank had fallen fairly sharply, and loan-deposit
ratios showed some slight improvement. This was quite a welcome development.
Turning to credit policy, Mr. Deming said it seemed to him that the
summer doldrums had been with us a bit too long. Thus, he felt that the

7/26/60
37
weight of evidence argued for further ease in monetary policy. Perhaps
this might be accomplished, as had been suggested, by attempting to
anticipate some of the seasonal needs and supplying reserves more freely
through open market operations. Perhaps it would be well to prepare to
take some action via further release of vault cash. In any event, he
would like to see further ease--accomplished undramatically but accomplished
effectively.
As to the discount rate, Mr. Deming stated that he had mixed feel
ings. It was as much as, or more, out of touch with the bill rate now than
when action last was taen to reduce it. He felt the current rate did
exercise a more restrictive effect than he would like, and he could argue
that it should be reduced now. At the same time, with the Treasury finane
ing coming up, he had some question about action now, and on balance he
believed he would prefer to wait for a bit. He saw no reason to change the
directive at this time.
Mr. Mangels said there was little evidence of an increase in
Twelfth District business activity in the past three weeks, while there
were some signs of a slackening pace in several areas. The unemployment
picture was not very good, with unemployment at the highest level since
1958. Perhaps this was due to the large influx of teenagers into the labor
force and the situation was temporary, but in June unemployment figures
were 5.6 per cent in California, 7 per cent in Oregon, and 7.8 per cent in

7/26/60 -38
Washington. Lumber production was down further, and steel production was
at the rate of 57 per cent of capacity in the second week of July, although
one mill in Utah was operating at 95 per cent.
Turning to the banking picture, Mr. Mangels reported that loans
declined in the three-week period ended July 13 and that, while the total
decline was not large, there were decreases in all categories except for
modest increases in agricultural loans, loans to sales finance companies,
and loans to Government securities dealers. Holdings of securities
increased about $166 million. Bank deposits had gone up for seasonal
reasons, and there also had been some unexpected increases because of the
run-off of bills held by customers which were redeemed at maturity. For
the District, savings deposits increased about $39 million. The expected
loss of savings deposits in California apparently did not materialize to
the extent that the bankers thought it might. For the first six days of
July, losses were about $200 million, approximately half as large as those
suffered in the same period in January. District banks were net sellers
of Federal funds in rather substantial amount, while borrowings at the
Reserve Bank were nominal, the average for the two weeks ended July 19
being under $2 million per day.
Mr. Mangels said that for reasons others had indicated, he could
go along with extension of further ease in the coming period. Free
reserves of $200 million, $250 million, or even $300 million would be
acceptable to him. He felt that a change in the discount rate should not

7/26/60 -39
be made at the present time because of the Treasury financing, but that at
the first clear period consideration should be given to a reduction in the
rate. He regarded the directive as satisfactory.
Mr. Irons said there had been little change in the Eleventh Dis
trict during the past three weeks. The pattern was not too dissimilar
from the national pattern, except that the factors affecting the District
might be somewhat different from those affecting other parts of the
country. In general, economic activity was moving along sideways at a
high level. There was, of course, some question as to how long a side
ways movement might prevail, but at the moment most of the major economic
indicators except those directly associated with petroleum were within a
couple of percentage points, plus or minus, from record levels.
Mr. Irons reported evidence of less restraint on the position of
District banks than had prevailed a few periods back. During the most
recent period there was a decrease in loans, an increase of holdings of
Government securities, and a net increase in bank credit. Borrowings from
the Reserve Bank had been averaging about $25 million, a bit lower than
they had been. The use of Federal funds by large city banks was con
siderably lower than it had been running earlier.
Mr. Irons said he did not detect reluctance on the part of banks to
use the discount window. The country banks needing to borrow were borrowing,
and he had heard of no reluctance. Some large city banks that were using

7/26/60 -40
the Federal funds market might be doing so to protect their position at
the discount window.
Mr. Irons went on to say that the psychology and attitude of
bankers and businessmen with whom he had had contact recently was certainly
not one of pessimism. It was a sort of acceptance of an attitude that
during times like these, with all of the various factors that are at play,
there is a period of watchful waiting and cautiousness. The general feeling
was that there would be a slight increase over the months ahead, perhaps in
the fourth quarter. There was no attitude of rank optimism or real
pessimism.
Turning to policy, Mr. Irons said he came out a little differently
in degree than those who had spoken thus far. He was quite satisfied with
open market operations during the past three weeks. The Desk had made
some reserves available and had followed a moderate and cautious approach.
He would much prefer to continue in that manner during this period of
unsatisfactory outlook insofar as forecasting was concerned. The visibility
was low because of many factors, and at a time when visibility was low he
would not be inclined to take off in either direction. Instead, he would
prefer to follow the basic policy that had been followed, permitting a
moderate increase in bank credit and a moderate increase in bank reserves.
For the period immediately ahead, he would favor no change in the discount
rate or in the directive. When one talked of going to free reserves of
$200 million or even $300 million, that to him (Mr. Irons) was more than

7/26/60 -41
a moderate and cautious approach, and he would rather stay around $100
million. He would prefer to permit funds to move into reserves cautiously
and moderately, while meeting seasonal requirements. While errors might
be on the side of ease, he certainly would avoid anything in the nature
of aggressiveness. If free reserves should be moved up to $250 million or
$300 million, he felt that this would be taken by the market as a clear
change in policy.
In summary, Mr. Irons said his thinking was in terms of a cautious
relaxation of reserve pressures, and that he would avoid being aggressive.
He would meet seasonal requirements, and if it seemed desirable to err a
little on the side of ease he would be agreeable to that. However, the
Treasury would be in the picture during the next three weeks; August 15
would be the settlement date, and the Treasury was attempting a new form
of financing. Therefore, for the time being, he would be careful and
cautious. To go a little beyond seasonal needs, if necessary, would be
all right, but he would not favor anything that could be construed as a
basic change in policy.
Mr. Erickson noted that several expressions had been used around
the table to describe the current situation and that Mr. Ellis, at
yesterday's meeting of the directors of the Boston Bank, had used the
phrase "coasting uphill" in referring to the situation in the First
District. Mr. Erickson went on to say that there were still many favorable
factors in the District picture. The New England production index, which

7/26/60 -42
held at 117 in February, March, and April, rose to 119 in May, while every
week this year electric power production had been ahead of last year, when
allowance was made for weeks with holidays. Department store sales in
June were 4 per cent above last year; in the four weeks ended July 16,
they were 5 per cent ahead. New car registrations in May were 18 per cent
ahead of last year. As to nonagricultural employment, the monthly
year-to-year comparison had narrowed since the first of this year, but
the situation was still fairly close to the national picture. Insured
unemployment in July was higher than last year, but not as high as
nationally. Construction contracts through May were lower than nationally,
but residential construction was better than nationally.
Turning to the June survey of mutual savings banks, Mr. Erickson
said that year-to-year comparisons of deposits are made monthly. The
year-to-year improvement reached a high point of 6.5 per cent in February
1959 and the figure then decreased until May of this year, when it stood
at 4.4 per cent. In June the improvement was 4.5 per cent. While the
figure for this one month might not be too significant, it did mark the
first turnaround.
In the past three weeks, Mr. Erickson said, District banks were
net purchasers of Federal funds. Commercial loans were higher, both at
Boston and country banks, than at the first of the year. The loan-deposit
ratio for Boston banks had risen from 60 per cent at the first of the year

7/26/60 -43
to 63 per cent in July, and for country banks the ratio had risen from 56
to 58 per cent. In July to date, District banks had used the discount
window less than in other months, the average being less than $10 million.
It would have been even lower if there had not been one or two days when
Boston banks could not get Federal funds. In this connection, Mr.
Erickson said he had found the same sort of situation as Mr. Irons, that
is, no real reluctance to come to the discount window if the banks needed
funds. Businessmen also appeared to have about the same point of view as
described by Mr. Irons; all seemed to feel that the fourth quarter of the
year was going to be on the upside.
As to policy, Mr. Erickson said that he considered the directive
entirely satisfactory. In view of the fact that the Treasury was in the
market, he would favor no change in the discount rate at this time. By
the time of the next meeting, however, the situation might be more favor
able to a change in the rate. He felt that the Desk should supply reserves
for seasonal requirements, but that the Desk should,not be too aggressive.
He would favor free reserves somewhere around $200 million. Mr. Erickson
expressed the hope that, since it would be necessary to provide reserves
later in the year, some part could be made available through adjustment
of provisions relating to vault cash and through a change in the reserve
requirements applicable to central reserve city banks.
Mr. Balderston said it seemed to him that at the Committee meeting
on July 6 the question was whether the summer slackness represented merely

7/26/60 -44
a pause to refresh the economy or fatigue of greater duration. The answer
now seemed more clear, despite one's fear of deception on account of the
seasonal summer doldrums. In his view the decline that one might expect
at this phase of the cycle was now evident and should be countered actively
by such means as were available to the System. There were fundamental
domestic trends affecting the state of business which might have an effect
for a long time to come. First, there was the price decline stimulated by
excess productive capacity. It would tend to bring about continued re
duction in the rate of inventory building, which he suspected by this time
had dwindled to zero. And very soon there might be an actual decline in
inventories, if that had not occurred already. Then there was the profit
squeeze stemming from inability to pass cost advances along to the customer.
This, he found, was worrying not only chemical and other manufacturers but
even utility executives. The profit squeeze would induce more labor saving,
thus aggravating the unemployment problem.
In the face of this situation, which he now believed to be long
lasting and not seasonal, Mr. Balderston said he would favor the following
actions. First, he would remove the word "moderate" from clause (b) of
the policy directive. In the preliminary draft of policy record entry for
the Board's Annual Report covering the July 6 meeting of the Committee,
he had found the phrase "marking time", and this was a phrase he did not
like to see in the record. He did not believe that the Committee's
policy was one of marking time. This sounded like waiting for the

7/26/60 -45
inevitable, and it was not something he would relish. Since he did not
believe that the present posture of the Committee was one of trying to
bring about a moderate increase in bank reserves, but rather that the
Committee had been struggling to do better, he would eliminate the word
"moderate" from clause (b) of the directive. Second, he would adopt a
free reserve target of $250 million, as suggested by some others. Third,
he would reduce the discount rate to 3 per cent. In this connection, he
raised the question how long after the close of the books next week on
the pending Treasury financing it would be necessary for the System to
wait if it desired to take action on the discount rate. He did not think
anyone would be injured by a decrease in the discount rate as they would
by an increase. He then asked Mr. Rouse whether dealers might be likely
to receive a windfall if a change in the discount rate were made within a
week or so after the closing of the books.
Mr. Rouse replied that he thought this would depend on the terms
on which the dealers would be allowed to subscribe. It could be that what
Mr. Balderston had referred to might happen. Ordinarily, one would think
in terms of a little time after the delivery date, in this case August 15,
before making a move on the discount rate.
Chairan Martin said he did not propose to cover in his comments
the ground that had already been covered. He wished, however, to make the
observation that the adjustents now going on had long been needed and
were necessary if there was to be any real revival of business and any

7/26/60 -46
real improvement in prospect. Price adjustments, and adjustments such as
now taking place in business thinking and speculative psychology, are
always painful, he noted. For example, reference had been made at this
meeting to the price-earnings ratios of common stocks. It was fine to say
that the adjustment was a good thing, but anybody who was caught in those
stocks certainly felt terrible today. From personal experience, he could
say that it is a painful period when adjustments long deferred come about.
However, these adjustments were going on in an orderly way. It might be
that the summer doldrums had been exceeded but, particularly in view of
the long-deferred adjustments, he was by no means convinced that the
situation was serious.
The Chairman said he was inclined somewhat toward the approach of
Mr. Irons, although not to the same degree. This approach suggested that
the System be cautious in what it was doing and not show any sign of panic.
The discount rate had been out of touch with market rates, technically,
for some time; the situation was not new at this meeting. The Treasury
financing was now right on top of us, a situation which always creates a
problem for the System. Assuming, hypothetically, that it was possible to
change the discount rate without having to go through the twelve Federal
Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors, and if it had been decided to act
on the rate, the proper time would be tomorrow morning. However, it would
not be feasible for the System to act by tomorrow, even if it wanted to
act. The System is caught constantly in this type of thing, the Chairman

7/26/60 .47
noted, and one should not worry about it unduly. Since it was general
policy to take into account Treasury operations, obviously the even-keel
approach was the correct one at the present time.
The Chairman noted that, as Mr. Leedy brought out, free reserves
had already been up to a $200 million average. If they ran somewhere in
that area, he continued, no one would think that the even keel was being
changed substantially.
It appeared that the Committee unanimously wanted to trend toward
an easier reserve position, Chairman Martin commented, whether by Mr.
Bryan's formula or some other formula. He went on to suggest supplying
reserves in an orderly way and maintaining a posture of ease, adding that
when the appropriate time came he felt that the System should not hesitate
to lower the discount rate.
Chairman Martin cautioned about projecting too far into the future
and about being influenced unduly by such things as conversations. However,
after noting that projections were involved and that one must be careful,
he expressed the view that if the System was going to adjust the discount
rate, it might be better to do so before September.
The Chairman then commented on reserve requirements, saying first
that he hoped all would study the problem actively. Thus far, he had
found himself confused. As to vault cash, he did not think there was any
real way of measuring what action in that area would do in terms of reserves.
Also, the Board was under a mandate to equalize the reserve requirements of

7/26/60 -48
central reserve and reserve city banks, and this was complicated by the
fact that at the moment, at least, the greater pressure appeared to be in
the reserve city and country bank sector. If it was simply a matter of
trying to supply reserves to the economy, one would look there first.
The problem, the Chairman said, was not easy to handle on a piece
meal basis. A schedule of actions over a period of time would be
desirable, and the Board had spent some time on this, but the problem was
not easy. The Board had not come up with anything as yet that it would
want to try to sell. A general impression outside the System seemed to be
that this was something that could be turned on and off like a faucet, but
it was not that simple a problem. The Board must continue to wrestle with
it, and he did not know whether it would be possible to work out a
package operation.
Chairman Martin said he did not think he would want to change the
directive at this meeting, although that was something for the Committee
to consider. As he saw it, the Committee ought to continue trend in the
direction in which it had been moving. Its posture ought to be clear, and
at the first opportunity, assuming the present situation continued, the
System should lower the discount rate. That would be several weeks away,
the visibility might become greater in the interim, and he did not think
anything precipitate should be done now. As a matter of fact, he did not
think action would be feasible from a practical standpoint. The earliest
possible date would be Thursday, which would be when the Treasury announced

7/26/60 -49
its financing, and action would not be appropriate at that particular
juncture. The payment date would be August 15, he noted, and there would
be a meeting of the Open Market Committee the following day. These were
dangerous things to talk about in a large group, but at the August 16
meeting there would be an opportunity to consider whether a move on the
discount rate would seem desirable.
In the meantime, the Chairman said, it was his view that the
System should be supplying reserves at every opportunity. Certainly,
the odds were in favor of trending toward ease. There was nothing to lose,
and the trend could be reversed quickly. If there should be a big
upswing in the fall, the problem could be met when it came.
The Chairman said that he felt the Committee was remarkably
unanimous in its thinking this morning. He then referred again to the
matter of the directive and asked Mr. Balderston whether the latter had
any further comments.
Mr. Balderston said he now thought that perhaps the next meeting
would be an appropriate time to change the directive. He did not believe
that switching from net borrowed reserves of $200 million to free reserves
of $200 million represented a moderate increase. However, he was sensitive
to the fact that this was a week of Treasury financing.
Chairman Martin commented that this was one of the things in his
mind as a reason for continuing the present directive.
Mr. Balderston then repeated that he had now concluded that a
change in the directive at the next meeting might be more appropriate.

7/26/60 -50
Accordingly, the Chairman stated that if there was no objection
the directive would be renewed without change. He went on to say that
it seemed difficult to provide much more guidance for the Desk on the
volume of reserves than was available from the go-around at this meeting.
He then inquired whether there were other comments regarding the discussion,
and no disposition toward further discussion was indicated.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Committee voted unanimously
to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, until otherwise directed by the
Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (including
replacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities
to run off without replacement) for the System Open Market
Account in the open market or, in the case of maturing securi
ties, by direct exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary
in the light of current and prospective economic conditions and
the general credit situation of the country, with a view (a) to
relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs of
commerce and business, (b) to fostering sustainable growth in
economic activity and employment by providing reserves needed
for moderate bank credit expansion, and (c) to the practical
administration of the Account; provided that the aggregate
amount of securities held in the System Account (including
commitments for the purchase or sale of securities for the
Account) at the close of this date, other than special short
term certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to time
for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be
increased or decreased by more than $1 billion.
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one
or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time
to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such certificates held at
any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed
in the aggregate $500 million.

7/26/60 -51
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, August 16, 1960, and that the
succeeding meeting would be scheduled for Tuesday, September 13, 1960.
The meeting then adjourned.
Assistant Secretary