A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, August 22, 1961, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. M artin, Chairman
Mr. A llen
Mr. B alderston
Mr. Irons
Mr. King
Mr. Mills
Mr. R obertson
Mr. S wan
Mr. W ayne
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Ellis, Johns, and Deming, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Mr. Bryan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Messrs. Coldwell, Garvy, Noyes, and Ratchford,
Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Holland, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
Mr. Hilkert, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia
Mr. Hickan, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland
Messrs. Eastburn, Baughman, Jones, Parsons, and
Tow, Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of Philadelphia, Chicago, St. Louis,
Minneapolis, and Kansas City, respectively

8/22/61 -2
Mr. Willis, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston
Messrs. Holmes and Stone, Managers, Securities
Department, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Brandt, Assistant Cashier, Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta
Mr. Runyon, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meetings
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
July 11 and August 1, 1961, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report of open market operations covering the period
August 1 through August 16, 1961, and a supplemental report covering
the period August 17 through August 21, 1961. Copies of these reports
have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Mr. Rouse presented substantially the following statement in
supplementation of the written reports:
As indicated in the written reports, the money market has
been firm during the greater part of the period since the last
meeting, largely in reflection of a persistent tendency for
free reserves to concentrate in country banks. In the past
few days the money market has eased as free reserves increased,
and the market may ease further--despite our large sales of
yesterday--if country banks move large amounts of funds toward
the money centers with the approach of their reserve settlement
date tomorrow.
The market has been influenced by the same background
factors that were affecting the market at the time of the
last meeting. The major influences continue to be rising
business activity and the prospective budgetary deficits
associated with the accelerated defense program. These
factors, together with the reduced free reserve levels of
the August 2 and August 9 statement weeks--due, as you will

8/22/61
remember from the weekly reports, to the necessity of deal
ing with unmanageable numbers--led to a feeling in the market
that the System may already have made at least a slight move
away from the degree of ease that had been maintained in
recent months. This feeling, which was partly reversed by
the appearance of free reserves of $547 million last week, in
turn played a role in the increase in yields that occurred
during the period. In the case of three- and six-month
Treasury bills, these yield increases amounted to about 20
basis points. The average rates in yesterday's auction, for
example, were 2.50 per cent and 2.79 per cent, against average
rates of 2.30 and 2.56 three weeks ago. Incidentally, dealer
awards of six-month bills in the auction yesterday amounted to
only $27 million as a large New York bank won $250 million of
the six-month issue on a bid at a single price. Dealer awards
of the three-month bills were about normal at $342 million.
Looking ahead, there will be a heavy schedule of Treasury
financing over the balance of the year. The Treasury is con
sidering a $2 billion cash issue shortly after Labor Day, and
is also contemplating an additional cash issue toward the end
of September. Also, the possibility of an advance refunding
in this period cannot be ruled out. In October, the Treasury
will have to roll over the $1.5 billion maturing annual bills,
and it looks as though an additional $500 million cash will be
raised at that time. The Treasury will announce tomorrow that
it will raise an additional $100 million in the regular bill
auction next Monday (thus bringing the total amount of that
auction to $1.7 billion); and it is likely that the Treasury
will raise an additional $200 million through two regular
weekly bill auctions in October, which will bring all issues
maturing within three months to $1.7 billion. Finally, the
Treasury will be announcing in late October the terms of its
November refunding, and following that there will be another
billion or two of new cash to raise before the end of the year.
The 1/8 per cent increase in bankers' acceptance rates
last Thursday reflected in part expectations on the part of
dealers in acceptances of an increase in the supply of these
obligations that would be coming into the market. With
summer loan demand not especially robust, and with Treasury
bill rates well below acceptance rates earlier in the summer,
there had been a tendency for accepting banks to hold the
bills they had accepted as investments rather than to sell the
bills into the market (indications are that the amount of

8/22/61 -4
acceptances involved is about $750 million). There have been
recent indications, however, that these banks will move their
acceptances into the market as their loan demand picks up,
and the increase in supply from this source would come at a
time when the volume of acceptances would be increasing
seasonally in any case.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the open market transactions
during the period August 1 through August
21, 1961, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Mr. Noyes presented the following statement with regard to
economic developments:
You will recall that at the last meeting I reported that
it was too early to tell whether the heightened international
tensions, and the steps proposed by the Administration to deal
with them, might impair what seemed otherwise to be an exceed
ingly satisfactory recovery. Most of the statistical informa
tion that has become available since the last meeting still
relates to the period prior to the President's July 25th address,
and, of course, the recent developments in Berlin. It confirms
that recovery was proceeding at a rapid rate, but generally
without overtones of an inflationary character.
Despite its rapid increase to a new record rate of 112
in July, production remained well below capacity levels. Both
the consumer and wholesale price indices were generally steady,
and even sensitive industrial materials leveled out after a
2-1/2 per cent rise early in the recovery period.
New orders at durable goods manufacturers rose further in
July, especially for aircraft and electrical machinery. Sales
also rose, but remained below new orders, thus adding to the
backlog of unfilled orders.
Further information on labor market developments confirms
the earlier observation that employment has been expanding
rapidly by any historical standard, but that even so the level
of unemployment has remained near the recession high.
Total retail trade was down 1 per cent in July, due
largely to a 5 per cent decline in the automotive group, which
is probably related to the earlier model changeover this year,

8/22/61
Consumer spending for housing and durable goods as well
as consumption items and services has, of course, risen as
the recovery has progressed, but it has shown less than a
typical upsurge for this stage of the cycle. For example,
while industrial production has increased 10 per cent from
the February low, retail sales are up only 1-1/2 per cent.
Furthermore, buying intentions, as measured by surveys taken
in mid-July, appeared to be relatively weak. The Board
Census survey showed some slight improvement in auto demand,
as compared to a year ago, but nothing of substantial pro
portions, while expressed intentions to buy houses and most
household durable goods continued to lag behind relatively
depressed year-ago levels.
One independent survey, of untested reliability, has
shown a dramatic decline in combined buying plans for housing
and durables throughout the whole first half of 1961, to well
below year-ago levels.
This absence of strong demand in any important area of
consumer expenditure is in sharp contrast to the two preceding
recoveries. You will recall that in 1954-55 the strong surge
in automobile purchases by consumers played a key role in the
early stages of recovery, and that residential housing played
a similar part in the 1958 recovery.
It is especially difficult to generalize about an area
where the normal problems of economic analysis are overlaid
with special conceptual difficulties, as they are in the case
of consumers' attitudes toward spending and saving. Neverthe
less, this area commands attention in the present circumstances.
All of the evidence seems to suggest that, up to the present,
consumers have been willing--in fact, even anxious--to devote
a large part of their increasing incomes to saving, in the form
of debt repayment and the acquisition of financial assets,
rather than increased current consumption or the accumulation
of physical assets.
There is evidence of this development in the flow of funds
accounts. Most striking perhaps is the growth in so-called
fixed value redeemable claims--savings accounts, savings bonds,
and the like. Using rough, but conservative, estimates for the
second quarter of this year, it appears that for the twelve
months ended June 30, consumers' holdings of such claims
increased by over $17 billion--$8.2 billion in the second half
of 1960, and $8.9 billion in the first half of this year.
This far exceeds any previous twelve-month period on record.

8/22/61
At the same time, while they are above the very low rate
of growth in late 1957 and 1958, consumers' financial liabil
ities have expanded less than in other recent periods. The net
increase in financial investment for the consumer sector; that
is, their acquisitions of assets less their increase in liabilities,
was about $3 billion in the first half of the year. While there
is, of course, no single or simple explanation of these develop
ments, the fact that the $17 billion increase in fixed value
redeemable claims that I mentioned is twice the amount for the
preceding twelve months suggests the extent to which the infla
tionary psychology of late 1959 has been liquidated.
It is an interesting sidelight that our data also do not
seem to support the commonly held view that there has been a
substantial increase in holdings of equity securities by the
public at large in recent months. Our estimates are too rough
to be precise, but it appears that the increase in outstandings
was just about matched by the increase in institutional holdings.
For whatever reasons, people in the United States do not
seem to have been behaving as if they expected inflation, up to
the end of July--and there is not yet any evidence that they have
shifted their behavior since then. The one private intentions
survey I mentioned does show a rise in buying plans since the
President's address, but not to extraordinary levels. Department
store sales are likely to be down, if anything, from July to
August--although up, of course, from a year ago. There is no
doubt that expectations of inflation can be created, and created
quickly, but it does not seem that the deed has yet been done.
Mr. Holland presented the following statement on financial
developments:
As has already been indicated, the signs of business recovery
continue to be strong and broadly spread throughout the economy.
Thus far, however, this renewed business expansion has had little
counterpart in accelerated demands upon the financial system. Loan
demand, while perhaps not quite as soft as in some earlier months,
has nevertheless lacked the vigor usually associated with this
stage of cyclical expansion. Such bank credit expansion as has
occurred has been chiefly in purchases of Federal and municipal
securities, the usual recessionary pattern. The trend of the
money supply has been phlegmatic at best, with net deposit expansion
being channeled by the public into time deposits. About the only

8/22/61
aspect of financial markets which has responded to recent economic
events has been the pattern of interest rates, and even here the
response has appeared to be more a product of adjustments in
expectations than of change in current needs for, and supplies
of, funds.
Since the last meeting of the Committee, the predominant
movement of yields on U. S. Government securities has been
upward, as the market continued to reappraise the interrelated
implications of the improved economic outlook, the higher defense
expenditures triggered by the Berlin situation, and the antici
pation of new and larger Treasury borrowing. Such upward rate
movements were reinforced, particularly in the short end, by the
reduced free reserve pattern of the banking system in the first
part of August. Toward the middle of the month, however, first
in longer-term issues and then in the short-term market, some
buying interest appeared and yields recovered a portion of their
preceding advance. In part, this recovery may also have been
technical. In any event, it was fostered by the easier bank
reserve position which became apparent after midmonth.
Other securities markets were more quiet in tone, with yields
on seasoned corporate and municipal issues showing modest net
changes. New issue flotations in the corporate market were
quite light, as is often true in August. In the municipal
market, what first appeared to be a fairly large volume of financing
scheduled for the month assumed more moderate dimensions with the
cancellation of more than half of the large California package
of bond issues.
At banks, both business loans and total loans declined less
in July than in some earlier years, but in part this reflected
the weaker increases during the preceding June, with its tax
date and other special financial influences. Over June and July
combined, total bank loans were up only $400 million, the smallest
rise in recent years, while business loans appeared unchanged net.
This lack of net change in business loans did offer a slight
contrast to the small net contraction reported in the summer
months of the recession years of 1958 and 1960. Something of
this same pattern also has appeared to continue in the city bank
reports for the last three weeks, with the advent of the period
of seasonal rise in these credits. Business loans were up some
$200 million, substantially more than last year's recession-slowed
advance, although less than in the same season of earlier years.
Sales finance companies borrowed a substantial sum from city banks
during these weeks. This increase was more than offset, however,

8/22/61 -8
by large retirements of securities loans, both those secured
by Governments (which had bulged over the Treasury financing
dates) and those for purchasing and carrying common stocks and
other securities.
City bank holdings of Government securities have declined
since late July, and banks have sold bills amounting to roughly
one-third the amount taken up at the time of the sale of tax
anticipation bills last month. On the other hand, average
portfolio maturities of these banks were lengthened appreciably
by their sizable exchange of maturing issues for the over one-year
notes offered by the Treasury on August 1. Over-all, bank credit
at city banks has declined since the last week in July. This has
been matched by drops in both privately-owned and Government
demand deposits. Time deposit totals have shown some further
advance thus far in August.
The daily average money supply, seasonally adjusted, is
estimated to have dropped $100 million in the second half of July
and an additional $4OO million in the first half of August. This
decline brings the money supply back roughly to the average level
for March and only 1-1/2 per cent above the figure for a year
ago. Time deposit totals were estimated to have increased as
much, seasonally adjusted, in the first half of August as the
money supply declined. This continues the strong growth trend
shown in the time deposit component in recent months, and imparts
an annual rate of growth on the order of 5 per cent to the total
of money supply plus time deposits since last winter.
Because of the sharp parallel recovery in national output,
however, both the ratios to GNP of money supply and money supply
plus time deposits have undergone declines.
The recent contraction in the money supply developed in
conjunction with reduced ease in bank reserve positions. Free
reserves ranged downward toward the $400 million mark in the
first two reserve weeks in August, before recovering to levels
in the $550-600 million range in the last statement week and the
current week. The reserve decline of early August was partly a
reflection of reserve absorption to support deposits created in
the Treasury cash financing, and partly also a reflection of large
market drains of unforeseen dimensions and of market additions
to funds which did not materialize in the full amounts anticipated
and allowed for in System operations. As a consequence, available
reserves declined even though System open market operations
supplied a net $734 million of reserves, on a weekly average
basis, to the market over the last four weeks. Data for the

8/22/61 -9
last complete reserve week of August show actual reserves falling
over $150 million short of the total projected in the staff
memorandum as necessary in order to meet seasonal needs, to
cover Government and interbank deposit changes, and to provide
an annual growth factor of 5 per cent in the reserve base.
The weeks immediately ahead of us will call for heavy
injections of reserves by the System. Market factors are expected
to drain large amounts of reserves in the next two weeks,
including the Labor Day holiday, necessitating net additions of
Federal Reserve credit of about $575 million to maintain free
reserves unchanged. This reserve injection by the System will
need to be reversed in the mid-September weeks. Required
reserves are expected to increase substantially later in
September, reflecting net expansion in both private and U. S.
Government deposits, Smaller net increases are projected for
October and November, followed by the usual large expansion in
required reserves in December.
Total reserves would need to increase by about $1.1 billion
from now to the end of the year to provide for projected seasonal
increases in required reserves plus a 5 per cent expansion of
private deposits and the maintenance of excess reserves at around
$600 million. This increase would include $155 million needed to
make up the short-fall of current total reserves below projected
levels. During this period market factors may be expected to
alternate between supplying and draining reserves in large
volume, although they may supply about $400 million of reserves
on balance through the end of the year. Most of the net expansion
in reserve needs will require System action, as is usual in this
part of the year.
The question arises as to the ability of the market to
absorb System purchases of securities in the dimension implied
by these projections without a resulting undesirably low bill
rate. Some offsetting upward pressure in the short-term rate
structure will be created by prospective Treasury financings.
Earlier this summer the Treasury had announced that its financing
for the remainder of the calendar year would range between $5 and
$6 billion. The latter figure now appears to be more appropriate
and could be exceeded, inasmuch as present projections suggest a
Treasury cash deficit of as much as $9 billion for fiscal 1962.
Present tentative plans call for the Treasury to provide for its
remaining 1961 cash needs in several trips to the market, as
Mr. Rouse has outlined, beginning with an announcement shortly
after Labor Day.

8/22/61 -10
As this prospective schedule suggests, the Treasury will be
contributing some pressure upon the short-term market this fall.
But this Treasury schedule poses other problems for the Federal
Reserve, since it provides only a few short gaps, chiefly in
October and December, during which System policy could be altered
without risking adverse consequences for debt management operations.
Even the range for immediate adjustments in reserve availability
is limited, since it would be desirable to move into an "even
keel" reserve position by early September.
Thus, in contemplating immediate reserve recommendations,
attention must be given as well to shortly attaining levels of
reserve availability which would be appropriate for some span of
time. Looking ahead to the fall, thoughts of appropriate monetary
policy for that stage of economic recovery may be influenced by
anticipated lags in the effect of monetary actions. Depending
upon the strength of expected developments, the possibility might
be raised of early monetary action, in order to forestall the
ramification of maintained monetary ease and prevent its spreading
well beyond the spans of time for which it would be regarded as
appropriate. On this point, however, it might be noted that the
documented evidences of lags in monetary effects pertain primarily
to markets for capital goods, in which considerable slack for
future expansion currently exists. Lags are much less apparent
in the financial markets, and probably least apparent of all in
the short-term interest rate structure, If, therefore, the
concerns of monetary policy through the end of the year are with
potential problems which could be dealt with by upward short-term
rate adjustments, anticipatory actions in this direction by the
System would not seem to be required.
Mr. Young presented the following statement regarding the
United States balance of payments and related matters:
Major international financial markets continue in a highly
sensitive state, reflecting in part investor disquiet over the
Berlin crisis and in part a lack of firm confidence in the future
relation of international currency values.
The Berlin crisis generated a large flow of funds from
Germany into other currencies. The main beneficiaries of the
outflow of funds were not the reserve currencies but rather
Switzerland, the Netherlands, France, and Italy. The most recent
news from European markets indicates some quieting of financial

8/22/61 -11-
fears. This is attributed to market response to last week's
show of strong U. S. position, with the concurrence of other
NATO powers, regarding a Berlin settlement.
The British program of financia retrenchment has apparently
halted the flight of funds from sterling, but there are few signs
yet of a large reflow to London. While the spot pound has
strengthened some, the forward discount on sterling has widened,
thus offsetting the incentive effect of the higher short-term
yields in London. British bond yields, which rose sharply
following the discount rate increase, have since declined
moderately but hold at a level close to that for Treasury bills.
The high British bond yields, it is reported, have been attracting
some, though not large, foreign buying.
Recent developments regarding the U. S. balance of payments
can hardly be described as cheering. Preliminary data on gold
and dollar transfers to foreigners for July would indicate a July
payments deficit about twice the monthly rate of deficit for the
second quarter. The July deficit reflects in part temporary and
seasonal influences, but over-all payments tendencies would
suggest a real worsening of the U. S. deficit position.
Imports, as shown by June data, are beginning to rise, as
they should be expected to do in a period of vigorous cyclical
recovery. On the other hand, exports in June were up only a little
and there is small hope for much rise above recently prevailing
levels over the balance of the year. With the trade balance thus
tending to deteriorate, the main area for compensating payments
adjustment would have to be the long-term capital outflow.
Balance-of-payments data for the first two quarters of the year
fail to show any contractive tendency in the long-term capital
outflow, although such contraction might be expected on cyclical
grounds. Currently available data, moreover, give no indication
that this outflow is presently tending to abate.
It may be concluded, therefore, that the short-run outlook
for the U. S. balance of payments is one of continuing and somewhat
worsening deficit, with the deficit for the whole year possibly in
the neighborhood of $2 billion. In addition, payments flows among
European nations are currently altering the ownership of foreign
dollar deposits, particularly in the direction of ownership likely
to convert them into gold.
In the light of these circumstances, and barring uncertain
repercussions of an unforeseeable mishap in overcoming the Berlin
crisis, we must be prepared in the months ahead to see some
further reduction in the U. S. monetary gold stock. A resumed

8/22/61 -12
gold outflow of moderate volume should not be alarming as long
as renewal of large outflows of volatile funds is avoided and as
long as there remain good grounds for belief that real progress
is being made towards better basic equilibrium in international
payments
Mr. Treiber presented the following statement of his views with
respect to the business outlook and monetary policy:
On the domestic scene, the economy continues to move forward.
Industrial production has attained a new high. Consumer spending
is moderate in the light of record personal income. So far,
prices have continued relatively stable, but there are a few
signs of upward pressures. We are moving from a period of
recovery into one of expansion. Nevertheless, there is a good
deal of unused resources, both men and plant capacity, and the
high level of unemployment continues to present a challenge.
Bank credit has been expanding moderately with some signs of
renewed strength discernible during the last week or so. Business
loans made by banks this year have been offset by a larger than
usual amount of repayments, presumably as the result of the sale
of large amounts of refunding capital issues by the borrowers.
Viewed in this light, the record of business loans by banks has
been good. We may expect substantial bank credit expansion during
the remainder of the year not only because of the increased
seasonal need for bank loans but also because of large borrowing
by the Federal Government. The general liquidity position of
the economy is good.
In the period since the last meeting of the Committee the
money market has been less easy than in preceding periods, but it
has not been tight. In the preceding period the unexpected
confluence of several market factors brought about a condition
of greater ease than was expected. Conversely, in the last couple
of weeks several market factors worked in the opposite direction
more than was expected.
More Federal Government spending seems to be in prospect,
throwing the budget more out of alignment and requiring more
Treasury borrowing. People are raising questions here and abroad
as to the potential danger of the prospective deficit spending to
economic stability and confidence in the dollar. As greater
deficit spending further stimulates the domestic economy, there
will be less need for a policy of monetary ease.

8/22/61 -13-
Within the next few weeks, possibly before the next meeting
of the Committee, the Treasury may announce new cash borrowing
and perhaps also an advance refunding. The latter would afford
the Administration an opportunity to underline its concern for
fiscal responsibility in a period of a rising deficit. Since
the Treasury will need to borrow shortly, it is desirable to avoid
upsetting developments in the securities markets in the next few
weeks.
Our international financial position has been deteriorating.
Our balance of payments is worsening. In the first quarter of
the year we did well, but since then the deficit has progressively
widened despite heavy outflows of funds from London. Our trade
surplus has declined as exports have fallen off and imports have
increased. With further economic expansion at home, imports are
likely to rise further. We have made little progress toward a
long-run solution to our balance of payments problem. Failing
that, we continue to be vulnerable to shifting winds of sentiment
which could eventuate in a substantial demand upon us for gold.
The demand for gold has been increasing and the price of
gold has been rising gradually in the London gold market. The
price at the fixing on Friday was the highest since February.
Some of the demand is due to international political tensions.
The aggravation of these tensions will likely raise the demand
for gold still further. Climbing gold prices stimulate specula
tion. Some European central banks are concerned about the
possibility of a run-up in the price of gold such as occurred
last October. They fear that such a development would be
interpreted as a first step toward the devaluation of the dollar
and other currencies. People abroad are watching carefully
developments in the United States. They are watching our monetary
policy and fiscal policy, and especially the way in which we
handle the Federal deficit. It behooves us as a nation to do
everything we can to promote sound policies and to demonstrate
to the world our resolution in this respect.
The domestic business and credit situation still calls for
a policy of monetary ease. We must be alert, however, to the
possibility that stepped-up defense spending and related expansion
in private spending may place excessive pressures on the price
structure and endanger economic stability. Large wage increases
growing out of wage negotiations now under way or in the offing
could also put pressure on prices. The international picture also
calls for continuing alertness. We should seek to avoid any
substantial decline in short-term interest rates.

8/22/61 -14
We believe that in the coming period the System should
continue to follow about the same monetary policy it has in the
last period. Doubts should be resolved on the side of less ease.
The so-called "feel" of the market is especially important. It
would seem desirable that the effective rate on Federal funds be
a bit below the discount rate, ranging between 2 per cent and
3 per cent, perhaps averaging about 2-1/2 per cent. We think
that it is desirable that the rate on three-month Treasury bills
continue within the range of 2-1/8 to 2-5/8 per cent which has
been in existence for about a year. In the light of both domestic
and international conditions it is desirable that the rate be in
the upper part of the range.
We believe that the authority to engage in transactions in
longer-term securities should be continued and that the discount
rate should not be changed. At the last meeting of the Committee
it was suggested that the time was approaching when a change in
the directive would be in order. As we move now from recovery
into expansion, we think a change would be appropriate, and we
suggest that clause (b) be revised so as to read as follows:
"to encouraging credit expansion so as to promote fuller
utilization of resources, while guarding the international
position of the dollar."
Mr. Johns commented that Mr. Holland had covered in such detail
the facts pertaining to the behavior of reserves, total and otherwise,
in the recent past as to permit proceeding at once to what seemed a
reasonable conclusion; namely, that total reserves had not been expanding
rapidly enough to allow for the continued expansion of total deposits
at about a 5 per cent annual rate. The rate of expansion of total
reserves had been so slight recently that bank credit expansion had
been dependent to some extent, perhaps primarily, on a decline in excess
reserves of about $80 million in the past four weeks. He would not
want to depend on a further redaction of excess reserves as a basis

8/22/61 -15
for continued deposit expansion; therefore, he would suggest that the
Committee be diligent about increasing total reserves in an adequate
amount to continue deposit expansion at at least the rate that had
prevailed since March. He had some doubt whether it could be assumed
that the rate of expansion of time deposits would long continue. If
this doubt proved valid, he thought it was unquestionably true that
the System would have to provide more reserves in order to support an
expansion in demand deposits, and there had been no such expansion in
recent months. In the circumstances, he was inclined to recommend
that total reserves be increased about in line with the staff projection
set forth in the memorandum that had been distributed under date of
August 18, more particularly in the column of total reserves projected
found in table 3 of that memorandum. This would include a $15 million
weekly increment in order to provide for expansion in demand deposits
adjusted and time deposits at an annual rate of 5 per cent, and it
would also make up the short-fall of total reserves that had occurred
recently. With alternating periods of about two weeks each in which
the projections contemplated the necessity of buying heavily, then
selling heavily, and then buying heavily again, it appeared that there
should be possibilities of catching up the short-fall without dire
repercussions in the market, and he would like to see this done.

8/22/61 -16-
Mr. Johns said that he would not recommend a change in the
discount rate at this time. Although he had not come to this meeting
prepared to argue for a change in the directive, he was attracted to
the suggestion made by Mr. Treiber and thought it was a good one.
Mr. Bryan said there had been no developments in the Sixth
District that seemed worthy of a detailed report at this time. The
District seemed to be going along about the same as indicated by the
national figures, and in any event only fragmentary new data had
become available since the August 1 meeting.
As to the national picture, it seemed that the recovery was
going ahead. It also seemed that the $542 million figure of free
reserves reached in the most recent statement week was one that would
permit credit expansion. However, as he saw it, the situation actually
had tightened rather substantially in a couple of the weeks of the past
period. He did not believe that at the moment a tightening in the
money situation could be justified; therefore, he would suggest aiming
for free reserves between $550 and $600 million. Such a range, he
thought, would be compatible with a more than seasonal increase in the
total reserve figure.
Mr. Bryan said he saw no reason for changing the discount rate
at this time. As to the directive, he would have no objection to

8/22/61 -17
changing it in the manner that had been suggested, but he was not sure
there was any real point in making such a change.
Mr. Hilkert reported that the pace of recovery in the Third
District had quickened in recent weeks. Construction contract awards
were now moving up at about the same rate as nationally, steel
production had increased, along with output in most lines of
manufacturing, and goods were selling well at retail. In July, total
bank credit at District banks increased, with loans showing no
significant change but investments rising. More recently there had
been little change. Reserve positions of District banks were easy.
Reserve city banks had been net sellers of Federal funds, and country
bank borrowing at the discount window continued to be small.
Mr. Hilkert's appraisal of the national business picture was
that, in brief: (1) the rise in business activity was broad-based
and was continuing at a good pace; (2) excess plant capacity, a still
large number of unemployed, and keen competition, both domestic and
foreign, provided fairly strong restraint on any important upward
movement of the price level; and (3) although evidence of inventory
building and anticipatory buying was not yet seen, the stepped-up
defense program and growing international tension had added fuel which,
if sparked by a resurgence of inflation psychology, could lead to a
boom and rising prices.

8/22/61 -18
Mr. Hilkert expressed the view that recent business and
financial developments did not call for any change in monetary policy
for the next three weeks. Rising market rates and lower free reserves
indicated some tightening in the past three weeks, and he would favor
maintaining about the same general degree of ease as had prevailed
during this period. More specifically, he would like to see the Federal
funds rate comfortably below the discount rate, market rates at about
the present level, and, if consistent with these two objectives,
reserve positions in the same general range as during the past three
weeks. He would favor continuation of the authority to conduct open
market operations in intermediate and longer-term securities. With
the recent rise in intermediate and long-term rates, it appeared that
it might be desirable to supply some of the reserves, when needed,
through purchases of the longer maturities. He would not favor changing
the discount rate nor would he suggest a change in the directive at
the present time.
Mr. Hickman reported that after some hesitation caused by
vacation shutdowns in the Fourth District, most economic indicators
now showed a resumption of the economic expansion evident since last
spring. Steel output was back by mid-August to the highest levels
since mid-June, and outbound freight shipments at Pittsburgh and
Cleveland had recently moved ahead of year-ago figures, whereas they

8/22/61 -19
were still lagging for the nation as a whole. As a result of warm
weather and stronger industrial demand, electric power output had risen
sharply, and on a seasonally adjusted basis had averaged higher in
major centers than at any time this year.
Recent changes in bank credit in the District had been dominated
by the July Treasury financing, as banks continued to liquidate bills
acquired in the last week of July. Banks generally appeared to be in
an easy reserve position, as indicated by the low level of borrowings
from the Reserve Bank, although net purchases of Federal funds had
increased in recent weeks. Commercial and industrial loans of weekly
reporting banks expanded by about $12 million in the three weeks
ending August 16, about twice the expansion indicated in the comparable
period a year ago, but the general belief among bankers in the District
was that the expansion this year will be no more than seasonal.
Despite recent improvements, Mr. Hickman said, there was
widespread evidence of excess capacity and high-level unemployment in
the Fourth District. Since the District is dominated by the heavy
industries, output usually contracts more sharply during recessions
than in the nation as a whole, and this had been true in the recent
recession. Similarly, the recovery from recession lows is usually
sharper than in the nation, since the District starts from a lower

8/22/61 -20
base. The recent advance in the Fourth District had conformed to this
pattern, but there was still some way to go before previous cyclical
peaks were regained.
Using 1957-59 as a base, steel output was still about 5
percentage points below the national average, and was lagging particu
larly in the Youngstown and Pittsburgh areas. Manufacturing employment
also had exhibited the cyclical sensitivity of the District and the
slower rate of recovery. Manufacturing employment declined by about
12 per cent between May 1960 and March 1961, against a decline of only
6 per cent nationally. By June 1961, the United States had regained
about half of the decline, while Fourth District employment had
recovered only one quarter.
Despite the lagging pace of the recovery thus far, Fourth
District economists and businessmen were optimistic for the fourth
quarter and looked for further improvement in the first half of 1962.
Steel ingot production (20 million tons in the first quarter of this
year and 25 million tons in the second quarter) would exceed 25 million
tons in the third quarter, a good showing in view of the seasonal
weakness normal for this period, and would come close to 30 million
tons in the fourth quarter, with the greatest strength exhibited toward
the end of the year. There was talk of a price increase in the steel
industry after wages were adjusted upward on October 1, but feelings

8/22/61 -21
were mixed as to whether a general upward price adjustment could be
made to stick at this stage of the cycle. It was perhaps indicative
that the automotive industry was still buying steel on a hand-to-mouth
basis.
In conclusion, Mr. Hickman said that District automotive
economists continued to look for production and sales of U. S. built
cars of about 5-1/2 million this year, with total sales (including
foreign) of 5.9 million; and they were predicting total sales in 1962
of about 6.5 million, roughly comparable to the performance in 1959.
The higher level of disposable personal income projected for 1962 was
a plus factor for the automotive industry, but sales expectations were
tempered somewhat by the relatively small number of cars three to five
years old now on the road. Cars in that age group are the best
candidates for trade-ins, and the small number now in this age group
might retard sales next year.
Mr. King presented the following statement with regard to System
operations in longer-term securities:
It appears that the System has, if for the present only,
accomplished its purpose of helping slow the gold flow through
purchases of longer-term securities instead of bills. The bill
rate has remained slightly above two per cent, and I believe
our departure from the "bills only" policy helped reduce
downward pressure on the bill rate. This being the case and
with the past three weeks' upward trend of the bill rate in
mind, it seems this might be an appropriate time to cease
operations under the special authorization to the Manager of

8/22/61 -22
the Account. I do not mean that I would terminate the
authorization now, nor does this imply that it might not be
reactivated within the next few weeks or months, possibly
for selling as well as buying.
As an advocate of a more flexible approach than the
"bills only" policy afforded, it seems to me that we have
no need at the present time to supply reserves through
purchases other than bills.
Disengagement at this time would in no way repudiate
our policy of the last six months, nor would it make us appear
unsure of ourselves. Rather, it would indicate that we are
decisive and have no fear of being bold when circumstances
warrant boldness. What better evidence of flexibility could
anyone have than to be flexible in two directions instead of
only one?
I believe it would not be desirable to make an announcement
if this action is taken. If we did, it might be necessary in a
few months to make another announcement that we were re-entering
the long-term market to buy or to sell. To state now that we
are getting out and to possibly reverse our statement in the
next few months would be difficult for many to understand. Our
withdrawal would become obvious in a matter of weeks, and I
believe it would be better to let the financial community
draw its own conclusions. Action in this manner should have
a healthy effect on our domestic financial community as well
as on those abroad who have an interest in our decisions.
In further comments, Mr. King said the rise in the bill rate
and the tone of the market as reflected by the Federal funds rate
suggested somewhat less ease than he believed desirable. What he had
believed the Committee was intending to do was to stay where it was,
but in fact it had moved toward less ease. His vote would be to move
back to about the degree of ease that prevailed during July and to
resolve doubts on the side of ease. A level of free reserves ranging

8/22/61 -23
from $500 to $600 million would seem to him appropriate. He would not
recommend a change in the discount rate at this time.
As to the directive, Mr. King indicated that he would be
inclined toward no change at this time, even though the suggested
language might be perhaps more appropriate to the existing circumstances
than the present language. The figures, he noted, did not suggest that
there had been any great success in meeting the objective, as stated
in the current directive, of encouraging the expansion of the money
supply. However, he questioned whether the omission of the pertinent
words would serve any particular purpose at this stage. He would be
inclined to leave them in the directive rather than to have readers of
the policy record speculate that the System had given up on that score.
Mr. Robertson expressed the view that the recent record of the
Committee in providing reserves had hardly been in keeping with the
existing directive, which provided for encouraging expansion of bank
credit and the money supply. Therefore, he felt that the directive
should be changed or, in the alternative, that the Committee should
change its policy and its instructions to the Desk. He had found
himself concerned, upon returning to his office yesterday, about the
degree of tightness that seemed to have developed in the first part of
August, with free reserves averaging $401 and $435 million, respectively,
in two of the statement weeks. When he reviewed the record, however,

8/22/61 -24
he found himself unable to criticize the Desk; instead, he thought the
record indicated that the Committee ought to be more specific in its
instructions to the Desk. Also, he realized that some of the tightening
had been caused by conditions that could not be completely controlled
by the Desk. Still he felt that the amounts of reserves that had been
supplied were inadequate to meet the present directive or to meet the
needs of the economy.
Mr. Robertson suggested that the System should be acting now,
while it still had latitude for action, to increase the money supply.
Because of the Treasury operations, there would only be short periods
in which the System would be uninhibited during the balance of the
year. Accordingly, for the next period he would suggest striving
toward a level of free reserves from $550 to $600 million. During the
first two weeks that would create what he thought would be a condition
of ease adequate to implement the existing directive, the suggested
directive, or alternative wording that he intended to suggest shortly.
During the third week there would be a rise in float. Thereafter, if
it seemed desirable, free reserves could be dropped slightly to a
level, perhaps in the $500 million range, that could be held during
the Treasury financings in September and October and perhaps over the
major part of November and December.

8/22/61 -25
Mr. Robertson then suggested, though not with the thought of
proposing action at this time, the advisability of keeping watch on
developments in the stock market so that margin requirements could be
increased, if necessary, rather than to permit any increased activity
or speculative tendencies in the stock market to swerve the policy of
monetary ease too far toward tightness. He saw no such indications
today, but there had been earlier, and he felt that an eye should be
kept on the situation.
Mr. Robertson also suggested that care be exercised to see
that the international situation did not panic the System into adopting
a tighter policy than called for by the domestic situation. At the
moment he saw no immediate prospect of inflationary developments;
although there were potentials, there continued to be a large amount
of unutilized manpower and productive capacity.
As to the directive, Mr. Robertson expressed the view that the
time had come to recognize the change in economic conditions since the
directive was first adopted. While he was not opposed to the language
suggested by Mr. Treiber, he would like to suggest alternative wording;
namely, that clause (b) be amended to provide for operations looking
toward the maintenance of economic growth and monetary stability
adequate to meet the tensions and strains arising out of the prevailing
international situation. In making this suggestion, he was trying to

8/22/61 -26
indicate the great need to maintain confidence in the dollar and to
act in a manner that would recognize the existing strains and tensions.
In his opinion, this kind of language probably could not be carried in
the directive too long, because tensions and strains vary. However, he
felt it was desirable to amend the directive from time to time in the
light of changing conditions, whether international or domestic.
Turning to System operations in longer-term Government securities,
Mr. Robertson made the following statement:
I feel compelled to turn again to the issue of our opera
tions in longer-term securities. These operations pose serious
problems, and they cannot be resolved by avoiding discussion of
them.
Consider the environment in which these operations are
being conducted. Interest rates have risen, and prospects for
continuing increases in rates are cited in all quarters. In
such circumstances it is difficult for the market, even when
operating without Government intervention, to carry through
orderly adjustments of prices which will keep supply and
demand factors in balance. If Federal Reserve purchases of
longer-term securities intrude upon these market adjustments,
they are likely to hold prices at an unviable level at which
the System will be the only substantial buyer.
Around this table, on a number of occasions, critics of
the special operation (myself included) have endeavored to
express the logic of adverse market effects which could flow
from these activities. Let me call to your attention this
morning some of the concrete evidences of such ill effects
which have begun to emerge.
Some Government securities dealers tell us that it is
becoming common practice for them, whenever they are offered
longer-term bonds by a customer, promptly to make a correspond
ing offer to the Desk. By this means dealers check to see if
the bonds can be passed to the System, before they themselves
will buy any substantial amount. Thus, System Account buying,
and the prices at which it is or is not done, have become an
immediate market influence.

8/22/61 -27-
Statistics reported by dealers indicate that private
buying interest in the long-term Government market has shrunk
drastically. Buying of over-10-year issues by commercial banks
and nonbank investors, which was averaging nearly $10 million a
day in the latter part of 1960, dropped to a $7 million average
in the first quarter of this year, to under $4 million in the
second quarter, and to only $24. million thus far in this
quarter, barely one-fourth of the rate less than a year ago.
In the weeks around the turn of this month, precisely when the
last System purchases of any consequence were made in this
area, total purchases of over-10-year issues by nonbank
investors dwindled to an average of only $100,000 a day. To
be sure, current figures could be expected to be lower than
average because of the season of the year and the stage of the
cycle. However, after all reasonable allowance for these
factors is made, I think one still finds the decline in
investor demand proceeding to such low levels as to display
a baleful influence from Operation Nudge.
If there were some major offsetting advantages being
obtained through our purchases of long-term securities, perhaps
there would be some grounds for arguing that the Committee
should risk the ill effects I have mentioned. But there are
no clear economic gains which are being realized. system
purchases of long-terms in recent months have been so modest
as to have had no reserve effects of consequence. Our entire
special purchases of issues maturing in beyond 10 years have
aggregated only $79 million. If, alternatively, we had
endeavored to provide this amount of reserves through bill
purchases, it is inconceivable that any perceptible further
downward movement in bill rates would have resulted; yet this
is the rationale on which we undertook the special operation.
In summary, our continuing to buy dribbles of long-term
issues cannot be justified on the grounds of the balance-of
payments situation, the need for additional reserve inlets, or
any salutary influence exercised on the market. I think we
would be well advised to recognize this evidence produced by
our own operation, and accordingly to withdraw the special
authorization to the Account Management to deal in long-term
securities.
Although I still feel that prompt cessation of the whole
special operation would be the wisest course, I am aware of the
desire on the part of some members of the Committee that
disengagement be a gradual process. In keeping with that

8/22/61 -28
desire, I suggest that the Committee begin by returning to the
initial standard set last February in barring Account operations
in securities maturing beyond 10 years. It is to operations in
the over-10-year area that the arguments I have expressed
earlier apply most strongly. Avoiding future System purchases
in this truly long-term sector would be a good beginning, and
it would lay the foundation for progressively further limitation
later as, in the Committee's view, conditions make it appropriate.
Mr. Mills suggested that the Open Market Committee hark back in
its thinking to its fundamental responsibility--providing an adequate
base of credit availability to the commercial banking system--and that
it avoid straying off into other areas and citing objectives on
extraneous points as the criteria for policy-making. He noted that in
the past a tendency to tie policy judgments to some specific level of
positive or negative free reserves had been criticized, and it seemed
to him that at the present time the Committee should think twice and
avoid taking a new sighting based on some projected level of total
reserves as the correct answer to policy-making. It also seemed
desirable to remember that an occasional tightening in the market should
not throw forebodings and fears into the policy-makers in situations
when the supply of reserves remains sufficient to develop and preserve
an adequate base of credit availability. He suggested that in such
circumstances the Committee should not be either impatient or appre
hensive that it had fallen into error and should remember that there
is a lag in time before the market can become acclimated to a lower

8/22/61 -29
reserve position. The policy considerations that would tie into the
kind of reasoning he had outlined were set forth in the following
statement, which Mr. Mills then read:
It is never easy to foresee economic developments from a
summer mid-point of seasonal slackness in activity. Despite
that fact, a fair estimate of the present position of the
economy might be that to date the strength in the recovery
movement has been more on the side of production than
consumption and, therefore, the test to be met during the
fourth quarter of the year is whether enough economic power
has been generated at the level of production to carry over
into a measure of consumption sufficient to move the expanding
plant output into final hands and in that way to insure
lasting recovery. A Federal Reserve System monetary and
credit policy suitable to this kind of economic situation
would supply the commercial banking system with sufficient
reserves to permit the further expansion of commercial bank
credit. Such a policy, in supplying only enough reserves to
permit an expansion of commercial bank credit truly evoked
by natural market demands, would avoid the mistake of forcing
reserves onto the commercial banks in a superfluous quantity
that would result in dragging down the interest yields on
U. S. Treasury bills at a time when international considerations
demand a Treasury bill rate high enough to hold foreign
investment funds in the United States. Moreover, oversupplying
reserves at a time of international financial tensions could
lead to the impression abroad that the United States was
embarking on inflationary programs that would tend to weaken
the purchasing power of the dollar. Adoption of the policy
recommended would also take into account the fact that under
present conditions, the rapid growth occurring in time deposits
must be related to the lesser rate of growth that has occurred
in the money supply as conventionally defined. The present
justification for taking time deposits into partial context
with the conventional money supply is that the growth in time
deposits is in part a reflection of a slack demand for commercial
bank credit, which demand, if it should come to life rapidly,
would be accompanied by a conversion of time deposits into
more highly charged economic factors having an inflationary
bias. It is consequently advisable to combine in view the

8/22/61 -30
growth of the money supply and time deposits as being the
foundation on which a massive expansion of commercial bank
credit has been built in the past year, whose structural
components, in being susceptible to variation and exchange
as between the commercial banks and other lenders, are fully
adequate to accommodate the growth needs of the economy.
In essence, the kind of monetary and credit policy now
called for is one of moderation that will encourage reasonable
commercial bank credit expansion and, in so doing, avoid the
mistakes of the recent past in overdoing both the supplying
and withdrawing of reserves which so disturbed the state of
the money markets. To allow reserves to be supplied inordinately
at this time would be inadvisable for the reasons previously
mentioned, and also because the appearance of a high level of
positive free reserves could lead to investor expectations of
a steady rise in the prices of U, S. Government securities
which, in turn, could incite harmful speculative activity.
No change is necessary in the discount rate and continuation
of the special authority is recommended on the basis that it
will be used when practicable to reduce the System Open Market
Account's portfolio in securities other than U. S. Treasury
bills. It is suggested that subsection (b) in the directive
issued to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York be revised to
read, "to permitting an expansion of bank credit that will
serve as a propelling force to the momentum of economic
recovery without producing unstabilizing influences in the
field of the foreign exchanges."
Mr. Wayne said that the upward course of business activity in
the Fifth District had apparently gained a broader footing in the past
three weeks. Employment and man-hours were continuing to rise, In
the textile industry, cost increases were expected to create a difficult
profit situation this fall, and in anticipation there had been small
but general price increases. Thus far, demand seemed strong enough to
sustain the higher prices and activity had continued at encouraging
levels, although this was due in part to Government buying and the

8/22/61 -31
placing of orders in anticipation of price rises. The lumber industry
seemed rather pessimistic, but a rising level of construction contract
awards was noted. In a recent check, Reserve Bank contacts commented
favorably on such items as manufacturers' orders, shipments, the trend
of profit expectations, and retail trade. In summary, the Bank's
contacts were generally optimistic about the outlook for the remainder
of the year.
Continuing, Mr. Wayne said that business and other loans at
District banks had been unusually strong in the past three weeks and
that the agricultural outlook was for further improvement. Early sales
of tobacco were marked by price increases above last year. District
banking developments, other than as noted previously, had been fairly
routine, with gross loans following about the same pattern as in 1958
and investment portfolios moving slightly downward. The larger banks
had continued to be heavy sellers of Federal funds and there was little
use of the discount window.
Turning to policy, Mr. Wayne commented that developments of
note had occurred in two areas. First, the balance-of-payments position
had shown further deterioration. Second, there was the substantial
increase in short-term rates, especially the three-month bill rate.
Although recognizing that monetary policy could make only a limited
contribution to the solution of the balance-of-payments problem,

8/22/61 -32
Mr. Wayne noted that the System must be alert not to aggravate the
situation. The market causes of the sharp rise of interest rates were
not entirely clear, but possibly the situation reflected a misinter
pretation of System policy by the market. The relatively sharp drop
in free reserves in the early part of the month, which reflected mainly
unanticipated and uncontrollable market factors, seemed to have been
interpreted by the market to mean that the System might be reducing
the degree of ease. Perhaps it was only natural that the market should
be looking carefully for such evidence at this time. In any event,
however, the condition could feed upon itself unless System actions in
the weeks ahead clearly indicated no reduction in the degree of ease.
In Mr. Wayne's view, there was no valid basis for tightening
at this particular stage, Retail sales lacked vigor, prices remained
quite stable, and business orders showed only normal increases. In
the circumstances, he felt that any further rise in short-term rates
would be unwarranted, and in fact might be harmful, unless there were
more signs of inflationary forces or speculative influences, and he
would favor a policy that would not encourage any further increase in
such rates. In fact, he would not be disturbed if short-term rates
tended slightly downward. It would be necessary to inject a substantial
amount of reserves in the near future, and he would be inclined to
inject those reserves through the purchase of bills, if possible,

8/22/61 -33
unless there was some significant shift in market conditions in the
meantime. The staff estimates of reserve needs seemed appropriate to
him, and he felt that a level of free reserves around $550 million
would be desirable.
After stating that he would not recommend a change in the
discount rate at this time, Mr. Wayne turned to the directive and said
that he was inclined to endorse the change proposed by Mr. Treiber.
he would favor renewing the special authorization covering operations
in longer-term securities.
Mr. Tow commented that nonfarm employment in the Tenth District
reflects the predominance of nondurable goods employment in the region.
The composition of employment was an element of resistance to the
recession and led to the -rerecession level of nonfarm employment being
regained earlier than in the country as a whole. This same factor,
however, had resulted in little change in nonfarm employment in recent
months--though at a level above that of a year earlier.
The agricultural sector of the Tenth District appeared to be
having a rather satisfactory year. Farm cash receints in the first
half of the year were well above a year earlier, out at a much reduced
rate toward midyear. Lower cattle prices were one factor in this
narrowing of the margin over a year earlier. Another was the rather
widespread speculative holding of wheat off the market. The winter

8/22/61 -34
wheat crop this year was excellent, even though 4 per cent below a year
ago, and crop conditions generally were very favorable in the District
at this time,
The performance of the domestic national economy in recent
weeks had been very good, Mr. Tow felt, especially when account was
taken of price behavior since the beginning of the Berlin crisis this
summer. While the direction of economic activity might not be in
doubt, the pattern and timing of future developments were more uncertain.
The situation would require close watching, particularly as to indi
cations not yet apparent of strong anticipatory response on the part
of business and consumers.
Mr. Tow noted that the changes in the level of interest rates
since the last meeting of the Committee indicated greater tightness in
the money and capital markets. In part, this reflected an expectational
response on the part of those markets. It also reflected, however,
more restrictive System open market operations, for various reasons
already mentioned at this meeting, and it would not appear to him
appropriate to add to this restrictiveness at this time. Rather, he
felt that the Committee, for the present, should provide reserves for
bank credit expansion at a seasonally adjusted rate about in line with
the first half of this year. Or, if the statement was made in terms
of recent operations or in terms of free reserves, operations should

8/22/61 -35
be conducted more nearly in line with the most recent week rather than
the two previous weeks. In view of the international flow-of-funds
problem, it would seem well to maintain the Treasury bill rate within
the range of recent weeks, and in his view purchases of longer-term
securities should be undertaken to the extent necessary to maintain the
bill rate within that range.
Accordingly, he felt that the special authorization with respect
to operations in longer-term Government securities should be renewed,
and without restriction as to maturities. No change would appear to be
called for in the discount rate. While the directive apparently would
need to be changed presently, he did not consider that any particular
importance attached to whether the change was made at this meeting or
the next. If a change should be made today, he would be inclined to
favor the New York proposal.
Mr. Allen said the rapidity of the economic upswing had seemed
to him impressive, more so than to those who were saying that this
year's rise was about in line with those of 1949, 1954, and 1958. He
believed that those judgments understated the vigor of the uptrend.
Although he agreed that there was more elbow room in the economy, more
potential for expansion, in 1961 than in those earlier years, this did
not justify underratirg the movement thus far.

8/22/61 -36
To elaborate in terms of the Seventh District on what he had
called elbow room, 11 of 23 District centers remained in the "substantial
labor surplus" class with six per cent or more unemployed. In the four
weeks ended August 12, District department store sales were just even
with last year, compared with two per cent higher for the nation. Steel
production was running below the June level, although production would
increase if auto firms ordered in line with their anticipated fourth
quarter production of 1,800,000 cars, A fourth quarter of that
dimension would mean total 1961 auto production of 5,600,000 cars,
compared with 6,700,000 in 1960.
The automobile labor contracts would expire next week, Mr. Allen
noted. The most important information--what the companies would give
and the union take--should become clearer soon. As of the contract
termination date, August 31, it appeared that about 150,000 1962 models,
an average of five cars per dealer, would be on hand. Twice that
number, or 300,000, was considered the minimum for so-called proper new
car announcements. On August 31 there would be 500,000 to 600,000 1961
models on hand.
Bank credit, as shown by the figures of Seventh District weekly
reporting banks, expanded substantially in July, when acquisitions of
Government securities and increased loans on securities far more than
offset a decline in other types of loans. In the two weeks ended

8/22/61 -37
August 9, however, the pattern was reversed. Total credit declined as
the security loans made in July were paid down and the Government
security portfolios were reduced. But loans except on securities rose
in this latter period, and Chicago and New York banks reported further
loan growth in the week ended August 16. Thus the weekly reporting
member bank figures suggested that business loan demand was strengthening,
and it seemed likely that both seasonal influences and the increasing
pace of business activity would bring a continued uptrend through the
rest of 1961.
Mr. Allen pointed out that it was too early to judge the vigor
of the loan demand he had mentioned. And there was still the elbow
room in the economy to which he had referred, as evidenced by unused
resources, both human and material. Under the circumstances he felt
that it would be advisable to carry along for the next three weeks as
the Committee had been doing and continue to supply reserves necessary
to accommodate seasonal credit expansion and maintain about the
existing degree of ease. He would not change the discount rate. He
did feel, however, that the time had come to delete the words
"strengthening the forces of recovery" from clause (1)(b) of the
directive. The suggestions made thus far, particularly those of
Mr. Treiber and Mr. Robertson, seemed to him to imply a responsibility
in the foreign area which the Committee should not accept. He would

8/22/61 -38
favor the first clause of Mr. Treiber's suggestion, "to encouraging
credit expansion so as to promote fuller utilization of resources,"
but he would prefer at that point to use the "while" clause in the
existing directive, namely, "while giving consideration to international
factors." As in the past, he would like to see the special authori
zation discontinued, and for the same reasons,
Mr. Doming said that he saw no significant change in the Ninth
District economic picture over the past three weeks, which meant that
mixed trends continued. The drouth had cut and would continue to cut
farm income; at a guess, the cash income loss from the damaged small
grain crops would approximate $350 million, and the effect of this loss
would be felt over the course of the next twelve months. Iron mining
also continued weak. Perhaps the best way to picture this weakness was
to note that the number of small centers with substantial unemployment
increased to 21 in July from 9 in June. Most of these were in the
mining areas, but some were in lumbering and trade centers.
On the other side, there had been continued general improvement
in manufacturing and trade. While total nonfarm employment continued
to run behind year-ago levels, manufacturing employment was higher than
a year ago and industrial use of electric power was up.
The net of those contrasting trends in the District could be
expressed in capsule form through the personal income series. The

8/22/61 -39
July figure was just equal to the January figure (both seasonally
adjusted), but it was 3 per cent ahead of July 1960. Looking ahead,
some gain could be seen in personal income, but a much smaller increase
than probably would occur in the nation.
In banking, a contraseasonal decline in loans in July continued
into August. This movement was evident in both city and country banks,
and in each of the States of the District. No other July since 1946
showed such a weak loan picture. Relative to a year ago, however, city
and country bank loan movements differed. Both total and business
loans of city banks were below comparable 1960 levels, while country
bank total loans were significantly higher than at the same date in
1960. Deposit behavior had been about normal. With weak loan demand
and normal deposit trends, loan-deposit ratios had improved and general
bank liquidity had improved, particularly at city banks.
The Ninth District, Mr. Deming observed, obviously was not
typical of the nation at present. But the national economy, while
expanding significantly, was still far from operating under the pressure
of full resource utilization. On the national evidence, he would
advocate staying "just about where we are" in monetary policy posture
for the next three weeks. By that, he meant providing reserves adequate
to maintain a free reserve level of about $500-$550 million, and a
Federal funds rate significantly below the discount rate, while at the

8/22/61 -40
same time continuing to be concerned over the bill rate. On this
latter point, however, he would not be worried about a bill rate that
ran somewhat below 2-1/2 per cent. He saw no reason to change the
discount rate, nor would he favor discontinuance of the authority to
operate in longer-term securities.
The foregoing, Mr. Deming pointed out, was obviously a
continuation of "wait and see." Consistent with this, he would not
change the directive at this meeting, although he did agree that the
wording of the present directive seemed somewhat dated.
Mr. Swan commented that the extent of the upward movement noted
in the nation as a whole in July did not seem to have been paralleled
in the Twelfth District. He could summarize by noting simply that
nonagricultural employment, seasonally adjusted, in the Pacific Coast
States, which represents a major part of total District employment,
appeared to have been down slightly in July from June. This was only
a small fractional decline, and to some considerable extent it was
related specifically to labor stoppages. However, the fact remained
that employment, after going up in June, did not increase further in
July, and the drop extended to every major industrial group except
finance and Government.
In the banking picture, Mr. Swan said, the demand for bank loans
still appeared to be quite weak. However, the large banks were still

8/22/61 -41
anticipating a pickup in the fall. The major city banks were under
some pressure in early August, but in the week ended August 16 and in
the current statement week they became net sellers of Federal funds
on a rather substantial scale and seemed to be in a relatively easy
position currently.
Turning to policy considerations, Mr. Swan said he felt that
one must be cognizant of the inflationary overtones in the present
situation. However, they did not seem to be imminent. The speculative
outlook generated in late July did not seem to have intensified in the
past few weeks. Consequently, it seemed to him that the results of
the latest statement week, and apparently the current statement week,
were in accord with the kind of policy that would be suitable for the
period ahead, rather than the results of the second week of the past
period. He would recommend aiming at free reserves of about $550
million, with the definite hope that the level would not go below $500
million, and he would not like to see the bill rate above 2-1/2 per
cent. If the rate were a little below that, he would not be concerned.
Reserves would have to be supplied in rather substantial amounts in
the next few weeks, especially the week ending September 6, and it
would seem desirable not to fall as short as in early August. Although
he recognized that in the first week of each month reserves tend to be
somewhat lower in relation to the previous week or the following week,

8/22/61 -42
it seemed to him that the experience in the first two weeks of August
should be given consideration and that it would perhaps be even more
important in the period immediately ahead than in the past to offset
the factors absorbing reserves,
Mr. Swan stated that he would not favor a change in the
discount rate at this time and that he would favor continuing the
special authorization covering operations in longer-term securities.
If there was any hesitancy about supplying the substantial amount of
reserves that would be needed through the purchase of bills because
of excessive pressure on the bill rate, then he would certainly go
into the intermediate-term area to supply those reserves.
With regard to the directive, Mr. Swan said he did not feel
strongly on the matter. He thought a change would be desirable at
some point, and if the directive were to be changed at this time he
would agree with Mr. Allen's suggestion. On the other hand, in terms
of timing he would be a little hesitant about making a change at this
particular point, after a period in which some tightness had occurred,
because of the inferences that might be drawn at a later date. On
balance, therefore, he would be inclined to suggest letting the directive
stand until another meeting.
Mr. Irons said Eleventh District conditions could be summarized
by saying that economic expansion was going on, but not at an excessive

8/22/61 -43
rate, Probably the picture in the District was not too much different
from the national picture, with most of the major indicators moving
upward. The components of the industrial production index were up
generally. Construction activity was good and improving, and one
factor in the picture was the release of highway money that the
Government was going to turn loose a little ahead of schedule; the
State of Texas was ready to use the money for highways and roads.
Employment had moved up; unemployment, not seasonally adjusted, stood
at 5.5 per cent for the District. Income and trade were up a bit and
the agricultural situation looked quite good. Thus, the District
picture was generally satisfactory.
Turning to policy, Mr. Irons expressed himself as quite pleased
with what had been going on in the past few weeks. He felt that the
System had been about as nearly right as one could reasonably have
expected. In his opinion, what had been going on could not be charac
terized as firming or tightness, for he could not associate those
terms with a situation where there was virtually no borrowing at the
Federal Reserve Banks, the Federal funds rate was under the discount
rate, the bill rate was well under the discount rate, and free reserves
averaged $500 to $550 million. There might have been a move from
aggressive ease to ease, but the System was still providing reserves
to the banking system in reasonable accordance with the demand for

8/22/61 -44
loans. Banks in the Eleventh District were in a fairly liquid position
and were not borrowing from the Reserve Bank, all of the recent
borrowing being of a seasonal nature and on the part of smaller banks.
District banks had been net purchasers of Federal funds, but this was
because of the activity of two banks. In talking with bankers, he
heard that loan demand was off a little, but the bankers were not
concerned about being in a tight position. They could make loans as
needed because the banks were reasonably liquid.
Mr. Irons commented that three notable forces had developed.
First, there was the improvement in the domestic economy. Second, the
international situation was still uncertain, with a slight deterioration.
Third, a month-to-month increase in Federal deficit spending had been
occurring. Each of these forces suggested to him the same sort of
credit policy; namely, less ease. If they continued, sooner or later
the System would be moving in the direction of more firmness. For the
oeriod immediately ahead, however, he would think in terms of continuing
about what had been done, on average, over the past three weeks. He
hoped that the Federal funds rate would move at about 2-1/2 per cent,
give or take something, with the bill rate in the area of 2-1/2 to
2-3/8 per cent, and he would watch loans and investments closely to
see what the banks were doing with the funds that the System made
available to them. He would favor renewing the special authorization

8/22/61 -45
covering operations in longer-term securities, with no specific
limitations placed on the Account Management. In his opinion the
Committee should leave considerable discretion to the Desk, with the
understanding that the Manager would be governed largely by the feel
of the market.
In summary, Mr. Irons said, he would maintain the status quo
for the time being, watch closely for the rest of the summer period,
and see what developed with the advent of the fall season.
As to the directive, Mr. Irons said he had no strong feeling.
On balance, he would be willing to wait another three weeks, with the
thought that perhaps the suggestions already made, and any others that
might be submitted, could be studied by the Committee Secretary and
blended into a suggestion that the Committee could consider when it
met three weeks hence.
Mr. Ellis commented that the broad upward trend in New England
that he had reported in June may have moderated somewhat in July,
although the July figures were not yet firm enough to be sure. Some
industries, including apparel, jewelry, and silverware, had not shown
the recovery that seemed typical of the area in general. Production,
construction, and total employment had yet to regain 1960 levels, so
there was still a process of recovery in New England rather than a
movement into a period of expansion. In the past two weeks, in

8/22/61 -46
particular, loans of weekly reporting banks improved noticeably. Demand
deposits had increased 7 per cent since the start of the year, and
time deposits also had shown some further advance. District banks
were still expecting a vigorous loan expansion in the fall and perhaps
they would be selling off some of their short-term Governments.
Mr. Ellis exoressed agreement with the view, stated by
Mr. Balderston at the August 1 meeting, that the Committee should
follow total reserves as a basic guideline unless there was some reason
to diverge one way or the other. The projections that the staff had
presented for the Committee's consideration at this meeting involved
a steady expansion of reserves in response to cyclical and seasonal
patterns that would obtain in the coming months, and he would accept
the projections as an appropriate goal for policy, especially during
the next three weeks. He would favor a free reserve target of around
$500 million, resolving doubts on the side of restraint, but with the
hope that there might not be as many doubts as in the past three weeks.
Mr. Ellis expressed the view that it was time to change the
directive. The version proposed by Mr. Treiber, as amended by Mr. Allen,
had for him the most appeal; he thought it was something the Committee
could appropriately adopt as a guide.
Mr. Ellis commented that as he looked ahead to the fall and saw
a need to supply $1.1 billion of reserves for seasonal needs, he would

8/22/61 -47
expect that most of them could be supplied through the bill market.
Yet it might be desirable to supply some through participation in the
longer end of the market, and with that in mind he would renew the
special authorization. In fact, he would want the Desk to continue its
contacts with the longer-term sector of the market so that if it was
necessary to put funds into the market in this manner in the fall, that
would not cause unusual speculation or concern. He would not recommend
a change in the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Balderston presented the following statement:
Before giving you my views as to the monetary policy
appropriate for the next three weeks, I shall ask you to
bear with me long enough to deal with two matters pertaining
to Committee practices and methods. The first of these is
the pattern of thinking, or the long-term philosophy, that
should guide the Committee's determination of policy actions.
In discussing its decision-making, I shall be using the
language of total reserves, adjusted to eliminate both
Government and interbank deposits, and corrected for
seasonal. I shall then turn to the second matter: the
translation of Committee decisions from the language of
total reserves into that of free reserves, so that the
Committee's instructions to the Desk may be couched in
language that is not only definite, but of practical
usefulness.
The guiding philosophy that I favor for the Committee's
decision-making is to proceed steadily, week by week, toward
whatever goal seems appropriate at the time for the fostering
of recovery and economic growth without inflation. On the
chart that is before you, a consistent pattern of policy
decisions might be guided, for several meetings, by a
straight line like those labeled "5 per cent" and "3 per
cent".1/ The particular phase of the cycle will influence
1/ A copy of the chart is appended to these minutes as Attachment A.

8/22/61 -48-
the Committee's choice of such a guide. The Committee may
follow a certain growth rate for a considerable time, as was
the case for some four months last spring, and then veer
gradually to another guideline considered more appropriate.
The point I am making is that monetary policy should be
flexible but not erratic. To be administered with consistency,
changes in the guideline should not be violent but gradual.
The chart portraying what has actually taken place in recent
weeks indicates to me that the Committee may have changed its
long-run objective from a 5 per cent growth rate to a 3 per
cent growth rate without full realization as to what had
happened, and that since the last meeting the implementation
of Committee policy has resulted in a radical departure even
from the lower growth rate.
If an analogy be permitted, we should have been operating
in recent weeks as if we were driving a truck across the
desert on a straight course toward a goal that we had picked
out in the distance. We should have departed from such a
direct course only to avoid obstacles or depressions in the
sand, and should have waited for any obstacle or depression
to become actually visible before deviating. In short, we
should let the forces of the market indicate when departure
from a direct course is appropriate and necessary.
How can such a guiding philosophy of steady consistent
forward movement toward an agreed-upon goal be brought to
bear upon the Committee's decision-making? Perhaps its
goals and its progress toward them will stand forth in
clearer relief if one cuts through the blurring influence
of changes in Treasury and interbank deposits, and purely
seasonal shifts in privately-owned deposits. These changes
tend to hide what we really care about, namely, the cyclical
expansion of bank deposits in the hands of the nonbank public.
To appraise its performance, the Committee may well ask:
how well have we been doing in providing reserves for these
cyclical needs? The decision-making of recent months may be
appraised by reference to the chart. As mentioned already,
the reserve figures used in it are adjusted to exclude the
effects upon required reserves of changes in interbank and
Government deposits and seasonal patterns in private deposits.
The chart shows the actual movements in total reserves, so
adjusted, since the end of February 1961 compared with two
growth lines. One of these embodies a steady 5 per cent annual
growth rate; the other, a 3 per cent rate. It is not suggested

8/22/61 -49
that either of these percentages represents revealed truth.
They are used simply to compare what we were doing earlier in
the year with our performance in recent weeks. The line of
actual reserves portrays the vacillating nature of our
provision for cyclical expansion; and, since early July, the
slowing down, and indeed the net contracting, of reserves
made available for such purposes.
We have lost, since the week preceding our last meeting,
the equivalent of 10 weeks' growth at the 5 per cent rate and
over 16 weeks' growth at the 3 per cent rate. Even if the
Committee now resumes the supplying of total reserves in
accordance with a 3 per cent growth line, it would not restore
the $120 million difference between the actual at this moment
and the 3 per cent growth line on the chart.
Now I turn to the problem of translating policy decisions
expressed in total reserves into the language of free reserves.
Such translation cannot be precise. It is affected by the
rate at which bank deposit expansion proceeds, and this in
turn by the impact upon bankers of customer demands, ease of
reserve positions, and appraisals of the future course of
events. The best that can be done is to rely upon norms
derived from experience. Since the end of February, the
free reserve figures associated with weeks of net monetary
expansion have averaged about $54O million. Thus the market
place supplies a crude measure of the free reserves needed
for private monetary expansion during an average week.
But in reality, weekly conditions differ from the average.
Some refinement of this measure is called for to deal with
those weeks containing bulges in float. Generally speaking,
a dollar of reserves supplied by float has a less expansive
effect than a dollar of reserves from other sources. For
example, during the weeks of net monetary expansion since the
end of February, the free reserve figure characterized by high
float averaged $625 million; in weeks without a float bulge,
$80 million, or a difference of $145 million. (In contrast,
there have been other high-float weeks within this period that
have been associated with net monetary contraction, even though
the free reserves of these weeks averaged about $520 million.)
At long last I add my view as to policy for the next
three weeks. To promote moderate monetary expansion between
now and our next meeting, I recommend a target of about $500
million for the two-week interval ending September 6, and
above $600 million for the week ending September 13 when the

8/22/61 -50
reserve figures will be more influenced by float. If pursued
for perhaps 6 weeks, these targets should restore total
reserves (adjusted) to the 3 per cent growth line portrayed
in the chart. They have been stated in round figures to
avoid "false accuracy," like that introduced when the value
of pi is carried out to many places, even to 3.1416, when
some figure in the computation, such as the price of copper,
can only be approximated. Nonetheless, I am deeply concerned
that the course of action determined by the Committee should
be clear cut and should be adhered to as closely as possible
by the Desk.
In further comments, Mr. Balderston said that he would favor
renewing the special authorization covering operations in longer-term
securities. He would be inclined not to change the directive at this
meeting, with the thought that perhaps some study between now and the
next meeting might save time in determining the actual wording. A
change at this moment seemed to him relatively unimportant, although
he recognized that wording along the lines suggested was probably more
appropriate to the current situation than the present language.
Chairman Martin commented that he felt rather good about the
way monetary policy was developing. Upon reviewing the minutes for the
current year, it seemed to him a policy was gradually evolving that
would be understandable to the country and effective in helping the
economy. A year ago at this time, he recalled, he had entertained some
doubt as to whether those factors were at work.
The Chairman said that it appeared to him that almost all of
those who had spoken this morning were in favor of continuing about the

8/22/61 -51
same degree of ease that had prevailed, although some questions as to
the way to achieve that degree of ease had crep into, the discussion.
The shades of opinion expressed today seemed really to center around
the fact that although the System might be moving, in its thinking, in
the direction of a more restrictive policy, tre Committee had not yet
arrived at the point where it wanted to be more restrictive. That, he
thought, was about where the discussion had cone out,
Chairman Martin commented, in this connection, that the point
had been made well this morning about giving the Desk more precise
instructions than in the past. The Committee had not yet arrived at
the means of fully achieving that objective, and it would be necessary
to continue work on the matter. The minutes of this meeting ought to
be read carefully, and everyone should study wether any better means
could be devised of stating the Committee's instructions to the New
York Bank. Upon reading through the minutes of past meetings and then
reading the directives, he must admit to a degree of ympathy with some
of the criticisms that had been made by persons outside the System.
Unless one had the benefit of the full flavor of the Committee discussions,
it must be rather difficult to analyze the decision-making process.
As to the immediate question of a change in the directive, the
Chairman expressed the view that the first part of Mr. Treiber's
suggested wording for clause (b)--to encouraging credit expansion so

8/22/61 -52
as to promote fuller utilization of resources--probably was more
appropriate to the present situation than the language of the existing
directive. The Chairman added that he was favorably inclined toward
Mr. Allen's suggestion for retaining the words "while giving consideration
to international factors," since those words would not put the Committee
in the guise of alone being able to defend the integrity of the dollar.
Chairman Martin inquired whether such a change would be
favored or whether it was the consensus that the Committee should hold
the matter in abeyance, with the thought of perhaps obtaining additional
suggestions.
Mr. Mills moved the adoption of a revised directive in the
form mentioned by Chairman Martin, and Mr. Robertson seconded the
motion.
Chairman Martin then inquired whether anyone would wish to
vote against a directive containing such language, and there were no
indications to that effect.
Accordingly, it was voted unanimously
to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York until otherwise directed by the
Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (including
replacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities
to run off without replacement) for the System Open Market
Account in the open market or, in the case of maturing
securities, by direct exchange with the Treasury, as may be
necessary in the light of current and prospective economic

8/22/61 -53-
conditions and the general credit situation of the country,
with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in the market
to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to encouraging
credit expansion so as to promote fuller utilization of
resources, while giving consideration to international
factors, and (c) to the practical administration of the
Account; provided that the aggregate amount of securities
held in the System Account (including commitments for the
purchase or sale of securities for the Account) at the close
of this date, other than special short-term certificates of
indebtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be increased or
decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one
or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time
to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such certificates held at
any one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in
the aggregate $500 million.
Turning to the question of the special authorization for
operations in longer-term securities, Chairman rtin said he felt that
Ma
everyone, both the proponents and the dissenters, would have to continue
to work on the matter and study the available data. A memorandum from
the New York Bank had been prepared for the Committee, pursuant to a
suggestion at the August 1 meeting, attempting to trace the proceeds
of sales of longer-term securities to the System Account. This
memorandum had given the Committee some basis to go on, but there was
still a lack of real experience on which to make definitive judgments.-/
I/ The reference was to a memorandum from Mr. Rouse dated August 18,
1961, and an attached memorandum of August 11 from the New York
Bank's Market Statistics Department.

8/22/61 -54
Personally, he felt that it would be a mistake to remove from the Desk
the discretion it now had under the current authorization. He leaned
toward the position that it was not necessary under present conditions
that the bill rate be maintained at present levels at all costs. He
saw no reason why the bill rate could not fall to 2-3/8 or even 2-1/4
per cent, if need be, provided the Account could obtain bills without
seriously upsetting the market. However, he saw no reason at this
point for the Committee to get itself back in the box, in which it had
been for so long, of being inflexible to the extent of taking a position
that it would not deal across the board even though the deals, when
available across the board, were in reasonable relation to the market.
Everyone, he noted, could take the currently available data and read
it differently. Mr. Robertson, for example, had interpreted the
information in the memoranda from the New York Bank a little differently
than he would have interpreted it, but he (Chairman Martin) may not
have read the memorandum correctly. In any event, he felt that
everyone should study and evaluate data of this kind very carefully.
He had been talking to a number of people in the market, and there were
evidently some difficulties in the special operation, but he had not
reached the point where he would want to make a judgment. Instead, he
would prefer to keep an open mind. He felt, certainly, that the
Committee ought to renew the special authorization at the present time

8/22/61 -55
and continue the discretion placed in the Manager of the Account. At
the same time, the Manager should understand that the intent was not
just to engage in operations in longer-term securities for the sake of
holding the bill rate up to any preconceived level. That, he thought,
was essentially where the majority of the Committee stood this morning.
In response to a question from the Chairman, Mr. King clarified
that his position, as stated earlier during , e meeting, had not been
to terminate the special authorization, but rather to disengage from
operations under it for the time being.
Chairman Martin then inquired whether it was agreed that the
Committee would renew the special authorization, with Messrs. Allen and
Robertson dissenting. and there were no comments to the contrary.
Accordingly, the Committee authorized
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, between
this date and the next meeting of the
Committee, within the terms and limitations
of the directive issued at this meeting, to
acquire intermediate and/or longer-term
U. S. Government securities of any maturity,
or to change the holdings of such securities,
in an amount not to exceed $500 million.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,
Balderston, Irons, King, Mills, Swan, Wayne,
and Treiber. Votes against this action:
Messrs. Allen and Robertson.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Tuesday, September 12, 1961.

8/22/61 -56
Chairman Martin commented that he would be leaving shortly
after the date of the next meeting to attend the Fund and Bank meetings
in Vienna, and in those circumstances, particularly, he thought it
might be useful to put on the agenda for general discussion at the
September 12 meeting the subject of Federal Reserve holdings of foreign
currencies. He noted that there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee and the Presidents not currently serving on the
Committee copies of a memorandum from Mr. Young dated June 16, 1961
(as corrected June 26), along with a memorandum dated June 16 from
Mr. Furth of the Board's staff, and that there would also be distributed
copies of a letter dated July 21, 1961, from the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York commenting on Mr. Young's memorandum.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary.

TOTAL RESERVES AVAILABLE TO SUPPORT PRIVATE DEPOSIT EXPANSION, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
ACTUAL VS. 5 PER CENT AND 3 PER CENT ANNUAL GROWTH RATES, MARCH I - AUGUST 16, 1961
BILLIONSO F DOLLARS
19.5
5 PER CENT _____
ANNUAL GROWTH RATE ,19.
SINCE MARCH 1
ACTUAL-- "19.3
19.2
3 PER CENT
19.0
--- ANNUAL GROWTH RATE----- ------------ 90.
-- i1s 899
.. 188
1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27
MAR. APR. MAY JUNE JULY AUG. SEPT.