A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, October 3, 1961, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Balderston, Presiding
Mr. A llen
Mr. Irons
Mr. King
Mr. M ills
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Swan
Mr. Wayne
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Ellis, Fulon, and Deming, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bopp and Clay, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Kansas City,
respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Baughman, Coldwell, Einzig, Noyes, and
Ratchford, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Messrs. Holland and Koch, Advisers, Division of
Research and Statistics
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
Mr. Yager, Economist, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Francis, First Vice President, Federal Re
serve Bank of St. Louis
Messrs. Eastburn, Hostetler, Jones, and Tow,
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Philadelphia, Cleveland, St. Louis, and
Kansas City, respectively

10/3/61 -2
Mr. Litterer, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Mr. Schiff, Manager, Research Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on September 12, 1961, were
approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report of open market operations covering the period
September 12 through September 27, 1961, and a supplemental report
covering the period September 28 through October 2, 1961. Copies of
both reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Rouse made the
following comments:
Open market operations during the past three weeks were
complicated by wide swings in market factors, which required
sizable operations on both sides of the market. Outright
sales of securities--most of which were made early in the
period to offset a part of the mid-month bulge in float-
amounted to nearly $740 million, while outright purchases,
made largely last Wednesday and Thursday, amounted to nearly
$950 million. Since most of the purchases were Treasury
bills, and since a part of the sales was in securities other
than bills, our holdings of bills rose by about $385 million
net over the period.
The money market was generally steady during the past
three weeks despite the wide swings in reserves, and Federal
funds traded for the most part between 1-1/2 and 2-1/2 per
cent. Rates on three-month bills edged gradually lower

10/3/61
through yesterday, with the three-month issue closing last
night at 2.24 per cent bid, 9 basis points below the rate at
the time of the last meeting. Over the same period, British
three-month bill rates have remained at around 6.44 per cent,
while the discount on forward sterling has declined somewhat.
As a result there was a spread of 34 basis points in favor
of British bills on a covered basis yesterday, compared with
a spread of only 2 basis points at the time of the last meeting.
I should point out that too much emphasis may be placed on the
British bill rate in this connection, and that the Euro-dollar
rate is perhaps more important than the British bill rate. In
yesterday's auction, the average rate on our three-month bill
was 2.30 per cent, while the average on the six-month bill was
2.68 per cent. This is the fifth successive week in which the
average rate on the six-month bill has been in the 2.68 - 2.70
per cent range.
The major part of the Treasury's financing program that
we discussed at the time of the last meeting has now been
completed. The results of the advance refunding were especially
gratifying, and the auction of June tax bills went about as
expected. The market's initial reaction to the $2 billion of
additional 3-1/4 per cent notes of May 1963 was rather lukewarm,
since the Treasury priced the issue right on the market, with
the tax on loan account deposit, which is worth 4 or 5/32,
providing the incentive margin against the current market.
Nevertheless, it appears from early reports received from New
York this morning that subscriptions may only be fair and that
the guessing in the market last night that allotments may be in
the neighborhood of 35 per cent may be low. The Treasury will
complete the current phase of its financing program with the
auction next week of $2 billion one-year bills to replace $1.5
billion bills maturing October 16. Looking further ahead, the
Treasury will have to raise some additional cash during this
calendar year, with the amount depending very largely upon
whether it handles the $7 billion November 15 maturity through
a cash or an exchange offering. That refinancing will be a
sizable operation, particularly since almost the entire issue
is publicly held. I should add that with the success the
Treasury has had in its financing program thus far, and the
good performance of the market in recent weeks, the market
thinks that the climate may be right for a junior advance re
funding at an early date, and the Treasury is giving some
consideration to this possibility.

10/3/61
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the open market transactions
during the neriod September 12 through
October 2, 1961, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
There followed an economic presentation in the form of a chart
show. In concluding the presentation Mr. Thomas presented summary
comments as follows:
First, the recovery in activity so far has been as fast
as in the first half of the 1958 upswing. This was unexpected.
Not only that, the rise started from a level substantially
above the low of early 1958 and the present level is substan
tially higher, both in absolute terms and in relation to the
previous peak, than the level at this stage of the 1958
upswing. If further advance lies ahead, on a scale comparable
to that after the autumn of 1958, the level reached by mid
1962 will be much higher than that in 1959-60 and the growth
rate for recent years will appear to have been considerably
higher than had been thought.
It is possible too that activity will rise substantially
further and without much price advance. So far there has been
little evidence of upward price pressures, less than at the
comparable stage in 1958. Price advances then, moreover, were
limited despite speculative buying of steel in the spring of
1959 and a wave of optimism at the end of the steel strike.
Some of the same forces that limited price advances then--such
as international competition--are still present.
The credit situation does not show evidence of continuing
speculative activities and there has been no such dramatic
advance in interest rates as occurred in the summer of 1958.
Yields on long-term securities are still above those of late
1958 but not by much.
Looked at in other ways, the facts are subject to other
interpretations. One alternative view is that, strong as the
advance over all has been so far, it has depended too much on
an inventory turn-around and increased defense outlays. Housing
starts have risen only moderately. There is little evidence yet
of real strength in consumer buying and that is basic to any
important sustained advance in business spending for inventories
and capital goods and to any further substantial rise in general

10/3/61
economic activity. In this broad view the recovery may prove
abortive, stopping at levels only moderately above 1959-60.
A third view is that recovery forces will prove cumulative
in their impact, with higher incomes leading soon to increasing
consumption, and thence, along with other influences, to higher
utilization of capacity, and upward pressures on prices. Under
such circumstances, inventory buying would be presumed to
increase considerably further and there would be heavy capital
outlays for capacity expansion as well as modernization. The
continuation of the Federal budget deficit through the second
half of 1962 tends t- support the view that total demands will
rise sharply. Current lags in unemployment, consumption,
business loans, and the money supply would disappear. With such
developments, restraints on credit expansion would be needed at
some stages.
These are all possibilities that need to be weighed in
thinking about fiscal and monetary policy. If this Committee
could act only at intervals of several months, a decision
among the alternative prospects would be pressing. With action
being taken continuously, however, policy can be made more on
the basis of established facts and less on the basis of
speculation about the future, taking into account, of course,
lags between policy action and economic responses. Retail sales
performance in the current month, for example, should be
esoecially helpful in evaluating the underlying strength of
consumer demand, one of the major uncertainties in the present
situation.
At this point the need for some additional credit and
monetary expansion seems evident if we are to achieve higher
levels of resource utilization. Apparently, restraint is not
yet needed. In the record of commodity prices there is as yet
little evidence of strong upward pressures. Yet, it is
important in supplying the basis for desirable monetary
expansion to avoid laying the seeds for unsound debt expansion
and inflationary developments.
Before this meeting, Mr. Balderston had distributed a memorandum
dated September 28, 1961, with respect to the derivation of "Adjusted
Available Reserves." At this point, he called upon Mr. Thomas, who
commented on staff projections of reserves as prepared at the Board and

10/3/61
at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as well as on the chart that
had been distributed with Mr, Balderston's memorandum showing total
reserves available to support private deposit expansion.
Mr. Treiber then made the following statement regarding the
business outlook and credit policy:
The domestic business and credit situation continues to
develop satisfactorily, without any obvious signs of strain.
There has been little basic change in the economic and
financial picture since the last meeting of the Committee.
There has been no rush on the part of consumers to buy, nor on
the part of businessmen to build up inventories or to expand
plant and equipment. The increase in corporate profits in the
second quarter of 1961 may, however, provide both the means
and the incentive for further investment outlays. In view of
the increase in corporate profits and in corporate income
taxes resulting therefrom, the Treasury deficit now appears
more manageable than might have been feared earlier. The
unemployment problem remains serious.
The demand for bank loans has been roughly in line with
business developments. There is no indication of exceptional
borrowing in expectation of higher interest rates or inventory
needs.
While price stability does not appear threatened from the
demand side, there is some concern about the effect of a
possible wage push. The automobile settlement seems to provide
for larger wage increases (tentatively estimated at a bit higher
than 4 per cent a year) than the probable gains in average
productivity in the nation as a whole. So far there appears to
be little or no change in the basic pattern of demands for
higher wages; nor is there sufficient recognition that the
vulnerability of American industry to foreign competition has
introduced a new element into the wage picture.
On the international side, preliminary estimates for
August show a marked improvement in our balance of payments
over the poor July figures. The dollar has been somewhat
stronger in the exchange markets. These favorable developments,
however, do not justify any relaxation in our effort to solve
the balance-of-payments problem. Over the last three months

10/3/61
there was a balance-of-payments deficit at an annual seasonally
adjusted rate of close to $2-1/2 billion; a continued expansion
in business can be expected to increase imports further and to
make more difficult the correction of the deficit.
Europeans are still watching closely developments in the
United States. At the annual meeting of the International
Monetary Fund in Vienna there was considerable emphasis by some
Europeans--with an obvious eve on the United States--on the
relation between sound and vigorous domestic policies and the
need for additional international credits such as were discussed
at the meeting. The United States gold stock will probably
decline substantially this week, and short-term rates here are
low compared with rates available abroad, The dollar is still
vulnerable.
The Treasury is moving forward with its crowded calendar
of financing in which it has been engaged more or less con
tinuously for several weeks. Payment must be made on October
11 for the additional $2 billion of 3-1/4 per cent Treasury
notes of May 15, 1963, offered for subscription yesterday. The
Treasury has just announced the terms of a $2 billion issue
of one-year Treasury bills to provide $1/2 billion of cash
and to refund the $1-1/2 billion of one-year Treasury bills
maturing October 16, and there is talk about a possible junior
advance refunding.
The domestic and business credit situation still calls for
a policy of monetary ease. Treasury operations counsel the
continuation of an "even keel" in the money market. We must
continue to be alert to the possibility that not only a wage
cost push but also stepped-up defense spending and related
expansion in private spending may place excessive pressures on
the price structure and endanger economic stability; this is
still a matter of being alert rather than a matter calling for
immediate action,
We think it desirable that there be some increase in the
rate on three-month Treasury bills which has been about 2-1/4
per cent for the last several weeks. We would prefer to see the
rate nearer the middle or in the upper part of the 2-1/8 - 2-5/8
per cent range that has existed over the last year--if necessary,
at the expense of a somewhat lower level of free reserves.
Thus, while we favor continuation of the same degree of ease as
has prevailed since the last meeting, we would resolve doubts
on the side of less ease.

10/3/61 -8
We see no reason for a change in the directive. We
believe that the authority to engage in transactions in
longer-term securities should be continued and that the
discount rate should not be changed.
Mr. Francis said that in the Eighth District business conditions
had continued to improv- ,ut the rate of improvement had not been
spectacular. Agricultural prospects were better than a year ago.
However, the stubbornly high level of unemployment, the pattern of
production activity among manufacturing industries, and the lack of
expansive loan demand at District banks suggested that some of the
earlier vigor of the recovery was lagging. He noted that the lateness
of the cotton crop had been a factor in the weakness of demand for
credit, particularly in the Memphis area. As to the national situation,
it appeared to be quite comparable to that observed for the Eighth
District. Disposable personal income continued to rise but consumer
purchases were showing a surprising lack of exuberance, and plant
capacity was not being fully utilized. Unemployment rates continued
high and price levels were not under pressure. Coupling these indica
tions with an international balance-of-payments situation that harbors
problem potentials, but offers no observable reason for a change in
attitude toward domestic affairs during the next few weeks, he could
find little reason to urge a more restrictive monetary policy than that
followed recently. He was pleased with the recent substantial increase
in total bank reserves. In sum, he saw no reason at this time for change

10/3/61 -9
in the Committee's directive, the discount rate, or the special
authorization for purchases of longer-term securities.
Mr. Bopp said that in the Third District production and employ
ment were rising and unemployment was declining. An exception to the
general evidence of continuing business expansion was to be found in
department store sales, which fell in September on every basis of
comparison and now for the year to date failed to exceed 1960. Bank
credit was expanding, deposits were rising, and banks (both reserve city
and country) were in an easy reserve position. Even though the Treasury
was not in the market, Mr. Bopp said that he felt on balance the
condition of the economy favored maintenance of the status quo. He was
conscious that he had been recommending the same policy for some time
and he was alert to the fact that a change might become necessary.
While he would be looking for any need for a change in policy, he still
could see no need for that change at the present time and would recommend
continuation of the same degree of ease that had existed in recent weeks
with no change in the Committee's directive or other policy measures.
Mr. Fulton said that new orders for steel were not increasing to
the extent that had been expected and that a considerable portion of the
steel being produced was going into inventories at the mills rather than
for immediate shipment. The situation in the automobile industry had
caused some stockpiling and orders for steel from that industry were not

10/3/61 -10
now being placed in quantity. New orders were expected only in relation
to sales of new model cars. Steel producers looked longingly to
increasing prices on the basis of the wage increase that became
effective October 1, Mr. Fulton said, but ther was little hope that
they could actually make an increase effective at the present time
because of the amount of capacity not being used, the slowness of new
orders, and the recent reduction in the price of aluminum which is
competitive with steel in many ways. There was no change in tne
unemployment situation, with 11 of the 14 major ar as in the Fourth
District still classed as substantial areas of unemployment. Department
store sales declined in September and for the year to date were 1 per
cent below a year ago. Building permits had slowed down in Cleveland
although some public works had helped maintain building in other parts
of the District. Bank credit was not increasing and there was no pressure
for loan expansion. All in all, Mr. Fulton said that the District was
having a sidewise movement which led him to the conclusion that no change
should be made in monetary rolicy, that the same degree of ease that had
existed recently should be maintained, that there should be no change in
the Committee's directive or its special authorization permitting
purchases of longer-term securities, and that the discount rate should
remain unchanged for the present.

10/3/61 -11
Mr. Mitchell said that if the Committee had some arrangement
whereby it could tell what was going on currently and last week, perhaps
it could act in some way today. It did not have that information, and
the Committee was faced with a basic uncertainty as to what the final
takings of consumers would be. There did not seem to be much to do
at this time but to continue as during the past few weeks. Mr. Mitchell
felt it would be unfortunate if anything done by the Committee could be
interpreted by the business or financial community as indicating that
the Committee had taken a step of some sort because of a belief that a
change had taken place in the situation. Therefore, Committee policy
and operations should continue just as in the recent past.
Mr. King said that he would second the comments Mr. Mitchell had
made. It looked extremely doubtful to him that the boom that had been
forecast by the rise in the stock market earlier this year was going to
be pronounced. Producers today obviously were under twin restraints of
foreign competition and excess capacity. Although not every producer
was directly subject to foreign competition, he was indirectly affected.
A producer could not raise prices without peril of losing part of his
market or going out of business. On the basis of August and September
data, Mr. King felt it difficult to conclude that the country was in a
great period of advance. He did not want to sound overly pessimistic
although he had been somewhat that way since the beginning of this year.

10/3/61 -12
He would not resolve doubts in the Committee's operations on the side
of less ease, as Mr. Treiber had suggested, but would vote against any
such instruction. With the recent strength apparent in the longer
term Government securities market, he saw no reason for the Committee's
taking action that would result in an increase in the bill rate. He
hoped that rate could stay about where it is and would not object if a
slight decline occurred. in his judgment, the country was simply not
experiencing a dynamic recovery at this point, and the sooner this was
recognized the more likely it was that Committee actions would result
in good for the economy. He would make no change 3 1 the discount rate
or in the directive and would continue the special authorization with
respect to longer-term Government securities. He wouuld make no change
whatsoever in the degree of ease in the market.
Mr. Shepardson said that the presentation of the economic
situation given this morning showed clearly a tweedle-dee tweedle-dum
situation. On balance, a continuation of the policy that the Committee
had been following recently was indicated. He differed a little from
Mr. King in that he was inclined to agree with the suggestion that
Mr. Treiber had made that if any doubts had to be resolved, he would
resolve them on the side of less ease. In fact, he felt it would be
fortunate if there were some rise in the bill rate in the light of the
international situation. Other than that, Mr. Shepardson said that he

10/3/61 -13
believed the Committee should continue its policy and operations on the
same basis as during the past several weeks, bearing in mind that the
time was getting closer when the Committee might have to be prepared to
move promptly to modify policy.
Mr. Robertson said he did not think there was much basis in the
economic information available for a great difference of view among the
members of the Committee, and that this was borne out from the comments
made thus far, The outlook seemed clear: there was very little
justification for any deviation from present policy in the light of the
underutilization of resources in productive capacity or manpower.
Certainly, ease should be maintained. However, he was one who could
understand the third alternative that Mr. Thomas had presented in his
summary of possible courses, namely, that recovery forces would prove
cumulative and that restraint on credit expansion would be needed at
some stage. His feeling was that there would be continuing expansion
and the time would come when there was a possibility of recurrence of
inflationary conditions with pressures increasing all along the line.
The Committee should be prepared to act at that time. Although he
would make no change in the direction of policy at this time, he
would be happy if during the next three weeks operations would strive
for net free reserves in the $500-$550 million range--no great vari
ation from the degree of ease recently. He would suggest that the

10/3/61 -14-
Committee should not continue to guide its policy by the level of the
bill rate--too much emphasis had been put on the bi]l rate. In sum,
he would make no change in the directive, no change in discount rate,
and proceed as indicated.
Mr. Mills said that the economic experience since 1958 had been
arbitrarily posed as a basis for comparison with the 1961 experience
and also as a basis for policy considerations by the Committee. He was
not at all sure that 1958 as a benchmark in retrospect would not turn
out to be a delusion and a myth. There were other benchmarks that might
have been chosen, possibly with equal comparability. With that as a
background, Mr. Mills said that his approach to policy formulation was
a classic one and a much more spartan approach than had been expressed
thus far in the discussion. He then presented a statement as follows:
Students of public finance are the mo;t frequent and vocal
critics of financing a deficit in the national accounts through
the commercial banking system as being danrerously inflationary,
but in the case of the United States no real clamor has been
raised against that practice as it now exists. Over the past
year our commercial banks have increased their :oldings of
United States Government securities by substantially more than
the increase in the Federal deficit and debt and, on prospect,
can be expected to add still more to their portfolios. The
absence of criticism for this development has been buried in
the concern over what has been a lethargic increase in the
money supply and a continuing evidence of slack in the economy,
which have overridden doubts about the inflationary implications
of present financial trends. the fact that prices have been
generally stable has been taken as a favorable financial omen
when, in fact, their stability revives the possibility, in my
mind, that the economy has not as yet completed downward passage
through a major business cycle and that full recovery from its

10/3/61 -15-
stagnating effects still lies ahead. If this should prove to
be the case, the constant piling up of reserves in the
commercial banking system is storing up trouble for the
future at the time then the holders of time and savings
deposits will begin to convert them to more dynamic economic
uses. A strong demand for bank credit will then appear which
can be readily satisfied by bank substitution of loans for
investments in United States Government securities subject to
the restraining influence of higher reserve requirements on
the newly created demand deposits that will develop in
replacement of a reduction in time deposits. Upward price
pressures would certainly occur under these conditions and the
ingenuity of Federal Reserve System officials would be taxed
to devise ways to prevent the eruption of dangerous inflation
ary financial conditions.
In my opinion, the Federal Reserve System should not be
quiescent about permitting this possible kind of situation to
develop and should act now to limit, and maybe to absorb, the
excessive liquidity in the commercial banking system, which
liquidity is now giving evidence of spreading to other sectors
of the economy. A start should be made in bringing down the
level of positive free reserves to around $400 million, and if
in that process interest rates move up, an increase in the
discount rate to 3-1/2 per cent will be in order. For that
matter, the disparity between short-term interest rates in the
United States and Great Britain argues for higher rates in
this country as a hindrance against renewed gold losses and as
a token of our determination to counter inflationary influences.
Frequent allusions in the financial press to a seeming lack of
Federal Reserve System recognition of the need for moving toward
a restraining monetary policy indicates that in the public's
mind such action is past due. In any event, it would be folly
to look to Great Britain to lower its interest rate structure
in order to accommodate a level of interest rates in the United
States that is becoming unrealistic.
No change in the directive is suggested and a renewal of
the special authority is in order. In the latter respect, I
wish to record a modification of my earlier position in favor of
disengagement from oven market actions outside of the Treasury
bill sector. Although opposing purchases of longer-term United
States Government securities for the System Open Market Account
and recommending divestment of those now held, further
experience has justified operations in short-term United States

10/3/61 -16
Government securities other than Treasury bills as being in
the interest of a flexible conduct of monetary policy.
However, the advantages of the policy flexibility that has
been gained through these dealings would be enhanced if more
emphasis were placed on sales of such securities when
withdrawing reserves as compared to the weight that has been
given to purchases made to supply reserves.
Mr. Wayne said that, despite some hesitations, Fifth District
business remains basically strong. In August nonmanufacturing employment
was at a record level due to widespread gains, the largest of which were
in government, construction, services, and trade. In manufacturing,
however, both employment and man-hours showed less than normal seasonal
increases, largely because of conditions in nondurable goods industries.
Opinions received in a recent survey of manufacturers around the District
were less optimistic than they were three weeks ago but still indicated
that in September factory production was moving up slightly. On balance,
these reports showed gains in factory employment and weekly hours backed
by generally good levels of new orders. Textile order backlogs have
been rising since the first of the year and inventories are down
moderately; yet in some sectors of the industry problems relating to
uncertain demand, rising costs, and foreign competition are still
troublesome. Retail sales are reportedly about the same as they have
been all year--good but not good enough. Contract construction workers
numbered more than 300,000 in August, a new record for the District; and
the value of building permits in principal cities exceeded the previous
high by a substantial margin. Responding to stronger demand again last

10/3/61 -17
month, coal mines hired more labor thus maintaining this year's pattern
of fairly stable employment in sharp contrast to annual declines
averaging 10 per cent over the last three years.
Business and all other (primarily consumer) loans at District
banks have shown notable strength in recent weeks, moving up at a
better-than-seasonal pace. The rate of increase in time deposits tapered
off somewhat in September, and in the final week for which data are
available these deposits declined for the first time since April.
District money market banks made large net sales of Federal funds in
the last two weeks, after moderate net purchases in early September.
In the area of policy, Mr. Wayne said that developments since
the preceding meeting provided no basis for any significant change in
posture. The current recovery now seemed to be a bit more moderate than
it, appeared three weeks ago, and there was still no evidence of the
beginning of any general upward movement of prices. As often noted, the
Treasury's schedule of financing left few times in which it would be
feasible to make any substantial changes of policy and none of the
openings appeared in the weeks just ahead. In the international field,
London bills have had a relatively small and varying advantage over
New York bills on a covered basis for several weeks. Any substantial
fall in the domestic bill rate, if other factors remain unchanged, might
start an outflow of short-term funds. The domestic situation called for
no more restraint, the international position called for no more ease,

10/3/61 -18
and the Treasury schedule called for stability. Th answer seemed
e
obvious--the Committee should maintain its present posture, which
meant no change in the discount rate or in the substance of the
directive. He also favored renewing the special authorization for
purchases of longer-term securities.
Mr. Clay said that present circumstances appeared to call for
a continuance of essentially the same monetary policy that the Federal
Reserve System had been pursuing. Economic activitv was continuing to
expand but there was no evidence of overexuberance on the part of
either business or consumers. In fact, the pace of expansion had
moderated somwhat from the pronounced forward thrust of the initial
months of the upswing. Moreover, the private demand for credit in both
the commercial banks and the capital markets did not give evidence of
strong cyclical expansion. Altogether, these factors indicated that
monetary policy should continue its role of encouraging the expansion
of economic activity and the fuller utilization o' manpower and other
resources.
During part of the period until the next meeing of the Committee,
Mr. Clay noted that the Treasury's financing activities would need to be
taken into account in conducting the System's open market operations.
Avoidance of any change in the System's monetary policy would be
consistent with both the needs of the Treasury and the continued pursuit
of the appropriate policv of monetary ease. He also suggested that, in

10/3/61 -19
conducting open market operations, the level of the Treasury bill rate
would need to be watched with reference to the flow-of-funds problem.
Recently, the bill rate had been at about the lower limit that would
appear to be in order so far as this aspect was concerned. No change
was called for in either the discount rate or the directive, Mr. Clay
said, and the special authorization with respect to operations in
longer-term Government securities should be renewed.
Mr. Allen said that the situation was about the same as at the
last meeting in that business activity continued to increase, but at a
less rapid rate than in the spring and early summer. In the three weeks
ended September 16 new claims for unemployment compensation in the
Seventh District were 20 per cent less than in the same period last year,
compared with a drop of 11 per cent for the nation. In August, Milwaukee
was reclassified from "substantial labor surplus" to "moderate unemploy
ment" and was the only large city in the nation reclassified in August.
He believed that before the end of the year a number of other seventh
District cities would be reclassified upward, suchas Rockford, Detroit,
Flint, and the Gary-Hammond steel area.
In the area of prices, Mr. Allen said that there was a good deal
of talk about tough price competition in such lines as industrial
equipment, plumbing and heating equipment, farm machinery, radio
television, and petroleum products. A representative of the steel

10/3/61 -20
industry had reported that while officials resent the President's
public request that the industry refrain from raising prices, there
arpeared to be little chance of an "across the board" increase in any
case.
The closing of General Motors plants incident to labor contract
negotiations affected both production and sales of automobiles for
September, Mr. Allen stated, but if Ford and Chrysler escaped without
shutdowns, Detroit analysts expected the best fourth quarter since
1955, with sales of 1,600,000 units and production of 1,800,000 units.
He noted that the industry was in disagreement as to which of the 1962
models should be labeled compact, and until a standard was devised and
agreed upon, percentage figures of compact production and sales would be
meaningless.
Borrowing at the discount window of the Chicago Reserve Bank
continued negligible and member banks which operates int he Federal funds
market had been net sellers, with one or two exceptions. Weekly
reporting banks in Chicago now hold $2.5 billion of Government securities,
of which about half mature within one year. This was twice as much as a
year ago and supported the statements that the banks were able as well
as willing to handle considerable additional loan demand.
Mr. Allen repeated that he felt we were .bout where we were at
the time of the last meeting. The rate of rise in business activity had

10/3/61 -21
slowed, but the rise was going on and there was widespread confidence
that conditions would continue to improve. The number of unemployed
was still high. The international problems were no less serious. And
treasury financing continued to be a matter which must be taken into
consideration. His conclusion was that the Committee should carry on
until the next meeting its effort to maintain that degree of ease in
the money and credit markets that had existed for some time. He would
not change the discount rate or the directive, but he would discontinue
the so-called special authorization permitting purchases of longer-term
Government securities.
Mr. Deming said that the Ninth District economy continued to
move more slowly than that of the nation. A look at the whole third
quarter showed a marked slowdown in over-all activity in July and
August, followed by some strengthening in September. District banking
continued to experience relatively weak loan demand. July-August data
for all member banks showed loan declines larger than in almost any
comparable month in the postwar years, and these contrasted with gains
in most years. City bank data for September showed a continuation of
this trend. Deposits rose, but investments increased substantially less
than the decline in loans. Bank liquidity consequently had improved
significantly. There had been no borrowin- at the Reserve Bank during
the last week, and city banks had not borrowed at the Reserve Bank for
many months.

LO/3/61 -22
Mr. Deming went on to say that the information given in the
chart show this morning confirmed his feeling of uncertainty about the
national picture. This uncertainty had to do mwoitrhe the
implications for financial markets and for credit policy of further
economic expansion than with the probabilities of such expansion
itself. The Treasury financing situation made the policy prescription
for the next three weeks relatively easy for the Committee, itsh, at no
change in policy, in the degree of ease, in the Committee's directive,
,r in the discount rate.
Although this policy decision was relatively easy, Mr. Deming
felt that it miht be inadequate. The "oospeeans on' for policy change
came on to the Committee quickly and would be short. He was disturbed
ly what seemed to be increasing talk about price advances. There might
be no discernible price pressures, he said, and analysis might indicate
little in the short-run future, but there was more talk about increasing
prices than he wished to hear. He also was disturbed by some implications
of outside commentators that economic expansion could be accompanied by
financial pressures, and by the further implicati on that Federal
Reserve policy might continue to be easy for an indefinite period.
was impressed by the words used in the summary concluding the chart show
presentation this morning, "Restraint is not yet needed . . . . Yet, it
is important to avoid laying the seeds for unsound debt expansion and
inflationary developments." Thus, it seemed to him that the chances were

10/3/61 -23
better than even that monetary policy would move toward some restriction
in the future and that for the immediate period doubts should be
resolved on the side of less ease.
Mr. Swan said that business activity in the Twelfth District
continued to reflect only moderate or quite gradual improvement. However,
nonfarm employment on a seasonally adjusted basis rose significantly
faster in the District than in the nation during August. Previously, the
District had been lagging considerably in employment. The rise during
August was largely offset by an increase in labor force, however, and
there was little change in the unemployment situation. Construction
continued at a quite satisfactory level during August. Department store
sales, after a disappointing August, showed year-to-year gains during
the first three weeks of September. Bank loans had increased in almost
all categories during the three weeks ended September 20 but the rise
was less than seasonal except for real estate loans. Banks had been
heavy sellers of Federal funds during the three weeks ended September 20
but more recently they had been about in balance.
Mr. Swan commented that, in view of the rather wide fluctuations
in other factors affecting reserves during the past three weeks, he
thought the Desk had done a very good job in coming out about where it
had in its operations. As to policy, he agreed with those who felt that
operations should continue to produce about the same degree of ease in
the next three weeks, partly because an even keel was called for by the

10/3/61 -24
Treasury financing but also because he could see no indication of
developments that called for any lessening in the degree of ease in the
period immediately ahead. Consequently, his view would be that no
change in the Committee's directive or policy should be made and that
there should be no change in discount rate at this t:me. Also, he
would continue the authorization for surchases of longer-term securities.
Mr. Irons said that estimates of damage cau3ed in the Eleventh
District by the recent hurricane ranged rather widely but that it appeared
the dollar losses would be much less than some oft he figures earlier
mentioned. His own judgment was that the totak dollar loss might be
around $300 million which insured coverage of about $100 million. Repair
of damage would give some stimulus to construction and plant expenditures,
but the return of most plants to productive act which habde en surprisingly
rapid. With respect to current conditions in the District generally,
employment had shown little change while unemployment had decreased
slightly in recent weeks. Construction contracts, which had declined in
July and August, were expected to be higher during the next few months,
partly as a result of repair of damage caused by the hurricane.
Agricultural conditions were very good except in the hurricane area. Bank
loans had shown a fairly sizeable increase in the past three weeks, with
a moderate decline in investments. Demand deposits had risen while time
deposits had declined. Banks were reasonably liquid and borrowings from

10/3/61 -25
the Reserve Bank were small with no city banks borrowing recently. In
sum, District conditions could be described as reasonably satisfactory
and showing a broad upward movement. Mr. Irons felt that this condition
would continue and possibly be stimulated by reconstruction from the
hurricane.
As to the national picture, Mr. Irons felt that with economic
conditions as described earlier in this meeting and with the Treasury
financing situation and international conditions being what they were,
the Committee could strike a balance between the domestic and
international situation by continuing a policy of ease that would be
reflected in free reserves of around $450 to $500 million, a bill rate
in the 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 per cent range, Federal funds in the 2 to 2-1/2
per cent area, and little borrowing at the Federal Reserve Banks.
Mr. Irons said he liked the comment that Mr. Treiber had made that
doubts should be resolved on the side of less ease, although he felt
the System certainly should supply seasonal requirements and perhaps a
little more. Beyond that he would be inclined to the view Mr. Mills
had expressed as to what might be ahead in the more distant future.
He would make no change now in discount rate or in the Committee's
directive and would renew the authorization permitting purchases of
longer-term Government securities.
Mr. Ellis summed up the New England situation by stating that
it was caught up in a vigorous lull. The lull in production continued

10/3/61 -26
during August, and the rise in employment also was stalled in August.
Insured unemployment seemed to be declining more recently and in the
first week of September was below the rate of a year ago for the first
time since March 1960. Business loans had shown more than the seasonal
growth as had deposits. Banks continued to expect a substantial loan
demand this fall and felt well equipped to meet it. They did not
visualize any boom conditions.
In the field of monetary policy, Mr. Ellis said that he had
been impressed by the chart show this morning, particularly by the
summary presented by Mr. Thomas. The third alternative that Mr. Thomas
had outlined, that is, that recovery forces would prove cumulative and
that restraints on credit expansion would be needed at some stages,
seemed a likely development in Mr. Ellis' opinion, There was no
evidence that credit was unduly stimulative, but the most likely
projection was that it would become so if policy were continued in its
present position for too long. As Mr. Mills had indicated, the run-up
in credit could be quite sharp. Mr. Ellis said he was glad that the
Committee did not have to consider a change in policy at this time in
terms of the Treasury financing schedule. The only concession he would
make toward the longer run view he had expressed was that he would agree
with Mr. Treiber's suggestion that doubts be resolved on the side of
less ease and that the short bill rate be permitted to range somewhat

10/3/61 -27
higher. He was not prepared to seek a lower free reserve level or to
accept aterially higher bill rates. There should be no overt action
indicating a change in Committee policy, no change in discount rate,
and he would continue the special authorization with respect to
Government securities' purchases.
Mr. Balderston stated that the consensus appeared to call for
no change in the Committee's directive and for continuation of the
degree of ease that had prevailed during recent weeks. Most Committee
membersw ould make no change in the disount rate, and the special
authorization for transactions in securities outside the short-term
maturity range would be renewed with Messrs. Allen and Robertson
dissenting. He inquired whether there were dissents from the policy
indicated by the consensus other than those of Messrs. Allen and
Robertson on the special authortzation. Mr Mills said that he wished
to have recorded his dissent from the policy indicated by the consensus.
For reasons that he had indicated earlier, he believed that policy should
move more positively to a degree of less ease. He still would contemplate
a reserve base ample or more than ample to support the credit needs of
the economy, but in his judgment there were more than enough reserves
now to provide a base for satisfying such credit requirements and in
fact he was fearful that the amount of shrinkage he had indicated would
still leave reserves at too high a level. He recognized, however, that

10/3/61 -28
in moving back from the present degree of ease the Committee must move
cautiously and experimentally. Mr. Mills also said that, while he
dissented from the consensus as to policy, he would approve the wording
of the existing directive to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Mr. Balderston asked whether there were other dissents, and
Mr. King raised the question whether the consensus included any
statement as to resolving doubts on the side of restraint. After Mr.
Balderston stated that no such provision was in the consensus that he
had presented, there was a general discussion of its wording. During
this discussion, Mr. Shepardson and several others indicated that they
would prefer that doubts be resolved on the side of less ease, but the
Chairman pointed out that less than a majority of the members of the
Committee had so expressed themselves. Therefore, the consensus that
he had presented included nothing on resolving doubts either way. He
then inquired of Mr. Rouse whether he had any questions as to the
interpretation of the consensus as stated, and the latter responded in
the negative.
Mr. Balderston indicated that the consensus as he had stated it
would be approved, Mr. Mills dissenting, and the directive to the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York would be renewed without change.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, it was voted unanimously to
direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
until otherwise directed by the Committee:

10/3/61 -29
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (includ
ing replacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities
to run off without replacement) for the System Open Market
Account in the open market or, in the case of maturing
securities, by direct exchange with the Treasury, as may be
necessary in the light of current and prospective economic
conditions and the general credit situation of the country,
with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in the market
to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to encouraging
credit expansion so as to promote fuller utilization of
resources, while giving consideration to international factors,
and (c) to the practical administration of the Account; pro
vided that the aggregate amount of securities held in the System
Account (including commitments for the purchase or sale of
securities for the Account) at the close of this date, other
than special short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the
Treasury, shall not be increased or decreased by more than 41
billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one
or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short
term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from
time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury;
provided that the total amount of such certificates held at any
one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the
aggregate $500 million.
Mr. Balderston noted that Messrs. Allen and Robertson had indicated
that they would dissent from action to renew the special authorization
regarding purchases of longer-term Government securities for the System
Open Market Account and this was confirmed.
The Committee then authorized the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, between October 3,
1961, and the next meeting of the Committee,
within the terms and limitations of the
directive issued at this meeting to acquire

10/3/61 -30-
intermediate- and/or longer-term Government
securities of any maturity, or to change the
holdings of such securities, in an amount
not to exceed $500 million.
Votes for this action; Messrs. Balderston,
Irons, King, Mills, Mitchell, Shepardson, Swan,
Wayne, and Treiber. Votes against this action:
Messrs. Allen and Robertson.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, October 24, 1961.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary