A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, September 12, 1961, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Allen
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Irons
Mr. King
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Swan
Mr. Wayne
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Ellis, Fulton, and Deming, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bopp, Bryan, and Clay, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Atlanta,
and Kansas City, respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Baughman, Coldwell, Einzig, Garvy, Noyes,
and Ratchford, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Messrs. Holland and Koch, Advisers, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
Mr. Yager, Economist, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Eastburn, Hostetler, Parsons, and Tow,
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Philadelphia, Cleveland, Minneapolis, and
Kansas City, respectively

9/12/61 -2-
Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston
Mr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Brandt, Assistant Cashier, Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta
Mr. Bowsher, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis
Chairman Martin noted that Mr. George W. Mitchell, who took his
oaths of office as a member of the Board of Governors and as a member of
the Federal Open Market Committee on August 31, 1961, was today attending
his first meeting as a member of the Committee.
Chairman Martin also noted that according to his present schedule
he would be absent from the next two meetings of the Committee. For one
of those two meetings, Vice Chairman Hayes also expected to be absent.
Accordingly, in the anticipated absence of both Mr. Hayes and himself,
Chairman Martin suggested that it be understood that Mr. Balderston would
preside at the Committee meeting in question. No objection being indicated,
it was so understood.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
held on August 22, 1961, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, Mr. Ernest T. Baughman
was elected to succeed Mr. Mitchell as an
Associate Economist to serve until the election
of a successor at the first meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee after February 28,
1962, with the understanding that in the event
of the discontinuance of his official connection
with the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, he
would cease to have any official connection with
the Federal Open Market Committee.

9/12/61
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report of open market operations covering the period
August 22 through September 6, 1961, and a supplemental report covering
the period September 7 through September 11, 1961. Copies of these
reports have been placed in the files of the Open Market Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Rouse made the
following comments:
Open market operations supplied a large volume of reserves
to the market--$699 million on a delivery basis--since the
last meeting of the Committee. These reserves offset heavy
drains stemming from changes in currency, float, and gold and
foreign accounts.
All of these reserves were supplied through outright
purchases of securities, and by last Wednesday the System
Account portfolio amounted to $27.8 billion--the highest it
has ever been. Of the $699 million increase in System holdings
since the last meeting, $660 million was in Treasury bills.
This brings the bill portfolio to $2,8 billion, $166 million
above the level of last February 17, the day prior to the
beginning of operations outside the short-term area. Our
purchases were partly responsible for bringing bill rates
down to about 2.30 per cent in the case of the 91-day issue.
However, our bill portfolio will decline by $144 million on
Thursday, since we bid in the auction yesterday to run off
our holdings of this week's bills. In addition, if reserve
projections are borne out we will have a sizable amount of
selling to do in the next statement week, but we hope to sell
as many coupon issues as we can, while holding our bills.
These sales should result in higher bill rates, which might
well be helpful in view of our deteriorating international
position. However, as a more general matter, I doubt whether
such higher bill rates can be maintained if free reserves
should remain in the $500-$600 million range.
The approach of the Treasury's financing program, and
later the program itself, were the center of attention in the
market during the recent period. The terms of the advance
refunding are regarded as generous by the market and the
program as a whole has received generally favorable comment.
Although ideas have not yet begun to jell as to how many of
the $7.6 billion of the "rights" outstanding might be exchanged,

9/12/61
there is no reason, barring some unforeseen development, why
the size of the turn-in should not be satisfactory. I might
point out, in this connection, that in the advance refundings
held last March and September, about 31 per cent of public
holdings of the "rights" were exchanged.
The System's holdings of the two "rights" total $700
million--$562 million of the 2-1/2's of 1965-70 and $138 million
of the 2-1/2's of 1966-71. We hold $10 million of the 3-1/2's
of 1980, $41 million of the 3-1/2's of 1990, and $5 million of
the 3-1/2's of 1998. I see no reason for the System to exchange
any of its holdings of the "rights", and plan no exchange. We
have been informed, incidentally, that Treasury trust accounts,
which currently hold somewhat over $1-1/4 billion of the "rights",
plan to exchange up to $1 billion of such holdings.
The balance of the Treasury's financing program calls for
the raising of $5 billion in cash between now and mid-October.
This came as no surprise to the market, except perhaps for the
size of the June tax anticipation bill, which some had expected
would be larger than $2.5 billion. The Treasury indicated to
the press that except for the possibility of borrowing small
amounts from time to time, the program announced last Thursday
may be sufficient to meet the Treasury's cash needs for the
remainder of the calendar year. Whether events will turn out
this way depends upon a number of factors, including the
Treasury's decision as to whether it will handle the $7 billion
November 15 maturity on a cash or an exchange basis. Even if
additional cash financing this year is avoided, indications
are that the Treasury will be in the market shortly after the
new year begins. Our own projections, for example, show a
need for about $3 billion in new cash by mid-January. The
heavy schedule of Treasury financing over the balance of the
year thus affords only brief intervals for overt policy action
by the System.
In response to a question, Mr. Rouse said there should be a period
in the latter part of October when the Treasury financing schedule would
permit overt policy action if the System so desired. There might also
be such a period in the Thanksgiving-Christmas area.
Chairman Martin said he thought the only completely clear period
might be in late October. The Treasury apparently could delay until
November 2, if it wished, the announcement on its November refunding.

9/12/61 -5-
Mr. King inquired concerning the yields available under the terms
of the advance refunding, to which Mr. Rouse replied that the cost of the
extension to the Treasury would be in the range of 4-1/4 to 4-3/8 per cent.
The yield to the present holders of securities eligible for exchange would
be in the area of 4.16 to 4.20.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the open market trans-
actions during the period August 22
through September 11, 1961, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Noyes presented the following statement on economic developments:
Economic developments, such as current movements in things
like retail sales, production, employment, and prices, seem
relatively unimportant in the total complex of events of recent
weeks. The resumption of bomb testing in Russia, the continued
tension in Berlin, the labor negotiations in the automobile
industry, and the prospects for a price increase in steel all
seem to loom much larger than the fact that unemployment remained
at 6.9 per cent of the labor force, department store sales were
substantially unchanged from July to August, production was
probably up another point on the index, or that wholesale prices
have continued their sidewise movement, as consumer prices rose,
due largely to an increase in food costs. Even our estimate of
GNP for the current quarter, at around $527 billion, seems stale
as Government officials and others focus attention in their
public statements on such figures as a $54O billion GNP by year
end, or $575 billion by the end of next year. The Federal
deficit for fiscal 1962 even seems to have become yesterday's
news as public discussion focuses more and more on whether we
are likely to achieve the balance predicted by the President
and the Secretary of the Treasury for fiscal 1963.
While it goes without saying that one must avoid being
unduly influenced by the dead hand of the past, it is equally
important not to lean too heavily on projections and forecasts--
no matter how carefully contrived--in shaping current policy.
It is perfectly proper to speculate on the future course of
economic events and to project, either by highly technical
mathematical manipulations or long practice, past experience
into the future. For some sorts of policy planning, estimates

9/12/61 -6-
or projections of this kind are unavoidable. However, it takes
only a little familiarity with the heroic assumptions involved
to make clear that it is futile to speculate now as to whether
or not a GNP of $575 billion in the fourth quarter of 1962 is
"inflationary", and it certainly would be foolhardy to be
influenced in current policy formation one way or the other
by such an exercise.
All this is by way of a rather lengthy prologue to, and
apology for, a very brief and undramatic report on current
developments. Frankly, there is nothing in current data, most
of which relates to the month of August, which calls for
modification of the earlier generalization that the recovery
has progressed rapidly, carrying almost all indicators to above
their previous peaks but without evidence of excessive exuberance.
Some stimulation from added defense expenditures appears to be
just about offset by a lower level of consumer spending than
might ordinarily be expected at this stage of the cycle.
In addition to the facts about production, employment,
prices, and retail sales that I have already mentioned, further
evidence of this rough balance can be found in the rise of both
exports and imports in July, in the Commerce - S.E.C. report,
released today, rf a very moderate upward revision of plant
and equipment expenditure plans, and in the strong but not
atypical behavior of manufacturers sales and orders.
The likelihood that labor negotiations in the automobile
industry will be settled without a prolonged strike adds to
the stability o the current situation, whatever the longer-
run implications of the settlement may be. In addition to the
wholesale and consumer price indexes already mentioned, sensitive
industrial material prices have shown little change recently.
Consumer credit outstanding, which declined in July, appears
likely to decline again in August.
At the same time, the Treasury has announced, as was antici-
pated, a program to borrow over $5 billion of cash in the next
month or so. looking further in the financial area for clues,
the situation is much the same, with bank credit expansion just
about seasonal. Stock prices have been fluctuating in a rela-
tively narrow range, after their rapid run-up in the spring and
early summer, With the money supply remaining almost constant,
seasonally adjusted demand deposit turnover has declined a little
since May, which is quite unusual for a period of vigorous
expansion in GNP.
One might argue, on the one hand, that were it not for the
increasing stimulus provided by the public sector, the recovery
might be less vigorous--perhaps even in jeopardy. On the other
hand, it is argued that the vastly increased liquidity of the
economy, especially in the hands of consumers, constitutes a

9/12/61
sort of powder keg of potential spending, which could be
touched off by a very slight shift in peoples' psychological
attitudes. My point, in summary, is that up to the present
time there is no evidence to suggest that stimulus from public
sector will be withdrawn, or even reduced, nor of a dramatic
increase in consumers' spending or expressed intentions to
spend. Hence, it appears that the precariously balanced
upward movement in the economy, which has prevailed for some
months, is being maintained.
Mr. Koch presented the following statement on credit developments:
Outstanding commercial bank loans and investments
declined somewhat in August. This followed a large increase
in July, due in the main to Treasury financing operations.
The course of bank credit developments over the summer months
is always greatly affected by the size and timing of Treasury
financing operations, since loan demands normally show little
seasonal change on balance.
Business borrowing from banks, however, the most volatile
element in the loan portfolio, normally begins to pick up in
August and early September, and this year's rise has thus far
been of about seasonal proportions or possibly a little less.
The heavy seasonal borrowers like food processors, commodity
dealers, and trade outlets are beginning to come into the
banks.
One aspect of the business loan picture that has struck
me these last few months has been the large amount of gross
new borrowing despite the relatively moderate change in the
net volume of loans outstanding. Whereas many firms are
borrowing from banks, a large number of others are repaying
bank debt, to some extent in the case of the larger firms
with the proceeds from security financing. This large
volume of gross new business borrowing from banks probably
reflects in part the larger than seasonal increase in
inventories that has occurred since March.
Turning to the capital markets, new corporate bond
financing fell off sharply in August, more than would have
been expected seasonally. The September calendar has also
been light so far, but it is expected to pick up later in
the month. Stock financing in recent months has been low
in dollar volume but high in number of participants, indi-
cating the increased availability of equity money to smaller,
and possibly newer, concerns. New municipal and mortgage
financing has continued in fair volume throughout the summer
months.

9/12/61
As for the nation's liquidity, the money supply, narrowly
defined to include only currency and demand deposits, changed
little in August for the fifth straight month. The rise in
time and savings deposits at commercial banks, particularly
that in time certificate form, slackened slightly in August
after having maintained a sharp 15 per cent seasonally adjusted
annual rate of increase earlier in the summer. You may also
have noted that withdrawals in savings and loan associations
were particularly heavy in July, the latest month for which
such data are available, and that outstanding shareholdings
declined for the first time in several years. Withdrawals
are normally heavy in July, however, so on a seasonally
adjusted basis the drop merely meant that the rate of growth
of savings and loan shareholdings dropped off somewhat.
Insofar as the liquidity of financial institutions is
concerned, I was struck, on reviewing financing developments
again after several weeks away from the data, by the recent
sharp increase in the secondary reserves of commercial banks,
by which I mean their holdings of Government securities matur-
ing under a year. The ratio of these holdings to deposits has
increased to over 12 per cent, up sharply from earlier in the
year and now at the highest level since mid-1954.
Entering as we are on a period of at least 18 months of
large-scale Treasury financing, a large part of which will of
necessity have to be in short-term form, the liquidity of
commercial banks would likely increase considerably further
in coming months unless bank credit expansion is restrained.
In that case, somewhat higher short-term interest rates would
no doubt be needed to induce a larger volume of nonbank invest-
ment in short-term Government securities. The loan-deposit
ratio of all commercial banks considered as a group continues
quite high and at 55 per cent is still only two percentage
points below its recent high reached in the middle of last year.
Turning to bank reserve positions, free reserves averaged
about $475 million last week after three weeks during which
they approximated $550 million. Last week was a week of low
float, however, so the lower free reserve average was accompanied
by as easy money market conditions as had characterized the
earlier weeks.
In terms of total reserves, or more precisely seasonally
adjusted reserves available for private deposit expansion, the
situation has not changed materially over the three weeks since
the Committee last met. Such reserves have shown practically
no change on balance over this period, averaging about $19.2
billion in both of the weeks ending August 16 and September 6.

9/12/61
Looking ahead, the projections of both the staff of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and that of the Board suggest
free reserves between $550 and $600 million again this week.
In the following two weeks, market forces, unless their effect
is offset by System action, would tend to increase such reserves
markedly, mainly as a result of the mid-month rise in float,
Only in the final week of the coming interval between meetings
of this Committee will the Desk be likely to have to supply
reserves to the banking system. Late in September and early
in October, market forces, including payment for purchases of
the new tax anticipation bill, could utilize as much as $700
million of bank reserves.
In considering what open market operations would be most
appropriate for this Committee to adopt for the coming three-
week period, it is of relevance to note that since mid-June and
possibly since even earlier in the spring, we have experienced
a rather sustained, if slight, downdrift, or at least sidewise
movement, in most broad banking and money measures, that is,
in total commercial bank credit outstanding, total deposits,
money supply narrowly defined, and total reserves regardless
of how defined. This has happened with average weekly free
reserves varying in a range of between $400 and $600 million,
with the feel of the market being generally quite easy, and
with the Federal funds rate below two per cent most of the
time. On the face of it, these developments might call for
some further easing in policy in the weeks immediately ahead.
Two circumstances have to be weighed before reaching such
a decision. In the first place, international developments
are in a state of crucial flux, domestic economic conditions
are on a steady rise, and Government fiscal policy is adding
materially to exansionary market forces. Seasonal private
loan demands and Government short-term borrowing will be
potent factors for bank credit and monetary expansion through-
out the rest of the year, particularly in the next few weeks.
These developments all call for caution in easing credit and
monetary policy further at this time.
Secondly, the fact that the Treasury will be in the market
with new cash and refinancing ventures throughout the entire
three-week period prior to the next meeting of the Committee
normally calls for maintaining an even keel in monetary policy.
Some slight easing action, however, has occasionally been
followed in periods of Treasury financing in the past and such
action would not likely be either unfair or misleading to market
participants or the Treasury if adopted currently.
All this adds up in my mind to maintaining the status quo
in open market policy over the next three weeks, but being

9/12/61
especially alert to the fact that market developments,
particularly on the expansionary side, could develop quite
suddenly, thus requiring prompt re-evaluation of the
appropriateness of current policy.
Mr. Young presented the following statement on the balance of
payments and related matters:
The disturbingly large transfer of gold and dollars from
the United States to foreigners in July, reported to you at
the last meeting, now appears to have been mainly accounted
for by temporary factors. These include an extra large
outward capital movement, a reduced trade surplus, reflecting
especially a big, contraseasonal rise in imports, and the
seasonal increase in tourist expenditures.
It is all too easy to over-emphasize and over-rationalize
the temporary causes of any swing in our payments balance from
the less adverse to the more adverse, and to conclude that the
payments balance is really not so grievous a problem after all.
The fact of the matter is, however, that our background is one
of a decade of sizable deficits and, in consequence of the
cumulation of these deficits, a diminishing margin of monetary
reserve protection. Accordingly, any swing from smaller to
larger deficit, even if temporary, must be viewed with concern.
At the same time, the balance-of-payments situation must
not be allowed to get out of focus. According to very prelim-
inary indications of the New York Reserve Bank's flash report
on U. S. transfers of gold and dollars to foreigners for August,
the U. S. balance of payments for the latest month must have
been in close balance. Projection for September and the
remaining months of this year is nothing but guesswork. As of
the moment, our best guesses suggest further deficit, but not
of alarming size unless aggravated by adverse confidence
developments that activate outflows of short-term funds.
The reduced trade surplus mentioned above was the result
of a rise in imports more than offsetting a marked recovery in
exports. Imports on a seasonally adjusted basis rose a full
16 per cent, the largest rise in any single month in the postwar
period. It seems doubtful that a rate of increase of this size
can be sustained. Exports also rose significantly on a seasonally
adjusted basis, and regained a $20 billion annual rate, about
$1/2 billion higher than in April and May. The demand situation
continues favorable in Europe and elsewhere for U. S. exports,
and while the gains ahead may fall well behind those of imports,
they should still contribute positively to holding down our
balance-of-payments deficit.

9/12/61 -11-
It is too early, of course, to evaluate the recent
measures taken by the United Kingdom to correct its chronic
deficit in its basic balance of payments. The spot pound
has strengthened considerably but the forward pound remains
at a sizable, though moderately reduced, discount. In July,
the trade deficit decreased modestly further, but mainly
because of reduced imports. In August, curbs on outward
capital flows showed signs of taking effect. In addition,
the IMF drawing strengthened U. K. reserves and made evident
to those short of sterling the risks in their positions. In
August, some inflow of investment funds and reflow of short-
term funds to London apparently occurred to take advantage
of the high levels of British interest rates.
The wage pause that the British are endeavoring to
enforce is of particular interest. So far, its strict
enforcement has been limited to the public sector and to the
minimum wage categories of the private sectors which have to
have Government approval. A major test looms up later this
year when wage claims for railway and mining workers in the
public sector and for the engineering trades in the private
sector will come to a head.
In August, the monetary reserves of Germany continued
the decline which had set in in July. Since the basic
balance on current and recorded long-term capital account
remains in surplus, the main influence appears to be the
withdrawal of foreign funds invested in Germany on a short-
term or on a speculative investment basis.
The Bundesbank, despite the outflow of foreign funds,
has pressed ahead with an easy, or still easier, monetary
policy. Comparable money rates recently have either been
as low or only moderately higher than in the U. S. Meanwhile,
commodity prices in German wholesale and retail markets have
remained fairly stable, but wage costs have been showing
marked increase--about twice that of the increase in labor
productivity.
The French accumulation of gold and foreign exchange
reserves has been on an ascending scale--amounting to nearly
$900 million for the first seven months. Since the trade
account has been in approximate balance or moderate surplus,
an exceptional capital inflow and, more recently, better than
usual tourist receipts appear to provide the explanation.
Because of the large foreign exchange accumulation, the French
authorities repaid in August the remaining debt to the
European Payments Union creditors amounting to a little over
$300 million.

9/12/61 -12-
Resurgence of Canadian economic activity and decline in
Canadian unemployment is now well confirmed by current economic
data. In recent months, the Bank of Canada has aggressively
promoted easy credit conditions, including active purchasing
in the long-term sector of the market. Bond yields have been
held stable at just under 5 per cent and money rates have
declined to levels close to those in New York. In the meantime,
monetary expansion has attained a pace that appears very rapid
by Canadian historical standards--an annual rate of 15 per cent
or so. The Canadian dollar has been showing only slight
variation around the level of 97 cents. Apparently this level
has been holding without official support. At the bargain rate
for Canadian dollars, there has apparently been active buying
of Canadian securities by Americans.
Mr. Treiber presented the following statement of his views on the
business outlook and credit policy:
Since the last meeting of the Committee the international
political situation has worsened. This development implies
still further increases in spending for defense. It increases
the possibility of a more rapid step-up in business and con-
sumer spending; it increases the possibility of the emergence
of a speculative psychology. So far, however, there is no
discernible evidence that the trend of the economy or of public
psychology has changed significantly.
While the over-all expansion of economic activity is
continuing at a healthy rate, there are no clear signs of an
acceleration in pace. Consumer spending is still lagging and
surveys of consumer buying intentions point to a continued
cautious attitude. Business inventory building appears to be
moderate and in line with the current stage of the business
cycle, and there is nothing in current loan data or in reported
inventory plans to suggest a very rapid inventory build-up in
the immediate period ahead. The economy is still operating
considerably below capacity in terms of both labor force and
physical plant.
What is the probable trend of prices? The increases in
July in the consumer price index and the wholesale price index
were dominated by seasonal advances in the prices of food and
farm products, and do not seem to reflect a sudden shift in
the forces of supply and demand. The expansion in over-all
economic activity that now appears in prospect is unlikely to

9/12/61 -13-
create any strong and general price pressures from the demand
side in the immediate future. Yet we cannot be complacent
about prices. There is the highly important question as to
whether there will be a strong upward push on prices from the
cost side, resulting from wage increases in the steel and
auto industries and other wage increases growing out of wage
negotiations in other industries.
While we do not know the full import of the proposed
arrangements between the United Auto Workers and American
Motors Corporation and General Motors Corporation, the
settlements related to pay seem generous. Increased fringe
benefits add importantly to costs as do increases in direct
wage rates, The total increases seem to be well above the
average improvement in productivity throughout the economy.
Increases of such size tend to lead to increases in wage rates
in other industries regardless of the extent to which produc-
tivity in those industries may have increased; this is of
special significance for the service industries. It seems
to me that the cost of living is bound to rise unless some
of the benefits of increased productivity are shared with
consumers through some reduction in prices or improvement in
quality of manufactured goods. The prospects of such sharing
are dim. Public and Government pressures in this direction
would be welcome.
The bank credit picture has changed little in recent
weeks. The large drop in August in loans and investments at
the weekly reporting member banks was associated with a large
drop in bank holdings of United States Government securities
and security loans--a logical aftermath of the upsurge in
July in connection with large Treasury borrowing. In contrast,
business loans showed only moderate strength. Consumer loans
and loans to finance companies increased somewhat in August.
Bank liquidity continues to be satisfactory.
The recently announced Treasury financing will result in
increased bank loans and investments, and in due course the
newly created deposits will find their way into the private
spending stream. The Treasury's advance refunding has been
favorably received; it has been viewed as tangible evidence
of the desire of the Treasury to pursue a conservative debt
management program. Since the Treasury is now engaged in a
large and complex financing program, an "even keel" in the
money market is desirable.
While international political and military tensions have
been increasing, our international financial position has been
deteriorating. Our trade surplus has declined greatly compared
with the first quarter of 1961. With further economic expansion

9/12/61
at home and less ebullient economic activity abroad, our
imports are likely to rise much more quickly than our exports.
Our balance-of-payments problem is as serious as ever. We
have two major jobs to do and several minor ones. As a
country we must strive with all our power to keep our costs
down; success in this respect will promote stability at home
and strength abroad. We must persuade the more developed
countries of the western world to assume a larger portion of
expenditures abroad for defense and economic aid. The solution
will not come soon; it will not come easily. Meanwhile, we are
vulnerable to substantial demands upon us for gold.
Since the last meeting of the Committee the price of gold
has risen further in the London gold market, attaining about
$35.20 per ounce. As international political tensions increase,
the demand for gold is likely to rise further. Capital flows
between foreign centers may increase the demand upon us for
gold if the receiving country follows the practice of keeping
a larger portion of its reserves in gold than does the country
experiencing the outflow. While there is still no great monetary
incentive to move funds from New York to London on a covered
interest arbitrage basis, the advantage in such a movement may
increase. As the British succeed in their present stabilization
program--and we hope they will--there will be increased incentives
to move funds from New York to London on an uncovered basis. A
year of exploratory negotiations on possible ways to strengthen
the international financial system has pointed up the many com-
plexities to be resolved. Confidence, especially international
confidence, is a fragile flower. We must be constantly alert
so to conduct our monetary and fiscal affairs that we provide
no basis for those abroad to raise questions regarding the
ultimate soundness of the dollar.
A policy of monetary ease is still called for. At the
same time there is an intensification of the need for alertness
to developments that may call for a shift in policy. The risk
that economic expansion will falter has receded further while
the danger of rapid deterioration in the international financial
position of the United States has increased. Thus it is even
more important now than it was a few weeks ago to pay special
attention to international considerations and resolve doubts on
the side of less ease.
Higher short-term interest rates should be encouraged.
The rate on three-month Treasury bills, the bellwether of short-
term interest rates, is now below 2-3/8 per cent, the midpoint
of the 2-1/8-2-5/8 per cent range that has existed over the last
year. We think that domestic and international developments make

9/12/61 -15-
it desirable that the rate be in the upper part of that range.
A rise in the Federal funds rate also seems appropriate. It
would seem desirable that the effective rate on Federal funds
be a bit below the discount rate, ranging between 2 per cent
and 3 per cent, perhaps averaging about 2-1/2 per cent. To
achieve these results, less attention should be given to the
precise level of free reserves.
We believe that the authority to engage in transactions
in longer-term securities should be continued and that the
discount rate should not be changed. Nor would we suggest a
change in the directive, which was revised at the last meeting
of the Committee.
Mr. Ellis said the few available statistics for August on business
conditions in the First District suggested that the recovery was proceeding.
However, the trend could not be characterized as vigorous. According to
the statistics, there had been an interruption of the recovery trend in
July; production figures declined and despite higher electric power output
the level was below that of a year earlier. The textile industry appeared
to be coming to life, with civilian demand strengthening and military
procurement rising, while shoe production was running 5 per cent below
1960. Slower sales had caused some factories to hold back price increases,
but it was still hoped that sales would be strong in the fall. A large
newsprint producer who had been looking for an opportunity for some time
to increase prices so as to catch up with wage increases now found his
competitive position affected by the decline in the Canadian dollar. As
to construction, July is usually a weak month in New England and this
year had been no exception, with the total down 13 per cent from a year
ago. Total nonagricultural employment, seasonally adjusted, rose slightly
in July and about matched year-ago levels, but most manufacturing industries,

9/12/61 -16-
along with transportation and public utilities, were employing fewer
people than a year earlier. Consumer spending was fairly good, with
auto sales fair and department store sales quite vigorous. The
latter had exceeded year-ago levels in all but one week since May.
Perhaps the District's recovery movement was showing up
best in the financial statistics, Mr. Ellis said. For the year to
date, business loans at weekly reporting banks were up about 4 per
cent compared with a decline of 2 per cent for the country as a
whole. The level of total deposits had held about even during the
past four months, with the result that the average loan-deposit ratio
was up two points from 64 to 66 per cent, whereas the comparable ratio
for the country as a whole showed a drop of two points to 60 per cent.
The New England average was influenced somewhat by the fact that one
large bank had a ratio of 71 per cent. While the growth of total
deposits was disappointing, demand deposits had been doing well.
Even since the April peak for the nation, they had continued to grow
in New England. The monthly survey of mutual savings banks indicated
that 11 out of the 80 banks in the survey reduced their average mortgage
lending rate by 1/4 per cent from June to July.
Turning to policy, Mr. Ellis said the reports from the Account
Manager indicated that the Desk had succeeded in weathering a period
when it was necessary to supply large quantities of reserves without
upsetting the market or interest rate levels. Staff projections for

9/12/61 -17-
the next three weeks suggested that offsetting actions of the kind
undertaken in the past period would have to be reversed to avoid
developing an excessive degree of ease during the Treasury financing
period. He felt that the Committee had established a satisfactory
and correct stimulative policy and degree of ease, and that it should
endeavor to maintain the status quo during the ensuing three-week
period. This would mean preserving the current targets with respect
to total reserves, as shown in the staff projections, and maintaining
free reserves at existing levels. In his opinion it would be desirable
to maintain contact wth the longer-term market, and therefore he would
renew the special authorization. He saw no need to change the directive
or the discount rate at this time,
Mr. Irons noted that, according to current reports, the Eleventh
District was sustaining considerable damage from Hurricane Carla. Except
for this developmert, however, conditions in the District had been moving
along fairly satisfactorily. Various measures, such as industrial
production, employment, and petroleum production and refining, were
all moving upward on a satisfactory and sound basis. There had been
an increase in retail trade recently, perhaps reflecting to some degree
anticipation of the Texas sales tax that became effective the first of
September. The damage caused by the hurricane seemed certain to run
into large figures; the rice crop probably had been wiped out. A good
part of the cotton narvest was probably in, but there seemed some

9/12/61 -18-
likelihood of heavy damage to the citrus crop. However, agricultural
conditions in the western part of the State hadb een good and the
cotton situation in the southern plains area was favorable.
As to District banking developments, there had been an advance
in gross loans, some liquidation of investments, and a fairly substantial
gain in deposits, both demand and time. From the standpoint of liquidity,
the condition of the banks was about the same as it had been, and there
was virtually no borrowing from the Reserve Bank. Federal funds trans-
actions had been showing an excess of purchases over sales for District
banks as a whole, but the situation in Houston was completely different
from that in Dallas, the Houston banks being consistent sellers and the
Dallas banks consistent buyers.
Turning to policy, Mr. Irons expressed himself as satisfied with
developments during the past three-week period. In his opinion, neither
current or prospective economic developments suggested a need for further
easing, and the Treasury was in the market. Therefore, he would recommend
continuing about the same degree of ease that had prevailed, with any
deviations on the side of mild firmness rather than additional ease.
This would suggest a bill rate in the range of 2-3/8 - 2-1/2 per cent,
with the Federal funds rate running from about 2-3/4 per cent down to
about 2 per cent and free reserves in the area of $450-$500 million.
He would favor continuing the special authorization covering operations
in longer-term securities, and he would not recommend a change in the
discount rate or the directive.

9/12/61 -19-
Mr. Swan said that he found few, if any, significant changes
in the Twelfth District data that had become available since the
previous Committee meeting. Nor did there seem to have been any
significant change in business attitudes in the District since that
time. On balance, there appeared to be some continuing improvement,
but it was not notably vigorous. In brief, there had been little or
no intensification of the gradual upward movement. In August, employ-
ment moved up a little in California, the only State in the District
for which August figures were yet available, and based on employer
hiring schedules a slightly more than seasonal increase in employment
might be expected in September.
There was no particular evidence of pressure on the availability
of bank credit at the major District banks, Mr. Swan said. The banks
seemed to have funds to offer, and borrowing from the Reserve Bank had
been negligible. On the other hand, during the past few weeks two
large savings and loan associations in San Francisco found themselves
much tighter than they had anticipated due to a somewhat lesser flow of
funds from their shareholders during the summer and some pickup in the
demand for real estate credit. This was indicated to have been a rather
unexpected development, and he was not prepared to say whether it was
of general significance.
As to policy, Mr. Swan said he recognized the various possibilities
of some increase in credit demands that might have to be checked. It

9/12/61 -20-
seemed to him, however, that at the moment these remained only
possibilities. One indication of such a development would be a surge
in consumer spending, but no such surge had occurred as yet. He
recognized also that the effects of fiscal policy in all probability
would be expansionary in the several months ahead. As to the period
immediately ahead, however, even apart from the fact that the Committee
would be circumscribed by the Treasury financing program, he saw no
reason for positive action to change monetary policy in the direction
of tightening. Instead, it seemed to him that the Committee should
continue about the present policy. To him, that would mean a bill rate
from 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 per cent and free reserves ranging from $500 to
$550 million. If doubts arose, they might be resolved on the side of
less rather than more ease. He would recommend no change in the discount
rate or the directive, and he would continue the special authorization.
Mr. Deming said that a brief statement of recent Ninth District
economic developments would be "more of the same." Except for iron
mining, general nonagricultural activity was moving about in line with
the nation. In July, District nonfarm personal income was 4.1 per cent
ahead of July 1960, about the same as the national gain of ,.2 per cent.
On the other hand, District agriculture continued to suffer from the
effects of drought and net farm income in July was 6.5 per cent below
a year earlier. Thus the District gain in total personal income from a
year ago had been only 2.8 per cent against the national gain of 4.2 per
cent.

9/12/61 -21-
One indication of somewhat lesser strength in the District than
nationally was to be found in the forecast of the Minneapolis employment
authorities for employment in the Twin Cities area, which showed an
estimated gain of 5,500 jobs from July to November. In the same period
last year there was no gain, but in 1958 the gain was 12,000 and in the
like period of 1954 the gain was about 18,000.
Mr. Deming commented that the District banking situation remained
about the same as it had been. During the past three weeks, he said, the
Reserve Bank had been doing some intensive work on bank loan prospects
over the balance of 1961. Loan officers saw loan demand as being no more
than normal during this period, although some of them believed there might
be some shift to direct bank loans from commercial paper financing. Thus
far, they saw little borrowing for inventory.
As to policy, Mr. Deming said that for the next three weeks he
felt that quite obviously the Committee should go along on an even-keel
basis. Even so, however, he agreed with those who had suggested that any
doubts should be resolved more on the side of tightness than additional
ease. Also, he would agree that the System must be alert to developments.
Particularly during the past three weeks, he had been disturbed by having
heard more and more comments from the people with whom he talked about
the certainty of price increases. It was being said, for example, that
if one was going to build, obviously that could be done more cheaply now
than two years hence. Altogether, there seemed to be more signs in the
air suggesting some increase in belief in the inevitability of more inflation.

9/12/61 -22-
While bankers apparently did not foresee any particular increase
in loan demand, Mr. Deming commented that he did not see how a GNP figure
of $54O billion could be attained by the end of this year without some
increase in bank loans. Accordingly, he felt that there would be a
strengthening tendency for such loans to increase. At least, it would
seem that the rate of bank credit expansion during the latter part of
this year, while perhaps not explosive, might be stronger than generally
expected. Looking ahead, therefore, the System should be alert to do
whatever it could so a; to be in a position to move to a more restrictive
position, if necessary, particularly since the periods when there was an
opportunity to move would be limited. The quality of alertness that had
been mentioned might be even more important in the latter part of this
year than it would normally. As he had said, nowever, for the next three
weeks there did not seem to be much to do except to proceed along the
same pattern as now being followed, although being careful not to be any
easier. He would not recommend changing the directive or discount rate,
and he would favor continuing the special authorization.
Mr. Allen reported that developments tihne Seventh District
were for the most part, out not altogether, of an encouraging nature.
In the four weeks ended September 2, Seventh District department store
sales were 3 per cent higher than last year, an improvement over the
earlier part of the year. Manufacturers' shipments of virtually all
types of appliances rose substantially in June and July, and local

9/12/61 -23-
manufacturers advised that this reflected higher consumer sales rather
than inventory building. Furniture manufacturers had not participated
in that trend, however, new orders having been substantially below a
year ago throughout the first seven months. Reports from the vacation
areas were that spending had been disappointing. Although total
employment in Seventh District centers was about equal to last year in
July, employment in manufacturing was lower in virtually all categories.
Most employers expected a moderate increase in September.
District steel makers expected production to reach an annual
rate of 120 million tons in the fourth quarter compared with about
100 million tons at present. The talk had been that selective price
increases of 4 to 5 dollars per ton of finished steel would be made
effective after the wage boosts in October. Since the last general
price increase in August of 1958, it was said that employee costs had
risen $8 per ton, or about 10 per cent, and that effective prices had
declined slightly.
Excellent corn and soybean crops and favorable price trends for
cattle and hogs had improved farm income prospects in the District,
Mr. Allen said.
Turning to automobiles, he commented that the low sales in
August were attributed to dealer hesitation because of strike possibilities
and to inventory shortages of some models. On August 31 the stock of new
cars was 663,000--530,000 1961 models and 133,000 1962 models. It was now

9/12/61 -24-
expected that 520,000 cars would be produced in September and 1,800,000
in the fourth quarter, which would mean total 1961 domestic production
of 5,651,000 automobiles. The sales forecasts now were 400,000 in
September and 1,600,000 in the fourth quarter, and if those figures
were realized the year's sales would total 5,581,000--close to the year's
expected production. Sales of foreign-made cars were not included in
the figures he had quoted, but they were estimated at 375,000 for 1961
compared with 499,000 in 1960.
Seventh District weekly reporting banks showed a relatively
stronger rise in business loans than all such banks in the country,
Over the past three weeks commercial loans at those banks rose $54
million, more than half of the total expansion reported by all leading
city banks together. This experience was attributable to an increase
in loans to metals firms. However, the figures were not large, and
available indicators of bank liquidity suggested that the banks were
in position to handle considerable loan expansion. For the money market
banks, short-term liquid assets averaged 20 per cent of deposits compared
with 10 per cent a year ago. The large Chicago banks had had a basic
surplus position of about $30 million for the past two weeks.
Continuing, Mr. Allen commented that the rise in business
activity was slower in the June-August period than in the previous three
months, but that this was not surprising for a summer season and there
was much to support the view that activity would continue to rise, and

9/12/61 -25-
possibly at a faster pace, in the remainder of 1961 and in 1962.
However, the developments which were likely to accompany such an
increase in activity and which would call for a shift in monetary
policy were not yet in evidence, in the Seventh District at least,
and for that reason, and also because of the Treasury' s program, he
would favor continuing for the next three weeks that degree of ease
which had prevailed for some time now. He saw no reason to change the
discount rate or directive and he continued to oppose the special
authorization.
Mr. Clay reported that since midyear, loan volume at Tenth
District weekly reporting banks had shown an increasingly strong
performance. Loan demand was comparatively weak at District banks,
especially city banks, during the first half of the year, although the
recession-induced decline in business and consumer loan volume was not
as pronounced as in the country as a whole. During August, total loans
of weekly reporting banks, other than money market and Commodity Credit
Corporation loans, registered the largest increase for the month of any
recent year. Real estate loans advanced for the fifth consecutive month.
Consumer loans, however, continued to contract moderately. Increased
credit requirements of seasonal borrowers appeared to have been the chief
factor in the rise in business loans. While the largest increase was in
loans to commodity dealers, gains were registered in all classes of
business loans except trade firms.

9/12/61 -26-
Mr. Clay characterized developments in the domestic national
economy as continuing to be very encouraging. While the cyclical
weakness in credit demand might be over and substantial credit expansion
might appear before the end of the year, bank loans had not yet entered
the period of major cyclical advance. This was evident from the fact
that the classes of business whose bank indebtedness tends to show the
greatest sensitivity to cycles in economic activity decreased their
loan volume during August.
In view of the desired expansion in economic activity and the
needed credit availability for economic expansion, Mr. Clay felt that
it would be appropriate, so far as the private economy was concerned,
for monetary policy to continue in approximately the same posture as
during the period since the previous meeting of the Committee. This
policy would provide about the same degree of monetary ease as in the
past three weeks. In view of the international flow-of-funds problem,
it also would call for the maintenance of the Treasury bill rate within
the range of recent weeks. In other words, open market operations that
he would consider appropriate would implement clause (b) of the directive,
as adopted at the August 22 meeting, by "encouraging credit expansion so
as to promote fuller utilization of resources, while giving consideration
to international factors." The dominant factor during the period ahead,
however, would be the recently announced Treasury financing program. For
that reason, the maintenance of what had come to be referred to as an
"even keel" policy was indicated. This phase of operations need not

9/12/61 -27-
interfere, however, with the pursuit of the Committee's basic policy
objective of encouraging credit expansion for the private economy.
Mr. Clay expressed the view that no change was called for in
the discount rate or in the directive. He felt that the special
authorization with respect to operations in longer-term securities
should be renewed.
Mr. Wayne said that Fifth District business conditions continued
to improve, with little deviation from the pattern of recent weeks.
Nonfarm employment, seasonally adjusted, had climbed above the pre-
recession high. Manufacturing man-hours also had moved up, but fell
short of last season's high. Textile prices were generally firm, and
the demand for bituminous coal appeared to be a little stronger to judge
by production and shipments. Reports from businessmen revealed more
confidence than previously. They were appraising the near future with
considerable optimism, they commented favorably on the trends of employ-
ment and trade, and they reported substantial recent increases in
manufacturers' orders and shipments. Farmers had been favored generally
by good growing conditions, and tobacco prices were at record levels.
District banks continued in an easy position, and business loan growth
was stronger than in the nation as a whole.
As to policy, Mr. Wayne expressed the view that the course
followed during the past three weeks had been appropriate. In the face
of wide swings in market forces, the Desk had done a good job in holding
close to the targets suggested three weeks ago. Personally, he was glad

9/12/61 -28-
to see the bill rate decline moderately after the previous rise,
although he would not care to see it go significantly lower.
Mr. Wayne said he felt that during the past year System policy
had accomplished about all that could have reasonably been expected.
Bank credit had increased something like $13 million during the past
year, which apparently was adequate to meet the needs of the economy.
Over the same period the money supply also increased, but only a little
more than $2 billion. During the past six years, he noted, the increase
in demand deposits adjusted was only about one-sixth as much as the
increase in bank credit over the same period. The fact that more deposits
had not remained in the form of demand deposits seemed to him to indicate
that the public did not need more demand deposits. It was illogical to
assume that the System could bring about an increase in the money supply
by forcing more bank credit on the public unless it was prepared to pay
a price that would be unjustified, particularly in relation to the
international position of the dollar. The economy was now more liquid
than a year ago, and money could be obtained by reversing the process
that had been going on and converting liquid assets.
In conclusion, Mr. Wayne said that he would not favor changing
the discount rate or the substance of the directive, and that he would
continue the special authorization.
Mr. Robertson said that both prevailing economic conditions and
the Treasury financing program seemed to dictate an even-keel policy for
the next three weeks. In the circumstances, he did not consider it
necessary to comment further at this time.

9/12/61 -29-
Mr. Shepardson expressed the view that the general economic
situation called for a continuation of present policy. On the other
hand, he could not help but be concerned about the present and prospective
levels of Government expenditures and about the continuing and possibly
increasing international tension. Within the limits imposed by the
current Treasury financing program, it seemed to him that the Committee
should lean somewhat toward a little less ease. Also, it should be alert
to changes that could develop on rather short notice. He would favor no
change in the directive at this time.
Mr. King noted that the balance-of-payments problem was still
serious, but that it could not be solved by monetary policy alone. In
saying this, however, he did not mean to infer that the confidence factor
was not important. Confidence in some currency was not only a psychological
necessity but almost a spiritual necessity to an alliance of countries that
believed in free markets. Any such alliance seemed bound to erode unless
there was some currency in which the countries involved could have reasonable
confidence.
As to current policy, Mr. King expressed the view that a continuation
of the current degree of ease was in order. He would visualize maintenance
of the bill rate in the same area as at present and would consider any rise
unnecessary. Even though prospective selling operations out of the Open
Market Account might produce some tendency in that direction, he hoped any
increase would be as small as possible. Likewise, free reserves should
in his opinion be maintained in the same vicinity as at present. He thought

9/12/61 -30-
this was not a time to start moving toward a more restrictive position.
The Account Management, he commented, had proven capable in the past
year of operating without too much instruction on the manner in which
to resolve doubts, and he questioned the need of giving this type of
instruction to the Desk. There was a tendency, he thought, for the
Committee sometimes to feel that at least some minor change in instructions
should be made over a period of a few weeks. However, the present
situation was one in which he felt that the less the Committee did, the
more likely it was to obtain a satisfactory solution.
Mr. Mitchell commented that he thought there was some uncertainty
about the course that the economy would follow. It seemed to him that
the thrust obtained from the change in inventory policy on the part of
American business had been largely exhausted. This was the reason,
apparently, that the index of industrial production probably would not
continue to rise as rapidly as it did this spring and early summer.
What was really expected n a recovery was that some generative force
would get other things started, namely, consumer and business spending,
and it still seemed a little uncertain whether consumers were going to
spend to the extent needed to keep the recovery moving. Thus far, there
was no convincing evidence from consumer spending or expectations that
a second stage of tne recovery was going to eventuate. Then, too, a
little uncertainty was being evidenced by businessmen in terms of
inventory policy; in fact, operations were still on close to a hand-to-
mouth basis. Further, pricing policies were not as aggressive as one

9/12/61 -31-
would generally expect at this stage of recovery. It might be that
businessmen were alarmed by the antitrust activities of the Government,
particularly in the electrical industry, but it might be also that
businessmen themselves did not have confidence in the recovery. He
did not pretend to have the answer, but it seemed fairly clear that
there was not the buoyancy and ebullience in businessmen's attitudes
that might be expected at a time like this. It was quite true that
Government policies were on the expansionist side and that they might
become more so. Also, it might be that the current wage settlements
were going to be disturbing as far as price developments were concerned,
but again they simply might lead to more mechanization.
For the next three weeks, Mr. Mitchell felt the Committee should
not take any action which would indicate that it thought any different
type of monetary policy was required. The Desk should not show evidence
of resolving doubts on the side of additional ease or of additional
firmness; instead, it should try to proceed right down the middle and
do nothing to give observers reason to say that the Federal Reserve was
either tightening or easing. The uneasiness and anxiety resulting from
the cold war was undoubtedly affecting businessmen and consumers, and
it should not be augmented by Federal Reserve action. He would not want
to try to stimulate the economy by frightening people, that is, by raising
fears about disturbances, whether hyperactive or faltering, in the economy.
In summary, he would continue very much on an even-keel basis.

9/12/61 -32-
Mr. Fulton reported that the heavy industry sector of the Fourth
District economy had moved ahead moderately in August. There had been a
moderate but more than seasonal abatement of unemployment, which seemed
to have gone down at a rate a little faster than the national rate. On
the other hand, unemployment in the District was such that the District
had a longer way to go than the nation, and it was still a major problem.
Construction had slackened a bit in the past month, Mr. Fulton
said, and department store sales were not as good as in July, when they
reached an all-time high on a seasonally adjusted basis. For the year
to date, department store sales were down one per cent from a year ago.
Automobile sales were lower in August, probably reflecting the hesitation
incident to model changeovers.
In the steel business, there was a slight downturn in August
but there had been a return now to a pretty fair rate of production.
People in the steel industry felt that operations at the present level
plus about 5 per cent would persist for the rest of the year. There was
also a feeling that the first half of next year would show greater
improvement. Total output for the current year would probably be about
100 million tons, with production at an annual rate of 120 million tons
in the last quarter. No observable inventory accumulation on the part
of manufacturing industries was occurring, but it was thought possible
that the automotive industry would put in some inventory commencing the
first of next year in anticipation of a June strike in the steel industry.

9/12/61 -33-
Whether a strike was inevitable could, of course, not be foretold, but
at least it seemed to be indicated that the steel industry would try
to keep wage increases down. The demand for some types of steel,
including galvanized sheets and merchant pipe, had been quite active.
Some buyers of foreign pipe were now trying to make domestic connections,
but more steel was still being imported than exported. So far as prices
were concerned, the steel industry was unanimous in claiming that a
price rise was an absolute necessity, particularly in view of the wage
increase which would be coming in October. The industry apparently had
installed about all of the labor-saving devices that could be put in
place. As to tin plate, the price of tin had risen to about $1.25 a
pound against $1 last year, thus raising the question how the same
price for the product could be maintained in the face of cost increases
in both labor and material.
As to the auto industry, the settlement currently in process
seemed more inflationary than other recent settlements. Many of the
benefits were in the fringe benefit category, but they added to costs.
Acceptance of the current settlement now depended on working out many
local demands. In 1955, the contract was consummated in about a week,
but no one was so optimistic this year.
As far as policy was concerned, Mr. Fulton said he felt that a
continuation of the present posture would be quite appropriate. He would
not favor a change in the discount rate, and he thought that the special
authorization should be continued.

9/12/61 -34-
Mr. Bopp stated that business had been good in the Third District,
with production and construction both rising. The Reserve Bank had been
making some additional studies of the unemployment problem and considered
it possible that there might be a break in the persistently high levels
of unemployment that had plagued the District for some time.
Mr. Bopp expressed agreement with the view that there should be
no change in policy. He would favor no change in the discount rate, the
directive, or the general degree of ease in the market.
Mr. Bryan said that the reports and informal comments of the
head office and branch directors who attended the meeting of the Atlanta
directors last Friday seemed to be quite optimistic. He was not clear
as to just why this attitude prevailed because District statistics showed
no evidence of exuberant boom. There had been a little improvement in
nonfarm employment and in manufacturing employment, and the greatest
recent improvement probably was in construction contract awards. Other
figures failed to show any boom situation or any rapid rate of improvement.
He gained the impression, from conversations with the directors and with
persons outside the System, that there was a growing feeling that inflation
was again probable or perhaps inevitable. This did not strike him as a
good psychological development for the country whatever might be the turn
of events.
As to policy, Mr. Bryan said he believed that in view of the
Treasury financing the Committee was not in a position to make any

9/12/61 -35-
essential change in policy at this time. Therefore, he agreed with
what he sensed to be the general sentiment around the table. Perhaps
the Committee should provide some modest increment factor in supplying
reserves, and it should take care of seasonal variations. Other than
that, however, it should do nothing.
Chairman Martin noted at this point that Mr. Johns, who ordinarily
would have presented his views at this juncture, had been compelled to
return to St. Louis this morning for personal reasons.
Mr. Balderston expressed appreciation to the several members
of the Committee who had communicated with him concerning the procedure
that he had proposed at the August 22 meeting. The points raised had
been most helpful to him and also, he believed, to members of the staff
who had been working with the problem.
Mr. Balderston then noted that the chart distributed before the
meeting this morning differed in two respects from the chart distributed
at the August 22 meeting. 1/ First, there had been a change in the base
for the two growth lines. This base had been reduced by cutting its
excess reserve component from a figure of about $680 million to $600
million. The higher figure had been used originally because it was the
actual figure in the week of March 1, which was about the time when the
current business upturn was beginning. As some had noted, however, this
1/ A copy of the chart is appended to these minutes as Attachment A.

9/12/61 -36-
particular excess reserve figure was atypical. Thus, to the extent
that Committee members might wish to use this device for guidance, it
would be better to use the $600 million excess reserve figure, which
was the same as employed in the data submitted throughout the summer
by Mr. Thomas. The logical support for the $600 million base was that
it was sufficiently aoove the fairly consistent figure of excess reserves
at country member banks to have provided some expansionary effect during
the period since the first of March. Therefore, at the risk of adding
an additional adjustment of the chart to enhance it, accuracy, he had
adopted this assumed, but more typical, base figure for the trend lines.
Also, the chart distributed today reflected another kind of change from
the previous chart. Consistent rounding down of the growth allowance,
along with an error in adjusting the early July data of around $50
million, affected the amount by which the actual reserves had appeared
to depart from the two growth lines. The earlier chart reflected fairly
accurately the direction that policy took during August but not the
degree or amount of departure from a straight course.
Mr. Balderston recalled that the second portion of his suggested
procedure three weeks ago had to do with the translation of open market
policy, as worked out in terms of total reserves, into the language of
free reserves. At that time he had passed on an observation by the
staff that it might take almost $150 million more reserves in a week
featured by a bulge in float to have the same expansionary effect as a

9/12/61 -37-
given level of reserves in a nonfloat week. Accordingly, he had
suggested two targets for the weeks that had now intervened; namely,
free reserves of about $500 million for the two weeks ending September 6,
and over $600 million for the week that would end tomorrow. Thanks to
the Desk, and perhaps to chance, the actual and free reserve figures
for the first two weeks provided a small test of his suggestion. While
the week-to-week fluctuation was sharp, free reserves for the two weeks
averaged $519 million and, as indicated by the chart, there was some
expansion, in the order of $50 million, in the total reserves made
available over that period. He hoped that the week ending September 13
would see free reserves moving back to around $600 million, with some
corresponding upward fluctuation in the line of total available reserves.
The import of such figures was that after some slippage in the rate of
reserve growth as the summer progressed, particularly in early August,
there had been maintained since the August 22 meeting a reserve position
that had induced a resumed rate of expansion of available reserves.
At the previous meeting, Mr. Balderston noted, he had mentioned
certain basic factors that could cause the relationship of total and
free reserves to vary. In addition, two technical factors must be
taken into account. First, the weekly seasonal correction could be
relied on less than seasonals developed for monthly or quarterly data.
Second, the attempt to distinguish between weeks of float bulge and
other weeks involved guessing which weeks in the future would contain
such bulges.

9/12/61 -38-
As to policy, Mr. Balderston suggested for the two probable
high-float weeks ending September 27 a free reserve target somewhere
around $600 million, and for the week ending October 4 a target of
about $500 million. In short, he would seek to add to total reserves
at the same rate that he had advocated three weeks ago, because neither
international considerations nor speculative ebullience seemed to call
for departure from such a course at the moment. However, he hoped the
Committee would be prepared to make a departure at any time if necessary.
Chairman Martin said it appeared obvious to him that System
policy was progressing in a satisfactory way at the present time. The
Treasury problem would be acute for some time, so there was no particular
reason for the System to rock the boat in any way. He took it from the
discussion today that the consensus favored no change in the discount
rate, no change in the directive, and a continuation of essentially the
same degree of ease that had prevailed. He also understood that the
special authorization would be renewed, with, he assumed, two dissenting
votes. The Chairman then inquired whether it was agreed that this in
essence was the consensus, and no comments to the contrary were heard.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, it was voted unanimously
to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York until otherwise directed by
the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges
(including replacement of maturing securities, and allowing
maturities to run off without replacement) for the System
Open Market Account in the open market or, in the case of

9/12/61 -39-
maturing securities, by direct exchange with the Treasury,
as may be necessary in the light of current and prospective
economic conditions and the general credit situation of the
country, with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds in
the market to the needs of commerce and business, (b) to
encouraging credit expansion so as to promote fuller utili-
zation of resources, while giving consideration to international
factors, and (c) to the practical administration of the Account;
provided that the aggregate amount of securities held in the
System Account (including commitments for the purchase or sale
of securities for the Account) at the close of this date, other
than special short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased
from time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury,
shall not be increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in
cases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one
or more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short-term
certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to
time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided
that the total amount of such certificates held at any one time
by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate
$500 million.
The Committee then authorized the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, between
this date and the next meeting of the
Committee, within the terms and limitations
of the directive issued at this meeting, to
acquire intermediate and/or longer-term
U. S. Government securities of any maturity,
or to change the holdings of such securities,
in an amount not to exceed $500 million.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,
Balderston, Irons, King, Mitchell, Shepardson,
Swan, Wayne, and Treiber. Votes against this
action: Messrs. Allen and Robertson.
Chairman Martin then referred to a memorandum from Mr. Young
dated September 6, 1961, which dealt with the subject of the Open Market
Committee's operating orocedures and policies and transmitted to the
Committee: (1) a draft of standing rules governing Committee open market

9/12/61 -40-
practice that was first distributed to the Committee early in March
of this year, as revised to reflect further suggestions of Committee
members and subsequent Committee operations and discussions, and
(2) draft wording, in several alternative formulations, to separate
the Committee's directive to the New York Bank into two parts, a
continuing authority directive that would be adopted once each year
and a current economic policy directive that would be adopted at each
meeting.
In introducing the subject, Chairman Martin also referred to
two papers that were to be distributed to the Committee in the course
of this meeting. The first, prepared by Mr. Knipe, was a critique of
Federal Reserve policy, and its explanation, over the period 1949-1961.
The second, prepared by Mr. Broida of the Board's staff, constituted
a critical review of the language of clause (b) of the Committee's
policy directives during the period 1957-1960. The Chairman further
noted that he understood the Commission on Money and Credit would before
long issue a paper containing a critical discussion of the Committee's
directives.
Chairman Martin then commented that he thought it would be useful
for the Committee to study the distributed material and see whether it
could develop a form of directive that would be an improvement, particu-
larly as far as public understanding was concerned. While he was not
sure the Committee could do much better than at present, he thought that

9/12/61 -41-
discussion was always good and he was not defeatist in his attitude.
In any event, the Committee should do everything it could to resolve
the problem. Although there might be some general discussion of
Committee procedures this morning, what he had contemplated was that
the Committee as a whole would try to hammer out something over a period
of time. He would suggest that this be done beginning at the prospective
meeting on November 14, at which time both he and Vice Chairman Hayes
would again be in attendance. Otherwise, the Committee might run into
the new year before it could reach agreement.
The Chairman then called for any discussion or comments on such
a program, and Mr. Treiber commented that the program seemed satisfactory.
He indicated that the New York Bank would have some observations to make
on the documents transmitted with Mr. Young's memorandum of September 6.
Perhaps it would be premature to have a discussion of them this morning
but, in general, as indicated on earlier occasions, the New York Bank
would look with favor on trying to break down the directive into two
parts. As to the economic directive, it was the current thinking at the
Bank that alternative "B", as set forth in the attachments to the
memorandum, was probably the best of the several suggestions. As to
the standing rules, the New York Bank would have some basic comments and
some technical comments; it would also have some technical comments on
the continuing authority directive to be adopted once each year.
Chairman Martin expressed the view that it would be desirable
for the New York Bank to prepare a memorandum that could be distributed

9/12/61 -42-
to the Committee along with memoranda from others who might care to
submit comments or suggestions. He thought it would be advisable for
the Committee to study the other two staff documents that he had
mentioned before going into the matter too extensively. However, the
earlier the Committee started trying to pool its views on the subject,
the better off it would be.
Mr. Wayne inquired if he was correct in understanding the
Chairman to suggest that if any Committee member had comments they
should be sent to the Committee Secretary for distribution, and that
the sooner this was done the better, after the Committee members had
had a chance to study the staff documents mentioned by Chairman Martin.
Chairman Martin indicated that Mr. Wayne's understanding of
the suggested procedure was correct.
Chairman Martin then stated that, if agreeable to the Committee,
the understanding would be to proceed on the basis that had been suggested,
and no disagreement was indicated.
Chairman Martin noted that there had also been included on the
agenda for this meeting, at his suggestion, a discussion of the subject
of possible Federal Reserve holdings of foreign currencies. In this
connection, there had been distributed to the Committee copies of a
memorandum from Mr. Young dated June 16, 1961 (corrected June 26), a
supplemental memorandum from Mr. Furth of the Board's staff, also dated
June 16, and a letter from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York dated
July 21 commenting on Mr. Young's memorandum.

9/12/61 -43-
Chairman Martin commented that he had thought it would be
desirable to have a general discussion of the subject at this time,
particularly in order that he might have some of the thinking of the
Committee members before going to Vienna to attend the annual meetings
of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development. This did not infer that he intended
to discuss the matter in Vienna in terms of a commitment of any sort,
but he no doubt would be asked questions from time to time. The problem,
he thought, had been well stated in Mr. Young's memorandum, which
referred, among other things, to the criticism of System foreign exchange
operations by Senator Glass in 1932, when the Federal Reserve was concerned
more with bolstering foreign currencies than defending the dollar. As
the memorandum pointed out, however, this was unquestionably a new period,
and the Treasury through its Stabilization Fund had already embarked on
foreign exchange operations in defense of the dollar.
As he saw it, the Chairman continued, the handling of external
monetary problems of this sort belonged primarily with the Treasury.
Thus, there was a question whether the Stabilization Fund should not
be enlarged and the Federal Reserve should participate with the Treasury
in the handling of that Fund. To him, that was the critical problem.
To use the Washington vernacular, he did not think that the System should
be seeking "power," or a role that would attract attention to the System.
Instead, it should be seeking the best end result. It might be that
foreign exchange activities, if handled by the System, would be superior

9/12/61 -44-
to such operations if handled by the Stabilization Fund. However, any
operations would have to be closely coordinated with the Stabilization
Fund, so that there was again presented a dual operating problem requiring
Federal Reserve and Treasury cooperation.
The Chairman went on to say that in his mind there was no question
but that this country was going to be in the business of foreign exchange
operations in one way or another. In his opinion the nature of world
conditions was such that some activities of this sort unquestionably would
be engaged in in some manner.
Chairman Martin then turned to Mr. Treiber, who presented sub-
stantially the following statement:
We welcome the suggestion in Mr. Young's memorandum of
June 16, 1961 (corrected June 26, 1961), that the Federal
Reserve, in the course of its regular operations, acquire
and hold accounts in foreign currencies with major foreign
central banks.
Since March of this year the New York Bank, as fiscal
agent of the United States, has conducted operations in the
foreign exchange markets on behalf of the Stabilization Fund.
In addition, as agent of certain foreign central banks, it
has conducted foreign exchange operations in the New York
market. Such transactions on behalf of the U. S. Treasury
and foreign central banks through June 30 exceeded $1 billion.
Transactions on behalf of the Stabilization Fund were
undertaken, in cooperation with foreign central banks, for
the purpose of strengthening the dollar. Our experience has
persuaded us that United States intervention in the foreign
exchange markets is a potentially highly effective instrument
for defending the international position of the dollar and
that further use of this instrument should be explored
vigorously.
The volume of foreign exchange that may be acquired by
the Stabilization Fund is, of course, limited by the size of
the Fund. Its present size is about $1/3 billion, of which
a large amount is already tied up by stabilization agreements
with certain Latin American countries. The scope of acquisi-
tion of hard currencies by the Fund is probably not much over

9/12/61 -45-
$100 million. While the Treasury may eventually ask the
Congress to authorize an increase in the resources of the
Fund, I understand that in any case the Treasury would
welcome Federal Reserve acquisition of foreign exchange as
a helpful supplement to the Stabilization Fund.
The primary purpose, as I see it, of System exchange
operations would be to defend the dollar. Such operations
should help to reduce the drain on gold and to influence the
rate of the dollar in relation to other currencies, and thus
promote confidence in the dollar.
In very general terms, Federal Reserve holdings of
foreign exchange might be built up during the fat years of
United States balance-of-payment surpluses and be run down
during the lean years of deficits. Even during periods of
deficit, such as the present, opportunities exist for acquir-
ing currencies of certain foreign countries which may be short
of dollars. There are seasonal as well as cyclical swings
in our balance of payments that affect our gold reserves and
the relationship of the dollar to foreign currencies. The
impact of both types of swings might be cushioned by contrac-
tion and expansion of our exchange holdings.
Until recent months, the rate of the dollar in relation
to other currencies has been determined exclusively by the
exchange authorities of foreign countries. Abrupt declines
of the dollar to the floor of the foreign exchanges have
excited speculation as to possible changes in currency parities.
By having in its possession an adequate supply of the major
foreign currencies, the United States should be able to resist
such pressures upon the dollar rate and thereby restrain a
snowballing of speculative anticipations.
It is useful to engage not only in spot operations but
also in future operations. Forward sales of German marks
initiated by the Stabilization Fund in March, in cooperation
with the Bundesbank, proved remarkably effective in restoring
confidence in the stability of the dollar-mark parity, as well
as restraining heavy German borrowing in the dollar market for
hedging purposes. Forward operations in Swiss francs, subse-
quently initiated, have also had a useful stabilizing effect
upon expectations in the face of the sterling crisis and then
the Berlin crisis; this success has encouraged the U. S.
Treasury to plan to enlarge substantially the volume of forward
sales. Plans are also being made for forward operations in
Dutch guilders with the hope of stimulating a sizable flow of
Dutch short-term funds to New York. In all of these forward
operations, arrangements have been made to protect the United
States from any risk of loss in the event of a revaluation of
the foreign currency involved.

9/12/61 -46-
The recent undertaking of foreign exchange transactions
by the Stabilization Fund has promoted the development of
close contacts and cooperation with officials of European
central banks. The very fact of joint operations has required
continuing consultations as to policy objectives and techniques.
The consultations have been most harmonious; they encourage the
hope of achieving the close cooperation of all the major central
banks in their exchange markets. The importance of central bank
cooperation is well illustrated by the operation undertaken by
European central banks to protect sterling after the German
revaluation. The European central banks have welcomed United
States exchange operations as a vital step toward closing the
ring of central bank defenses against speculation in exchange.
Beyond the immediate purpose of defending the dollar,
United States operations in the exchange ma kets may contribute
to a partial solution of the longer-term problem of insuring
an adequate growth in international liquidity in order to
finance the secular expansion of international trade. With
the flow of newly mined gold into official reserves tending to
lag considerably behind the annual growth of world trade, the
growth of international liquidity since the end of the war has
relied primarily upon a growth in foreign holdings of dollars.
But our ability to sustain a much larger volume of dollar
liabilities has now become seriously weakened and a variety of
far-reaching reform schemes have been proposed as a solution
to the problem of providing for future liquidity needs. System
and Treasury officials have effectively pointed to a variety
of serious shortcomings in such schemes, and have urged instead
that moderate reforms of the present international financial
system, such as standby credit facilities of the International
Monetary Fund, offer the best hope of taking care of the long-
term liquidity problem. While more ample credit facilities at
the IMF will unquestionably prove most helpful, growth of
official holdings of foreign exchange in currencies other than
the dollar and sterling would provide a second important source
of liquidity.
On July 21, Mr. Hayes wrote Chairman Martin commenting
on the subject of Mr. Young's memorandum. We endorse the
suggestion that day-to-day operations in foreign exchange be
conducted under a standing directive of the Federal Open Market
Committee, subject to the direction of and reporting to a
Subcommittee. There is no need for me to review today the
other comments and suggestions contained in that letter; all
members of the Committee have received copies of the letter.
In conclusion, I would urge that we move forward in plans
for the Federal Reserve to acquire and conduct transactions in
foreign exchange.

9/12/61 -47-
Chairman Martin inquired of Mr. Treiber what limit he would
contemplate on operations such as suggested, and the latter replied
that he thought the System would have to feel its way along. He
envisaged that certainly the amount would be relatively small at the
start. In this connection, he noted that total transactions of the
Stabilization Fund had involved about $1 billion, but that the holdings
at any one time were only a small proportion of that figure. In any
event, however, he had not come prepared today to suggest amounts of
operations; instead, he had thought the discussion was to be more in
terms of principle and whether to move forward with the study of
problems such as amounts and the manner of operations.
The Chairman then stated that any other comments or questions
would be in order, and Mr. Allen said that he had a question. Just
because a thing was legal, that did not mean that he would always want
to do it. On the legality of the proposed operations, however, he did
have a question. While he had not consulted Counsel for the Chicago
Bank, he assumed that the matter had been reviewed by the Board's
attorneys. His question, then, was whether it seemed clear that it
would be legal for the System to undertake such operations.
Chairman Martin replied that the matter would have to be gone
into more extensively than it had thus far. However, in one form or
another, he thought it could be said that the operations would be legal.
The Chairman then turned to Mr. Hackley, who commented that legal questions

9/12/61 -48-
had, of course, been raised in the past. Nearly 30 years ago, as
indicated in Mr. Young's memorandum, the Board took a position, which
it did not publish, that would seem to preclude the implementation of
a program such as suggested. However, for reasons that did not need
to be gone into today, he felt that the Board could well reinterpret
the law in a somewhat different manner, and in his view such a step
would be desirable.
In a further comment, Mr. Hackley recalled that in 1954 a review
of the matter had been made by the staff. While no formal opinion had
been submitted, he thought the views of Counsel for the Board and the
New York Bank were in general agreement.
Chairman Martin then stated that he had mentioned this subject
informally--not formally--to the Chairmen of the Senate and House
Banking and Currency Committees, but without any indication as to
whether or not the Federal Reserve might go into this kind of operation.
He did not think it would be fair to say that the Committee Chairmen
were either for or against the idea, but they were sympathetic to the
problem. He had made no effort to press the point, and it would not
be fair to say that the Committee Chairmen had given any clearance of
any kind.
The Chairman went on to comment that what had been done through
the Stabilization Fund was well known; some of the information was now
public property. He thought it important to bring out that in the public

9/12/61 -49-
mind, and in the mind of the Congress, there was a general idea that
these were operations of the Federal Reserve. A distinction could be
made, of course, in Federal Reserve circles, but in the public mind
no such distinction was made. The average commentator and the man on
the outside, at least those he had encountered, had the impression
that while these things might be done through the Stabilization Fund,
the Federal Reserve was involved. However, there was a very real point,
as he had already indicated, that the primary direction must come from
the Treasury and that anything done by the Federal Reserve must be
coordinated with the Treasury.
The Chairman also said he did not think that these operations
would involve anything in the way of substantial losses, if one wanted
to put the matter in those terms. The Federal Reserve might engage in
foreign exchange operations on a fairly substantial scale and actually
make some money. Whatever losses it might incur would not, in his
opinion, be of any serious nature; otherwise, he would not want to
consider the matter at all. Everyone, Chairman Martin suggested, ought
to keep in mind what the framework was. Also, before entering into any
such operations, the System ought to do as the memorandum from Mr. Young
suggested; namely, take the matter up formally with the Chairmen of the
Banking and Currency Committees.
Mr. Bopp said that as nearly as he could recall the Stabilization
Fund originally was in the order of $2 billion and one reason for its

9/12/61 -50-
creation was dissatisfaction with the idea of the Federal Reserve
handling foreign exchange operations. In many countries, he noted,
the central bank does actually deal in foreign exchange, so in a sense
the situation in this country was unique. Through the Stabilization
Fund, however, the Treasury was to have the authority in case of any
conflict. Then, as he recalled it, at the time of the Bretton Woods
Agreements the Stabilization Fund was reduced to something like its
present size, one reason being to cut down the power of the Treasury.
At least, that was the general thinking. In the longer run, he noted,
a possible conflict between Treasury policy and Federal Reserve policy
in this area could develop. This was a thing to keep in mind in
considering the basis on which any program would be entered into; that
is, the sense in which the Treasury could direct Federal Reserve operations
in this field even though Federal Reserve funds were used.
Chairman Martin called upon Mr. Young for comment in the light
of Mr. Bopp's remarks, and Mr. Young noted that the motivations in
cutting down the size of the Stabilization Fund had been varied, one
reason having been to provide funds to make up the United States
contribution to the resources of the International Monetary Fund. He
added that there were admittedly various possibilities and hazards in
the institutional relations that would be involved. On the other hand,
over a period of time the Federal Reserve had had well-established working
relationships with the Treasury in the international area through the

9/12/61 -51-
National Advisory Council. At times, there might be differences of
view that could become rather sharp. However, he felt the whole
background was such that these things could be dealt with as they
arose, and that solutions could be worked out without any such matter
developing into a monumental issue that would become public property.
Mr. Bopp then commented that he was sympathetic to the approach
suggested in Mr. Young's memorandum, following which Mr. Balderston
asked Mr. Young to comment further on the question that had been raised
by Mr. Bopp concerning the direction over the use of Federal Reserve
funds.
Mr. Young replied that he assumed the Federal Reserve would have
control over its own funds. There would be consultation on matters of
policy, but he could not imagine that the Federal Reserve would be
confronted with any problem of directives at any time.
Mr. Robertson said that he would not want to leave the legal
question in a posture where one could be misled into thinking that the
Federal Reserve could just move ahead. While he would not want to argue
that the proposed operations would be illegal, he thought that the point
was highly questionable. A great deal of work should be done on research-
ing the 1932 period and activities before that date to determine the
intent of the statute itself. He then referred to the language of the
sixth paragraph of section 14 of the Federal Reserve Act and noted the
problem of construction presented by that language. A study of the
legislative history, he felt, should help to clarify the point.

9/12/61 -52-
In further comments, Mr. Robertson said it seemed to him this
whole problem was not fundamentally the problem of the Federal Reserve,
but rather of the Treasury. If so, Federal Reserve operations of the
kind suggested might be construed as bailing out the Treasury. It
might be said that the Stabilization Fund was not adequate and therefore
the Federal Reserve was supplying supplementary funds. Accordingly,
before any operations were undertaken, he felt that the Congress should
have a chance to take a look, at least through the Banking and Currency
Committees, to see whether it was felt that the Federal Reserve had the
power to proceed. In saying this, he was not questioning the desirability
of action, along the lines suggested, by someone, whether the Treasury
Department or the Treasury and State Departments or the Federal Reserve
working closely with the Treasury. He noted, however, that in other
countries there was a much closer relationship between the central bank
and the executive branch of the Government than in this country. In
short, he would not like to see the Federal Reserve Act hastily. Instead,
he felt that the subject should be explored fully to be sure that the
Federal Reserve was making whatever contribution it could to a long-term
problem. While this problem did exist, he would not want to see the
Federal Reserve take the position that it could construe the statute in
any way it wished.
Mr. Hackley said he agreed with Mr. Robertson that the legal
question involved was certainly debatable. He suggested that it might

9/12/61 -53-
be advisable to furnish the Committee a memorandum which would deal
not only with the question specifically mentioned by Mr. Robertson but
also other problems involved in the program, such as the relationship
between the jurisdictions of the Board and the Open Market Committee
and the delegation of authority to a subcommittee of the Open Market
Committee. Several questions were involved that the Open Market
Committee might wish to have in mind before consulting committees of
the Congress.
Chairman Martin concurred in the view that it would be desirable
for the Open Market Committee to have such a memorandum.
Mr. Swan said that he had in mind somewhat the same kind of
questions that had already been raised. He did not quarrel with the
general approach--the general solution to this kind of problem--but he
had some questions about the use of the Stabilization Fund versus
Federal Reserve action. One was the question of authority as such,
as contrasted with intermediate decisions. Another question related
to the amounts involved, and whether the Federal Reserve in effect
would be supplementing a limit that had not been raised and would wind
up with much larger holdings than those of the Stabilization Fund.
Also, in the area of actual operating techniques there was the question
whether there would be any differences between operations of the Federal
Reserve and the Treasury or whether they would of necessity be consistent.
Further, there was the question of any differences in motives. He had
noticed, for example, in the distributed material that the Stabilization

9/12/61 -54-
Fund had certain amounts committed under existing stabilization agree-
ments with Latin American countries, whereas presumably Federal Reserve
operations would not involve such uses of funds. If these various
aspects of the matter could be spelled out, he felt that this would
help to clarify the issues.
Mr. Wayne commented that perhaps the System could satisfy itself
on the legal question. However, he had grave doubts about the desirability
of embarking on a program in which the Federal Reserve would attempt to
protect itself against the risk of loss. He did not see how the Federal
Reserve could operate as an equal with other central banks and stipulate
that other countries must protect its holdings against loss or it would
not play the game. He would favor moving ahead, however, if the legal
and related questions could be resolved.
In response to a request of the Chairman for his reaction to the
comment in Mr. Young's memorandum concerning the change in conditions
between the time of Senator Glass and today, Mr. Wayne said he thought
there was generally a changed attitude. He went on to remark, however,
that working relationships with the Treasury were currently of such a
satisfactory nature that one might tend to assume their continuation
indefinitely. In his opinion, that was a dangerous assumption. Also,
he would be rather reluctant to have the Federal Reserve go into foreign
exchange operations on the basis of even formal consultation with
Congressional committees in any off-the-record session. While it would
be unfortunate to have prolonged Congressional debate, at the same time

9/12/61 -55-
he would feel much more comfortable if the Federal Reserve had an
official commitment from the Congress that operations of the kind
under consideration were clearly within its power. As he had said,
it was his view that the Federal Reserve, if it moved in, would have
to accept the inherent risks. As long as the System made money from
the operations it would be applauded, but if it should lose money it
would be criticized. If it came to that point, he would prefer that
the Federal Reserve be criticized for operations that the Congress had
determined to be legal,
Mr. King said that, as he saw it, the great danger in the whole
process was that people would be likely to put too much reliance on
these operations to guard the dollar, thus distracting the attention
of the public and the Congress from the need for taking measures that
would really do the job. In other words, such operations might provide
a false sense of security. However, he believed that such a program
was likely to be engaged in, and that the question was who would do the
job. On behalf of the Federal Reserve, it might be said that it would
be a good thing if the decisions in such a program were removed from
politics. On the other hand, the diffusion of responsibility for
decisions within the System framework might present a practical problem.
In the type of operation under consideration, he envisaged that quick
decisions would frequently be required, and that difficulties would arise
if it was necessary to offer explanations or seek advice from a large group.

9/12/61 -56-
For this reason, he might be inclined to lean toward letting the
Congress do what it wanted to do through the Stabilization Fund.
Mr. Bryan said that while he would not want to take a firm
position at the present time, it seemed to him this was fundamentally
what might be called in another context a price stabilization attempt.
One can always win an argument in any price stabilization effort, he
noted, by assuming the stabilization procedures to be equilibrating
and ignoring the possibility that they might be disequilibrating.
Before embarking on a program of the kind mentioned, he would like to
see a careful analysis made of the kinds of situations where it was
envisaged that the Federal Reserve would or would not intervene.
Damage could easily be done in situations that could not be remedied
by the same means; and the operations would be essentially disequili-
brating rather than equilibrating in their end effects. Therefore, he
would urge caution.
Mr. Allen said he thought Mr. Wayne, Mr. King, and Mr. Bryan
had expressed his own thinking at the present time. With the world the
way it was at the present time, somebody was going to do this. However,
he had some doubt about the legality of Federal Reserve operations and,
like Mr. Wayne, he would not be comfortable, if he had the responsibility
for a decision, about consulting a few members of the Congress. He was
inclined to think that the intent of Congress had been, and perhaps was
now, to have the Stabilization Fund do this job. He was also inclined
to feel that the handling of the matter through that mechanism should be
encouraged.

9/12/61 -57-
Chairman Martin commented that this was about where he had
come out earlier. However, he felt that the Federal Reserve must be
positive in its approach to this subject. The present Under Secretary
of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs had done some real pioneering
work in this field, and he (Chairman Martin) was sure that this kind
of thing was going to go forward. One might say that it would be in
effect a price stabilization effort. Nevertheless, he felt sure that
somebody was going to undertake it, and he would dislike to see the
Federal Reserve get in the posture of not contributing what it could
in the way of advice and consultation to the development of the soundest
possible method of handling the matter. Perhaps the Treasury would want
to obtain enlargement of the Stabilization Fund. However, even in his
limited contacts thus far, one of the first questions he had been asked
by Senators and Congressmen was whether the Federal Reserve approved
or disapproved. In other words, they wanted to know the Federal Reserve's
opinion. In the circumstances, he considered it vital that the System
not just stay on the outside and say nothing. Even if the System should
conclude that it was not the proper organization to handle this function
and that the matter should be handled by the Stabilization Fund, he
would hope that the Federal Reserve could get together material that
would support the Treasury in the enlargement of the Stabilization Fund
rather than just take a negative position, particularly when the System
was already regarded in the public eye as being involved in these
operations.

9/12/61 -58-
In further comments, Chairman Martin repeated that he thought
it was important for the System to reach a position on this subject.
The problem must be thought through carefully, and a good start had
been made in the memoranda that had been distributed. There was, for
example, the question of the prospective magnitude of operations.
While he had talked with only a few Senators and Congressmen, that was
a question they immediately had asked.
Chairman Martin then suggested that the Committee might want
to ask the Board's Division of International Finance to continue the
work it had been doing recently under the leadership of Mr. Young, who,
he noted, was now representing the System at the working party level
of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. If this
suggestion were followed, the Division would be expected to go ahead
and pull the thing together, with the help of the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York and others, so that the System could proceed to take a
positive position. This would avoid the criticism that the System
never contributed anything constructive, that it was against everything,
and that there was nothing positive in its role. The System should not
let itself get placed in such a position.
Chairman Martin went on to say that he had had a chance to
think on some aspects of the matter during his trip to Europe earlier
this year. He expected to attend the meeting of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development in the latter part of October and,

9/12/61 -59-
as he had said, Mr. Young was attending all of the working party
meetings. However, the System must try to pull this together in
concrete form and if possible make some suggestions to the Treasury
as to whether, for example, the Stabilization Fund should be enlarged
two or three times. Then the System could determine whether or not
it would be desirable for the Federal Reserve to be part of this
program. It could let the Congress make that decision, but the System
should not just sit by idly and let the problem swirl around it. That,
he thought, was what had been happening to a degree.
Mr. King said that he had not intended his comments to be
negative. However, he did feel that some person must make the decisions
in connection with such a program and that the decisions must be clear-cut
and fast. If it were decided to delegate the authority to some one person
in the System, he would have no objection to such delegation and would
endorse the idea.
Mr. Treiber commented that he thought there were two types of
decisions. First, there was the extent to which the Federal Reserve
would conduct some operations in a certain foreign currency. Second
there were the day-to-day operating decisions. Essentially, the same
thing was involved in the day-to-day decisions of the Trading Desk in
conducting open market operations.
Mr. King asked Mr. Treiber if he would not envisage, then, more
difficulty than in making open market decisions, and Mr. Treiber replied
that he would not.

9/12/61 -60-
Mr. Wayne commented, by way of clarification of his earlier
remarks, that he would favor entering into such a program, but with
full recognition of the risks involved.
Mr. Rouse commented on the degree of urgency that he saw in the
matter. With the kind of international tension that existed at present,
somebody must do this kind of thing, and he thought there was a time
element involved in the sense of being ready, whether through the
Stabilization Fund or the Federal Reserve. The Stabilization Fund
resources were clearly inadequate to do the kind of job that might
have to be done.
Chairman Martin responded that he thought Mr. Rouse's statement
was well taken. There was a real question of urgency, and that was why
he had suggested that the problem should be gotten in the works. On the
other hand, he felt that the System should not move too fast, although
it should be on top of the problem. He added the comment that the work
done by the Under Secretary of the Treasury in this field had been an
excellent pioneering piece of work. The Under Secretary had shown
vision and capacity in improvising with the tools ,t his command; and
had demonstrated how real the need was and how effectively, under certain
circumstances, the problem could be handled, but only on a bridge of
sound policies. In his opinion, the foreign exchange field was one in
which the country had been fortunate in having the type of leadership
that had existed in the Treasury. He hoped the System would think the
problem through and be as constructive as possible.

9/12/61 -61-
Mr. King indicated that he had some concern about the idea of
operations being conducted in two different forms and raised the
question whether they should not preferably be concentrated, with one
agency directing the entire effort.
Mr. Young pointed out in this connection that the Treasury has
other jobs in connection with the Stabilization Fund. That was one of
the reasons why the funds available for the particular kind of operations
under discussion were so limited. He gathered that the Treasury might be
happy if it were left free to use the Stabilization Fund for the other
things with which it had to deal.
Chairman Martin then suggested that the Committee request
Mr. Young and the Division of International Finance to work with the
New York Reserve Bank and the Board's Legal Division in trying to pull
the parts of the problem together, and agreement with this suggestion
was indicated.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Open Market Committee
would be held on Tuesday, October 3, 1961, and that the next succeeding
meeting would be tentatively scheduled for Tuesday, October 24, 1961.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary.

TOTAL RESERVES AVAILABLE TO SUPPORT PRIVATE DEPOSIT EXPANSION, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
ACTUAL VS. 5 PER CENT AND 3 PER CENT ANNUAL GROWTH RATES, MARCH 1 - SEPTEMBER 6, 1961
ANNUAL GROWTH RATE
S.INCE MARCH 1 BASE 9.4
AVAILABLE RESERVES
19.1
3 PER CENT
ANNUAL GROWTH RATE
SINCE MARCH 1 BASE
9.0