A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, January 10, 1961, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bopp
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Fulton
Mr. King
Mr. Leedy
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Szymczak
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Lesch, Allen, Irons, and Mangels, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Erickson and Johns, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Boston and St. Louis, respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Brandt, Eastburn, Marget, Noyes, and Tow,
Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Koch, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
Mr. Yager, Economist, Division of Research and
Statistics
Mr. Wayne, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond
Mr. Hickman, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland

1/10/61 -2
Messrs. Ellis, Baughman, Jones, Parsons, Coldwell,
and Einzig, Vice Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Boston, Chicago, St. Louis,
Minneapolis, Dallas, and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Garvy, Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of New
York
Mr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
November 22, 1960, were approved.
Under date of December 16, 1960, there had been sent to each
member and alternate member of the Federal Open Market Committee, and to
each President not currently a member of the Committee, a copy of the
report of audit of the System Open Market Account made by the Division of
Examinations of the Board of Governors as at the close of business
October 21, 1960. The report, which has been placed in the Committee's
files, was submitted to the Secretary of the Committee under date of
November 30, 1960, in accordance with the action of the Federal Open
Market Committee at its meeting on June 21, 1939, as reaffirmed most
recently at the meeting on March 1, 1960.
Chairman Martin inquired whether any of the members of the Com
mittee wished to comment on the report, and there was no indication to
such effect.
Accordingly, the audit report was
noted and accepted without objection.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report of open market operations covering the period

1/10/61 -3
December 13, 1960, through January 4, 1961, and a supplementary report
covering the period January 5 through January 9, 1961. Copies of both
reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Rouse commented
as follows:
The past four weeks have witnessed pervasive ease in the
money market. At the same time, short-term interest rates have
not been unduly depressed. The rate on three-month Treasury
bills, for example, moved no lower than 2.16 per cent during
the period despite the fact that open market operations pro
vided a large volume of reserves toward the close of the year.
With short-term rates remaining relatively stable, there does
not seem to have been any strengthened incentive to transfer
short-term funds to other markets. The spread between the
British bill rate and the Treasury bill rate here on a covered
basis has fluctuated from slightly below 1 per cent to a high
of around 1.20 per cent in favor of British bills. We cannot
measure accurately the actual shift of short-term money in
response to interest rate differentials, but we have the
impression that relatively little has taken place recently.
The sizable foreign purchases of gold in the past two or three
weeks point up the fact that this problem is still very much
with us. These recent purchases, it appears, represent in
good part a conversion of existing assets rather than an
accumulation of new assets.
The year-end pressures that normally make it difficult
to keep the money market easy over the approach to the year
end have been mostly absent. Federal funds have traded well
below the discount rate through most of the period and bill
rates have fluctuated within a narrow range. While foreign
accounts and some corporations have liquidated bills, these
sales seem to have been about offset by demand from banks
and other corporations. We see some evidence that banks are
putting their ample surplus reserves to work in Government
securities to a greater extent, and in some cases are under
taking a modest amount of maturity extension. However, the
attitude of investors in fixed income securities generally
is clearly one of caution.
Funds were injected through open market operations
mainly by way of repurchase agreements, mostly at 2-3/4 per

cent in order to compete with other sources of funds and to
encourage the dealers to leave the contracts on the books.
Through this measure it has been possible to avoid outright
market purchases of Treasury bills even though the contracts
have not remained on the books as long as we would have liked.
We did, however, purchase some Treasury bills from foreign
accounts. Earlier in the period reserves were absorbed through
sales not only of bills but also of short-term securities other
than bills. Most of these sales were made to the International
Monetary Fund, which was investing the proceeds of its recent
sale of gold to the Treasury.
Prices in the Government securities market moved generally
upward over most of the period, but underwent sizable declines
in the past few days. These declines reflect renewed doubts
as to the duration of the business recession and more active
discussion of the gold outflow as a symptom of our unfavorable
balance of payments--developments which have occurred against
the background of the heavy positions accumulated by dealers.
Total dealer positions reached a peak of $3.8 billion, an all
time high. These positions, which were largely in short-term
issues, include securities held under long-term repurchase
agreements. Although dealer holdings have subsequently been
reduced, they are still at a level that could be troublesome
in the event of some unforeseen development, such as a marked
worsening in the international situation.
The Treasury is again facing new financing operations,
first in the roll over of the January 15 bills through an
auction tomorrow, which we expect will be routine. The next
operation will be the refunding of the February 15 maturities,
which presents some problems, such as whether to refund through
a cash offering or through the normal exchange technique, and
also whether to attempt a further extension of maturity at
this time. The problem of maturity is a difficult one, since
there are already outstanding about $11 billion of securities
maturing in February 1962. These decisions, of course, will
be made by the incoming Treasury team, but with the advice and
counsel of the outgoing team to the extent that it is wanted.
As I have noted in previous reports to the Committee, the
market for bankers' acceptances continues to grow. Both in
October and November the total of acceptances outstanding
surpassed the previous high established some thirty years ago,
and there is some likelihood that the December figures, when
they become available, will show further growth. Toward this
past year end the dealers in acceptances were called upon to
absorb larger amounts of these obligations than ever before.

1/10/61 -5
But in the easy money market conditions prevailing they have
been able to handle this large volume of acceptances without
strain and to market them in orderly fashion to a wider assort
ment of domestic buyers than at any time in the past.
Mr. Erickson referred to the very large holdings of Government
securities by dealers and asked how those holdings would be handled if the
demand anticipated by the dealers did not materialize and the System was
not in a position to put reserves in the market.
Mr. Rouse replied that the major problem, in view of the shortness
of the maturities held, was the availability of credit to enable the dealers
to carry the securities. If credit should not be available and the dealers
had to look for buyers, that would obviously have an effect on market rates.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the open market transactions
during the period December 13, 1960, through
January 9, 1961, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
A staff memorandum on recent economic and financial developments
had been distributed under date of January 6, 1961. With further reference
to economic developments, Mr. Noyes presented the following statement:
One business, at least, is booming--that of vivisecting
the economy, diagnosing its ills, and prescribing remedies.
This year the page upon page of newsprint devoted to current
and prospective economic developments seems high, even after
allowance for the normal seasonal peak. In these circumstances,
it is difficult to say anything that does not sound like a warmed
over version of yesterday's headlines.
Very little that actually occurred in December can be cited as
concrete evidence of a change in the down-drift that has generally
characterized economic developments since last summer. Nevertheless,
for reasons that are hard to pin down, there does seem to have been
a slightly more optimistic tone in most economic analyses in the
past few weeks, and the stock market has reflected this improved
sentiment. It has also been evident in the form of less optimistic
appraisals of the future course of Government securities prices.

1/10/61
The gross national product appears to have held about even in
the fourth quarter--certainly the change from the second quarter
level of $505 billion in either the third or fourth quarter is
hardly significant. Industrial production was off at least a point-
and probably two--in December, bringing the decline from July to
around 6 per cent. Unemployment rose further to a seasonally
adjusted rate of 6.8 per cent--an 8 per cent increase. Prices of
sensitive materials continued to decline, and the average of all
wholesale prices also drifted down a little. Steel scrap, one of
the few exceptions, recovered somewhat from the very low level
prevailing earlier in the winter.
The performance of department store sales, which just equalled
last year's records for the Christmas season, was mildly disappoint
ing in that it was derived from substantially expanded facilities,
and sales per outlet were generally down. Total retail trade was
down 1.3 per cent.
Perhaps one reason for the improved sentiment is the spreading
realization, as people study the aggregate data, that so far the
reductions in output are fully accounted for by shifts in inventory.
In fact, final takings of goods and services have continued to
increase, rising by more than $3 billion in the third quarter, and
at least as much in the fourth. It is an easy step from this to the
conclusion that the process of inventory liquidation may be almost
complete and that, as business shifts back--first to lower rates of
decumulation than the estimated $4 billion in the fourth quarter,
and then to re-accumulation--conditions could improve quite rapidly.
At least one aspect of the present inventory situation suggests
caution in assuming that liquidation will be reversed at an early
date. Manufacturers, especially in the durable goods industries,
have unquestionably liquidated a substantial amount of inventory,
both of raw materials and of finished goods. There is no indication
that a similar adjustment has already occurred at the retail level,
however, and some signs that, in fact, inventories have continued
to accumulate. Notably, we know that dealers' inventories of new
cars rose slightly further in December from the already advanced
November level. Production cut-backs of uncertain duration to
correct this situation have already been announced. A similar, if
less dramatic, situation exists in the case of other durable
goods. Despite widespread price cuts and promotions, stores
appear to have made little progress in reducing their stocks of
hard goods or apparel in the second half of 1960. This is
illustrated by the department store data, which show that stocks
increased 5 per cent from May to November, compared with declines
of 5 to 6 per cent in comparable periods in other postwar cycles.
Thus, it appears that there is room for--and undoubtedly pressure
for--a cut-back in retail stocks, which could act as a drag on

-7-
production for some time to come, even if we assume that inventory
adjustment at the manufacturers' level is nearly complete.
On the other hand, even if inventory liquidation increases
further, say to as much as $6 or $7 billion in the current
quarter, it appears unlikely that gross national product will go
much below the $500 billion mark. Without any new action,
Government expenditures for goods and services will increase by
at least $2 billion in the current quarter; net exports will
probably be well maintained, and there is no sign of any abate
ment in the upward trend of personal expenditures for services,
which has continued throughout the postwar period. These will
more than offset increased inventory liquidation of the amount
suggested, and declines from the already depressed levels of
producer and consumer durable expenditures, and in construction,
should not be much more than seasonal. Thus, the most plausible
immediate prospect seems to be for more of the same--a very small
down-drift in aggregate spending, a somewhat larger slipping off
in industrial production, and a sizable further increase in
unemployment. Beyond this, it is easy to fabricate assumptions
which will produce either an upturn or a further decline, but
there is very little factual basis for one or the other.
Certainly, it is hard to find any evidence which could be said
to provide sufficient basis for a dramatic shift in monetary
policy at this juncture.
If this analysis of the current situation sounds vaguely
familiar to those who read the report of Professor Samuelson's
task force, I can only say that I started with a clean sheet of
paper and a firm resolution to try to say something fresh and
illuminating. The facts of the matter seem to be--to quote
directly--that there is no reason for either "hasty improvisation
or doctrinaire reversal of policies."
Mr. Thomas presented a factual review and analysis of recent
trends and the present state of liquidity in the economy, pointing out
their significance for fiscal, debt management, and monetary policies.
He pointed out that, after increasing by record amounts in 1958 and 1959,
the total volume of principal liquid assets held by the nonbank public
increased less in 1960 than in other years of the past decade or more.
There was a small decrease in the money supply and in nonbank holdings of

1/10/61 -8
short-term Government securities, but a very large expansion in fixed-value
redeemable assets. The ratio of total liquid asset holdings to gross
national product had declined considerably in the post-war period, with
but few interruptions, and in 1960 was below the previous low level
recorded in 1957.
In view of this decline in liquid assets and the current state of
slack in the economy, some stimulation to increasing liquidity would be
appropriate. The likelihood of deficits in the Federal Government budget
in the next year, necessitating an increase in the public debt, together
with the large volume of Government securities maturing in each of the
next five years, would provide ample opportunity for increasing liquidity
through debt-management policies that permit some shortening of the average
maturity. In fact, sizable longer-term issues might also need to be
offered to avoid undue increases in liquidity and the creation of diffi
cult debt-management problems for the future when less liquidity may be
appropriate.
With respect to monetary policies, it was pointed out that they had
been directed for some time toward fostering expansion in bank credit and
the money supply. Although the response had been slow, bank liquidity
had improved somewhat and during December there was an unusually large
increase in bank loans and investments. The money supply increased some
in December, but most of the increase recently had been in time deposits.
With reference to immediate Federal Reserve operations, Mr.
Thomas suggested that the principal question was how much of the reserves

1/10/61 -9
released through the remaining seasonal decline in demands for reserves
should be absorbed and how much should be left as a stimulus to credit
expansion. Free reserves had declined in the past week and would
presumably average less than $500 million in this statement week.
During the following three weeks large amounts of reserves would
probably be released by seasonal decreases in required reserves and in
currency in circulation, partly offset by declines in float and a con
tinued gold outflow, as well as by a runoff of outstanding repurchase
contracts at the Federal Reserve.
There could be further System sales of nearly $400 million and
still leave free reserves of over $600 million while providing a level of
total reserves adequate to cover normal changes in the money supply. Free
reserves of over $600 million would probably give sufficient leeway and
stimulus for some growth above normal, without danger of excessive ease
in the money market.
Mr. Marget presented the following statement with respect to the
balance of payments and related matters:
I regret to report that, since my last report to this
Committee on October 25, there has been a development with
respect to gold outflow which is disquieting. The reason
for this is not only, or even primarily, the level of the
gold outflow. That level has, to be sure, become uncomfortably
high since October: from an October level of $280 million,
which was bad enough, gold outflow rose in November to $490
million, and in December (if we leave out the special sale of
$300 million in gold to the United States by the International
Monetary Fund) it was $440 million. For the first week in
January, the figure was also very high: $130 million.

-10-
What is disquieting about this is not the mere fact of
the large increase in the rate of outflow, but the nature of
the forces lying behind this increase. Up to last November,
it was possible to say that, despite our balance-of-payments
difficulties, there was no evidence of a "flight from the
dollar," in the sense of a significant conversion of dollar
balances by the holders of those balances into gold. Our
proof of this was the level of those dollar balances them
selves. As long as these dollar balances not only failed to
show any significant decrease, but actually continued to
increase, it was impossible to argue that a "run" on the
dollar was occurring.
But the situation in this respect changed suddenly in
November. After an increase in foreign liquid dollar holdings
in October of $160 million, these holdings in November showed
a decrease of $470 million. We do not yet have the complete
data on foreign liquid dollar holdings for December. But what we
do have is information indicating beyond question that a number
of foreign monetary authorities which up to now have refrained
even (unlike a country such as Great Britain, for example) from
converting into gold new accretions of dollars, are not only
converting, or are planning to convert, such new accretions of
dollars into gold but have been converting, or are planning to
convert, a considerable portion of their existing dollar
holdings into gold.
I do not wish to seem unnecessarily alarmist about this.
For one thing, in some cases--those of Peru and Argentina, for
example--the increase in the ratio of gold holdings to dollar
holdings does represent a reversion to practices followed by these
countries over extensive periods in the past. For another thing,
even a country's announced intention to convert into gold may be
subject to change, or at least to a rate of implementation which
would not create serious difficulties for us. There is the case
of Japan, for example, which up to now has been content to retain
its dollar holdings instead of converting them into gold. On Decem
ber 20, the Japanese Finance Minister, in reply to an interpellation
in Parliament, stated that the Government of Japan wished to increase
the ratio of gold in Japan's reserves from the present 14 per cent
to 30 per cent "following the example of other countries." This
would mean, in the case of Japan alone, an increase in gold
purchases of $350 million above what would have been expected on
the basis of balance of payments considerations alone. The
Minister added, however, that he was "in no hurry to purchase gold
right now"; and we have had subsequent communications indicating
that there is a strong element among the Japanese which is vigorously

-11-
opposing the indicated change in gold policy and is proposing
that if, for internal political reasons, the Japanese Government
feels it necessary to convert some of its dollar holdings into
gold, it should do so only at a rate not exceeding, say, $10
million a month.
But if one should not be unnecessarily alarmist about
this new development with respect to gold outflow, neither
can one afford to be complacent about it. There can be no
doubt that we are now confronted by a new development. It
is, moreover, the kind of development which could very easily,
and very quickly, feed on itself, in precisely the way in
which a run on a bank can feed on itself. There is no use
looking off in another direction and saying that this could
not possibly happen, when in fact it may be happening under
our very eyes.
It is one of the paradoxes of the current situation that
nothing has happened with respect to our basic balance-of
payments position which would warrant a sudden loss of
confidence in the dollar on the part of foreign monetary
authorities. On the contrary, it can be argued (as it is in
fact argued on page 26 of the current staff report on recent
economic developments prepared for this Committee) that, at the
very time when the gold drain has been accelerating, our deficit
on current and long-term capital transactions combined (leaving
out of account, that is, only short-term capital movements,
which by definition may be regarded as reversible) was running
at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of under $1 billion. We
have to keep on reminding ourselves, to be sure, that this
improvement in our basic position, which owes so much to the
improvement in our exports that brought our trade surplus to
a seasonally adjusted annual rate of around $6 billion in
October-November, has greatly profited from the favorable
cyclical constellation that has been prevailing as between
the United States and its principal trading partners. But
the fact remains that we have been able to effect this
improvement in our basic international position by means of
a basically "liberal" commercial and financial policy, while
maintaining, at the same time, a very considerable degree of
flexibility in our domestic monetary policy; and we have been
able to do this because of the strength of our reserve position
in terms of gold. It would be a very serious matter indeed if
both the liberal foundations of our international commercial
and financial policies for bringing our international accounts
into balance and the degree of flexibility which we have been
able to maintain in our domestic monetary policy were to be
shaken by so rapid a deterioration in our reserve position,

1/10/61 -12-
as the result of gold losses due to a loss of international
confidence in the future of the dollar, that we should have
no alternative to a policy of contraction, on both the inter
national and domestic fronts, which would be the very opposite
of what may be called for by the basic economic facts of both
the international and the domestic situations.
The heart of the current problem, then, is the restoration
and maintenance of that international confidence in the dollar
which, if the evidence that has been accumulating since October
in the field of gold movements is to be taken as a portent,
has begun to be shaken. It is not for me to undertake to
specify all the elements that may have entered into the
pessimistic appraisals with respect to the future of the
dollar that obviously underlie these new developments in the
matter of gold movements. Since, however, there are some voices
(very much in the minority, I must say) which do not exempt
Federal Reserve policy from bearing a part of the responsi
bility, I should like to quote what has been said recently on
this matter by the Managing Director of the International
Monetary Fund, Mr. Per Jacobsson, who is in as close touch
with the sentiment of foreign monetary authorities as any
body, and who has gone very much further than most observers
in attributing our balance-of-payments troubles to the internal
financial policies -- specifically the fiscal policy -- pursued
in 1958:
"I would say, for my part," he declared in a speech
delivered on November 17, "that the easing of credit
conditions recently undertaken by the Federal Reserve
System has been the proper policy . . .. In view of
the sharp increase of exports over imports of merchan
dise, it seems to me that balance of payments considerations
ought not to stand in the way of the proper measures which
should be taken for internal reasons, especially as the
transition from an inflationary psychology to the
expectation of more stable prices will insure greater
attention to costs." And again on December 13 last:
"I think that, in the present state of activity, the
authorities can well permit the continuation of fairly
easy money, and also take steps to stimulate activity,
especially in the depressed areas, provided the measures taken
do not lead to cost increases or hamper the essential adjust
ments of the free market."
The proviso, quite obviously, is of very great importance
indeed; and there is hardly likely to be dissent from it in
principle from any quarter. But what will be watched, in the

1/10/61 -13-
weeks ahead of us, will be not so much formal statements of
principle as the policy actions actually undertaken. The
nature of the gold movements that have been under way since
October is a vivid reminder of what can happen if the policy
actions undertaken by the United States in the immediate
future are such as to undermine, instead of strengthening,
foreign appraisals of the future of the dollar. We can
ignore that reminder only at our peril.
Mr. Treiber presented the following statement of his views on the
business outlook and credit policy:
Economic activity continues its sluggish course. So far,
there are no signs of snowballing downward momentum. Nor is
there evidence of a revival near at hand. A further contraction
of modest proportions seems the most likely near-term course.
The greatest downward factor has been the shift from
inventory accumulation to inventory liquidation. Final demands
have held up fairly well, receding a bit in the case of business
and consumer demands but rising in the case of Government and
net export demands.
To date, the downturn has been milder than in comparable
periods of other postwar recessions. Unless business senti
ment and consumer sentiment take a decided turn for the worse,
there is a good possibility of an upturn by midyear. However,
even if such an upturn does develop, there remains the important
question as to the vigor of the upturn and its ability to make
significant inroads into our idle manpower and productive
capacity.
Changes in the fiscal situation of the Federal Government
are already having some effect on the business outlook. Govern
ment income has been less than that estimated earlier in the
year. It now looks as if there will be a modest cash deficit
for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1961, whereas the official
estimates made twelve months ago indicated a budgetary surplus
of several billion dollars. The latest projections do not take
into account any increase in spending or reduction in taxes that
may possibly be voted by the new Congress.
Bank credit in December showed a strong rise. Much of
it, however, was caused by heavy borrowing by Government
securities dealers and finance companies as well as by
business concerns around the mid-December tax and dividend
dates. There has been some evidence recently of modest bank
purchases of intermediate-term Treasury issues.

-14-
December was marked by a moderate easing of congestion
and strengthening of prices in the long-term capital markets.
So far, bank purchases of longer-term securities have been on
too modest a scale to have had any great effect in reducing
long-term rates, but if such purchases continue they could
develop into an important factor tending to reduce long-term
rates. In general, however, an attitude of caution pervades
the bond markets.
The balance-of-payments situation continues to be highly
sensitive. The amount of United States exports in November
was gratifying. We continue, however, to lose gold. The
loss of gold in November was offset considerably by a
reduction that month in foreign liquid dollar holdings in
the United States, suggesting that the over-all balance of
payments may be coming into better balance.
The recent declines in short-term rates in some financial
centers abroad have been helpful to us. It seems reasonable
to assume that the decline in interest rates abroad has been
a factor in the tapering off of the outflow of short-term
United States funds. Yet the rate gap remains wide enough
so that we cannot relax our concern about any downward
pressure on our own short-term rates.
The recent heightening of tensions in various parts of
the world, and the approaching change-over in our own national
Administration, add further to the sensitivity of the current
situation. Thus, it is highly important that everyone con
cerned with our country's financial policies show a determination
to preserve the soundness of the dollar.
We think that the domestic economic situation calls for a
continuation of the current policy of credit ease, but that it
is of overriding importance to avoid any substantial decline
in short-term interest rates, particularly the rate with
respect to three-month Treasury bills. Such a reduction
would tend to encourage the transfer of short-term funds to
foreign markets and thereby worsen our balance-of-payments
problem.
We think it would be unwise to change the discount rate
and that there is no need to change the directive. We think
it desirable to seek to maintain about the same degree of
ease as has existed in the period since the last meeting
of the Committee. The feel of the market as to the degree
of ease is more important than the level of free reserves.
For example, it would seem more meaningful to aim at a
sufficient supply of reserves so that Federal funds are
usually available somewhat under the discount rate.

1/10/61 -15
The problem of promoting monetary expansion while avoid
ing a downward pressure on short-term rates is a difficult
one. Long-term rates are most important for investment
spending; short-term rates are most important for foreign
balances. We must continually strive for a flexible policy
that will serve best our various interrelated goals. To
this end, it may become desirable for the System to sell
short-term securities and to buy securities of other
maturities that are in supply in the market. I am not
suggesting that we undertake such a program between now
and the next meeting, but I do suggest that all of us
continue to study the ways in which our practices can
best meet the new problems confronting us.
Mr. Erickson reported that on balance economic activity in the
First District continued to reflect the easing tendencies that had been
evident in recent months. The New England production index was up one
point in November to 116, but it was still three points below the previous
year. Except for the General Electric strike, the index might well have
been higher in October than in November. The December survey of New
England purchasing agents was markedly poorer than other recent surveys
of that group. Electric output, however, reached new highs in the weeks
ended December 17 and December 24. In November, nonagricultural employ
ment was slightly lower than in the previous month, and the figure was
only .1 of one per cent higher than in November 1959. Insured unemploy
ment was still running more than 30 per cent in excess of the previous
year. Turning to construction, however, the picture was brighter. Awards
in November were 24 per cent ahead of November 1959, following an increase
of 11 per cent in October. For the first 11 months of the year, awards
were down 4 per cent from the previous year, reflecting a substantial

1/10/61 -16
reduction in awards for public works and utilities. Nonresidential
construction was up 14 per cent and residential construction was down 4
per cent, the latter figure being much less than the national average.
As to retail trade, business for the Christmas season was 3 per cent
higher than in 1959. Although two more shopping days were included this
year, these were offset by a blizzard which lasted more than two days.
For the year, the District finished 2 per cent higher than in 1959, which
was better than the national average. Automobile registrations were still
running well ahead of year-ago figures.
Mr. Erickson went on to say that as of December 28 weekly reporting
banks in the District showed an increase in commercial loans of about the
same proportions as nationally, In the past four weeks District banks
were sellers of Federal funds more often than they were buyers. The
discount window was used very little.
Mr. Erickson said that in view of the national situation and the
international situation he would make no change in the discount rate or
in the directive. He suggested that the instructions to the Desk be
about the same as those given at the previous Committee meeting, which
would envisage an easy situation but not excessive ease. He hoped that
Federal funds would sell under the discount rate and that the short-term
Treasury bill rate would remain somewhere around the present level.
Mr. Irons reported that there had been no particularly significant
developments in the Eleventh District. Conditions were continuing to

1/10/61 -17
follow about the same trend that the District had been experiencing,
both in terms of comparisons with the preceding month and in comparison
with national figures. Most of the movements were within a range of 1
to 2 per cent from the preceding month or from year-ago figures. Christmas
trade was good, better than people thought it would be in the first week
or two in December, but almost any statistical comparisons could be
presented depending on the definition of the length of the Christmas
season. Employment had shaded off a bit in the past month, and unemploy
ment was up a little, with about 5 per cent of the labor force unemployed
in December The petroleum situation had shown some slight improvement.
In general, the economy was moving along about as it had been, with
perhaps a very slight trend downward but nothing startling in any area
of activity.
Turning to banking, Mr. Irons said the situation was clearly
easy. Loans, investments, and deposits rose rather substantially in the
past month, and when the call report figures had been added up he thought
they would be appreciably above the previous year. As was true nationally,
there had been a substantial increase in time deposits. Borrowings from
the Reserve Bank during December and early January were negligible.
District banks had been net sellers of Federal funds, with net sales
larger than during the preceding month.
Mr. Irons said he supposed, in view of economic conditions, that
it would be appropriate to continue to follow a policy of ease and to be

1/10/61 -18
sure that reserves were adequate to enable the banking system to meet any
reasonable requirements imposed upon it. This situation appeared to
have prevailed during the past 3 or 4 weeks, and he would suggest
continuing the present policy, although perhaps a little less aggressively.
He would think twice before deviating on the side of ease, and it would
be his preference to maintain free reserves in the area of $500-$600
million rather than $600-$700 million. He shared the apprehensions
expressed by Messrs. Marget and Treiber regarding the international
situation. The time might be getting nearer when more consideration
would have to be given to that problem and there would have to be a shift
in the direction of policy to narrow the rate differential, but he did not
think that such a point was yet at hand. He would like to see the bill
rate more in a range from 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 per cent, preferably the upper
part of that range. The Federal funds rate should be below the discount
rate, but not much below.
In summary, Mr. Irons said, he would try to avoid aggressively
pushing reserves into the market. The domestic situation called for a
policy of ease, but not a policy of very aggressive ease, especially when
tied to an international problem which continued to discourage him more
than the domestic situation. He would not favor a reduction of the dis
count rate. In fact, he could almost find arguments for an increase,
although he was not at the point of making such a proposal at the moment.
He saw no reason for a change in the directive.

1/10/61 -19
Mr. Mangels reported that the over-all business picture in the
Twelfth District had not changed much in recent weeks. A substantial
pickup in department store sales during the last two weeks in December
was sufficient to offset somewhat depressed conditions in the first part
of the month, with the result that sales figures for the five-week period
ending December 31 were about 3 per cent better than the previous year.
Automobile sales in California for the first week in December showed a
25 per cent increase over the daily average in November, and the November
figures were about 11 per cent higher than in the same month of the previous
year. Steel production, at a little over 50 per cent of capacity, was
better than the national average. In November, total construction was
about 7 per cent above the figure for the previous year, most of the
increase being accounted for by public works and utility contracts. On
the darker side, lumber production reached a new low in November, and
orders in that month were lower than for any other month of 1960 except
January. Unemployment in the Pacific Coast States in November was at the
rate of 6.6 per cent; this figure reflected a slight improvement from 6.8
per cent in October, but it was the highest November rate for the past
11 years. On the other hand, civilian employment in Pacific Coast States
was at an all-time high level in November.
Mr. Mangels said that demand deposits of District banks had increased
somewhat and that time deposits were up considerably, with a rather substantial
increase in savings deposits, in December. Total bank credit showed the

1/10/61 -20
largest increase of the current year in December, with loans up more than
$200 million and Government securities holdings up more than $250 million.
In the past week or so, sales of Federal funds by District banks were about
double the amount of purchases. The December interest rate survey of short
term business loans showed an average rate of 5.31 per cent, compared to
5.4 per cent in September and 5.57 per cent in December 1959. About one
third of the dollar amount of the loans covered by the survey were made
at the prime rate of 4-1/2 per cent, as against one-fourth in September,
but the rate reductions were confined largely to loans in excess of
$100,000. There had been practically no borrowing at the discount
window.
Mr. Mangels recalled that it was mentioned at the December Com
mittee meeting, and again today by Mr. Thomas, that loan-deposit ratios
of banks continued to be high. He noted that the average for New York
City banks in December was 68.1 per cent, against 68.6 per cent in
November, while outside of New York City the average was 59.5 per cent
compared with 61.2 per cent in November. Over the past few months the
decline of ratios had been small, and banks therefore probably were not
looking aggressively for increases in their loan portfolios. Under these
circumstances, and in order to provide a slightly greater degree of ease,
it would be his thought that the Desk should absorb less than the amount of
reserves that would become available in the forthcoming period. He would
try to maintain an easy tone in the market and to keep net free reserves
in the range of $600-$700 million. The present directive seemed

1/10/61 -21
satisfactory, particularly in its reference to the international situation,
and there seemed to him to be no need to change the discount rate.
Mr. Allen said that in the Seventh District a slow, gradual decline
in economic activity seemed to have continued. Official employment data
available through November showed reduction in virtually all lines of
manufacturing, and fragmentary data available from other sources indi
cated that the trend had continued. Further reduction of automobile
production schedules meant that unemployment would increase in January,
particularly in Michigan.
Automobile production schedules for January called for 489,000
units, Mr. Allen reported, although private estimates were 450,000 or
less. That would compare with 522,000 produced in December. Car
production of 6,700,000 in the year 1960 represented the second best
year in history, but saleswise the total of 6,143,000 cars was the
third best year. Opinions obtained by the Detroit Branch suggested
that 1961 sales might fall to 5,600,000. Although others in Detroit
were more optimistic, it seemed rather certain, in the light of sub
stantial inventories, that 1961 production would be well below that of
1960, which did not brighten the employment outlook.
Department store sales in the Seventh District showed a gain of
3 per cent over 1959 in the four weeks ended December 31. In the last
week of the year the new index of steel production was 75 in Chicago and
68 in Detroit, compared with 59 for the nation. Three mail order houses

1/10/61 -22
had announced that their spring and summer catalogs contained price cuts,
one stating that its prices averaged 2.4 per cent below last year and
were the lowest since 1955. Farm income in the District in 1960 was
substantially higher than in 1959, and it appeared that 1961 income
would be close to that of 1960.
Mr. Allen went on to say that the use of bank credit by business
remained below normal. At District weekly reporting banks, loans to
commercial and industrial borrowers in December were down $60 million,
the first time since 1957 that these banks had reported a reduction in
business loans in the last month of the year. Deposits by reporting
banks, both demand and time, rose in December; this had been the case
for smaller banks throughout the last half of the year. Data on bank
reserves and borrowing indicated that reserve availability was still
quite large.
Mr. Allen commented that the picture in the Seventh District,
which he had attempted to summarize, was a mixed one. Certainly there
were favorable as well as unfavorable factors. Reserve availability, the
particular concern of the System, seemed adequate at this time to support
a substantial increase in bank credit.
For the time being, Mr. Allen said, he failed to see that a
change in monetary policy was called for or would contribute to an
improvement in economic activity. Therefore, he would not advocate
changes in the discount rate, the directive, or the degree of ease.

1/10/61 -23
Mr. Leedy said that because of the importance of the winter wheat
crop in the Tenth District the condition of the growing wheat exerts a
psychological effect over a widespread area. The December report showed
that the condition of the wheat was from good to excellent, although 1961
production was estimated at about 12 per cent less than the very large
crop harvested in 1960. Snow and cold weather had slowed the use of
wheat pasture in parts of the District, but generally there was adequate
grazing for cattle and sheep. Because of abundant feed supplies, a
considerable number of livestock had been withheld from the market.
Also, some sales of livestock, as well as last year's crops, had been
deferred to the current year for tax purposes, and as a result cash
receipts from farm marketings in District States during the fall months
were below the previous year. Seasonally adjusted nonfarm employment
was unchanged from October to November, the latest month for which figures
were available. Following the trend that existed throughout most of 1960,
there was a slight decline in manufacturing employment, but this was offset
by a rise in nonmanufacturing employment. The cutbacks in defense contracts
to the aviation industry were a factor contributing to the lower level of
manufacturing employment. Apparently there would be some further decline
in manufacturing employment in the early part of this year due to layoffs
that had been announced by automobile company assembly plants. The volume
of construction was lower during the first 11 months of 1960; the figures
for December were not yet available. While increases in construction

1/10/61 -24
contracts started after July, these were mainly due to nonresidential con
tracts and to the continued high level in the public works segment. In
December there was a significant increase in department store sales which
continued through the end of the year, with the result that the year wound
up on the plus side, although only by about 1 per cent.
Turning to the banking developments in the District, Mr. Leedy
said that loan demands failed to suggest any great strength in the business
segment during December. However, reporting member banks did increase
substantially their portfolios of Government securities in the maturity
range of less than five years. At the end of the year total deposits
of reporting member banks were about $170 million higher than at the
end of 1959, with more than half of the increase -- around $94 million -
in time deposits.
As to policy, Mr. Leedy said it seemed to him that in the period
until the next meeting the Committee should undertake to see that further
easing in reserve positions did not occur. Although the statistics did
not seem to lend much support to the optimistic psychology which appeared
to have developed quite recently, nevertheless that was a factor that
could not be ignored. As long as the Federal funds rate was moderately
below the discount rate, and as long as the bill rate fluctuated in a
range as high as 2-1/2 per cent, he would not be too much concerned.
Apparently there was going to be a chore of absorbing reserves, and he
would prefer to make sure that the System absorbed enough rather than

1/10/61 -25
to operate in the other direction. He would not make any further change
so far as System action was concerned.
Mr. Leach reported that in the closing weeks of 1960 business
activity in the Fifth District was marked by small but general and wide
spread declines, with only a few elements of strength and stability. Both
employment and man-hours in manufacturing, seasonally adjusted, were down
in November and reached their lowest points of the year. Demand for textile
products was still slow and the mills remained on shortened schedules.
Inventories continued to accumulate and backlogs had dwindled, while
prices had eased further and were down substantially from a year ago.
New orders for lumber had continued to lag behind production and ship
ments, and extended holidays were scheduled to keep output closer to
demand. Bituminous coal production during the first half of December
was 25 per cent below the comparable period a year earlier even though
foreign shipments were higher. The few elements of strength and stability
included the following: Employment in construction had been steady for
the past six months at a level somewhat above that of a year earlier.
Contract awards for residential construction in November indicated that
activity in that area might be turning up after a long decline. Employ
ment in the fields of finance, services, and Government had been steady
or rising slightly. Cash receipts from farming in the District for the
year 1960 were up 7 per cent from 1959 due to higher yields on smaller
acreage and better prices, with most of the gain occurring in tobacco,
the marketing season for which ended in December.

1/10/61 -26
The position of District member banks had eased further, Mr. Leach
said. Since the Committee meeting in December, business loans of weekly
reporting banks had expanded less than seasonally, and total investments
had continued their contraseasonal rise. The increase in investments
since the end of August had now reached nearly 11 per cent, well above
the rise during any recent year, with most of the increase occurring in
Government securities maturing in less than one year. Borrowings at the
discount window had averaged only $2.5 million the past four weeks, less
than for any four-week period since 1952. District banks remained large
net sellers of Federal funds.
With respect to policy, Mr. Leach said he continued to believe
that easing actions taken by the System since the decline in business
activity began last spring had been timely and sufficient. Monetary
policy seemed to him to have already made its full contribution, barring
a greater deterioration in economic conditions than now appeared likely.
In view of the sizable expansion in time deposits, he was not as much
concerned as some appeared to be about the failure of the money supply
to expand more rapidly. Banks should not be expected to make loans in
the absence of legitimate loan demand, and apparently under existing
conditions substantial amounts of demand deposits were being transferred
into time deposits because of unwillingness of the holders to spend.
During the past year the seasonally adjusted money supply decreased 0.9
per cent while time deposits were rising 8.2 per cent. Of course, there

1/10/61 -27
are sound reasons for excluding time deposits from the definition of the
money supply, but one should not lose sight of the fact that the money
supply plus time deposits increased by 2 per cent while the money supply
itself was decreasing 0.9 per cent.
For the forthcoming period, Mr. Leach indicated that he would
favor maintaining substantially the same degree of ease as in recent weeks,
taking care to mop up the reserves that appeared because of seasonal
reasons so as to avoid greater ease and a decline in short-term rates.
He saw nothing to be gained by lower short-term rates, and something could
be lost. He would be opposed to any lowering of the discount rate at
this time, and he saw no reason to change the directive.
Mr. Mills commented that over the period of each calendar year
the deliberations of the Open Market Committee shift their focus from one
economic and financial area to another, but inevitably decision-making
is tied to the interpretation of statistics that represent past events.
On occasions, therefore, decision-making will lag behind the events that
are rushing to a conclusion. Mr. Marget's cogent discussion of the
balance-of-payments problem was based on events that had occurred
recently and were occurring currently, and they suggested that the focus
of the Committee's thinking and policy-making should shift drastically
from the domestic scene to the international scene. The interpretation
that he (Mr. Mills) would place on policy thinking in recent times was
that it represented in effect an attempt to poultice over cracks in the
domestic economy through the application of a monetary policy of ease at

-28-
a time when it was quite probable that the cyclical trend of events could
not be responsive to monetary policy. An evidence of that fact was the
situation which found the rate for Federal funds running consistently
below the discount rate, which would signify to him that funds were
piling up in the money market centers and were not being put to employ
ment by the recipient banks for reasons that had been repeatedly expressed,
most recently by Mr. Irons. Looking strictly at the domestic scene, there
seemed to be little reason to follow a policy of continued monetary ease
or to attempt to maintain a level of net free reserves that was futilely
ignoring the responsibility on the part of the banks to expand the
resources placed at their disposal. In his view, it would be much more
in order to permit the reserve positions of the banks to tighten to a
degree that would find the short-term interest rate moving up from its
present artificially low level to a more realistic level which would be
conducive to checking the outflow of funds and possibly reversing it.
Mr. Mills commented that his own approach was a more heterodox
one than that of Mr. Irons. The latter's approach dealt with the situation
more gingerly, whereas in Mr. Mills' view the economic affairs of the
country had reached a point where it became necessary to use monetary
policy as a surgical scalpel to correct dramatically a very difficult
international financial situation. He would not go into the means by
which he would apply that scalpel because a sensitive area was involved
that deeply concerned the Treasury, bat he wished to call to the Committee's

1/10/61 -29
attention that in the press yesterday and this morning there were notices
that the President-elect was calling today on the Secretary of the
Treasury. He also called attention to the fact that the New York
Chamber of Commerce, a responsible body, had issued a statement of its
concern about the international financial climate. The point he was
leading up to was that it was a serious responsibility of the Federal
Reserve Banks and of the members of the Board of Governors to take into
account first the international situation and to consider what definite steps
should be taken that would be most conducive to a more harmonious inter
national financial picture.
Mr. Robertson said that he too was concerned about the remarks
that had been made this morning concerning the international situation,
especially to the extent that they touched upon diminution of confidence
in the stability of the dollar. It seemed to him that the major contri
bution the Open Market Comittee could make today toward increasing the
confidence of the world in the stability of the dollar would be to follow
a policy that would do whatever was possible to reverse the trend of the
economy in this country. The failure of bank lending rates to go down
was an indication that the System had not moved fast enough or far enough,
and the same thing was true with respect to long-term rates. Consequently,
he would favor moving toward a greater degree of ease than yet achieved.
He would be much more reluctant to absorb reserves that would come into
the market over the next few weeks than others around the table had

1/10/61 -30
indicated; he would favor permitting a greater abundance of reserve availa
bility in the hope that this would have an effect in reversing the economic
trend. This, he felt, was the real way in which System policy could be
effective. If the System adhered to what he regarded as the short-sighted
view of over-emphasizing the short-term Treasury bill rate because of the
international situation and the outflow of funds, that outflow might in
fact be prolonged. In his opinion, it would be much better to let the
bill rate go lower and turn the economic picture around. He also would
indicate to the world the position of the Board of Governors and of the
Federal Reserve System by reducing the discount rate.
Continuing, Mr. Robertson said that since this was the beginning
of a new year he wished to express the hope, first, that in 1961 the Desk
would adhere to the rulings of the Committee, until they were changed,
regarding the use of repurchase agreements at lower than the discount rate
by using such agreements sparingly rather than at every opportunity.
Second, he hoped the Desk would refrain from offsetting every temporary
fluctuation in float merely to maintain a statistical free reserve figure.
The result of attempting to offset those fluctuations was not to change
the economic picture or the effective reserve structure of the country
but merely to subsidize the dealers who profit from the handling of
purchase and sale transactions.
Mr. Robertson said he saw no reason to change the policy directive
which, in its present wording, could be implemented in the manner he had
suggested. In fact, the directive appeared to call for such a policy.

1/10/61 -31
Mr. Shepardson said it seemed to him the economy of the country
was facing a situation that it had been due to face for a considerable
period of time. It was beginning to be realized that there is a dif
ference between a seller's market, such as had existed for about twenty
years, and a buyer's market which is the constructive type of marked for
a healthy sustained growth of the economy. While some of the adjustments
were painful, nevertheless wholesome adjustments were taking place.
With reference to the considerable amount of current discussion
regarding depressed areas and the relief needed for them, Mr. Shepardson
related a report that had come to his attention regarding the situation
in the Wheeling, West Virginia, area where a group of labor people had
decided that jobs at reasonable wages were better than no jobs at exorbi
tant wages and had started to try to rebuild industrial activity through
positive action to assure stability of the labor force. While this was
only a single incident, it seemed to him that the publicity it was
receiving was wholesome. He did not believe that flooding the market
with money at this time to try to stimulate loans which borrowers and
lenders obviously did not consider desirable would do any good. Instead,
it seemed to him that a posture of not constituting a restraining influence
represented as much as the System could do to assist the domestic economy.
In addition, the international situation was of increasing importance.
For these reasons he aligned himself with those who would not favor
further ease. As a matter of fact, he would be inclined to go along with
the view that somewhat less ease than now prevailed might be appropriate.

1/10/61 -32
It seemed to him that this was not a time to change the discount rate and
that there was no need to change the directive.
Mr. King said he had little faith in the ability of monetary
policy to reverse the present economic trend. He believed that business
was awaiting the actions of the new Administration and the new Congress,
and this view had been strengthened in recent conversations with knowledgeable
members of the business community. Businessmen were watching the situation
carefully and the domestic economic trend would be based largely on the
decisions that were made. Internationally, people also would be watching
the new Congress and the new Administration closely. Mr. King went on to
say that he had frequently scoffed at pessimists and had watched them turn
out to be wrong. However, he believed that a point had been reached where
it would be a dangerous course to be optimistic and to be wrong. In his
own view, and on the basis of comments by people with whom he had talked,
this year would probably be a year of drifting--some might call it
sliding--during which some contradictory indicators would be seen.
Activity might start up for a while and then slow down in some sector of
the economy, while activity in another sector might go down and then
level off. Frankly, he was concerned. He did not feel that there
could be any decisive movement upward, for the factors that would make
such a movement possible did not appear to be present. The operating
budgets of business concerns were being cut, in some instances with which
he was familiar, and profit margins were expected to be lower than in 1960.
It appeared to him that an era had been entered in which it would be

1/10/61 -33
necessary to learn to live without inflation. A restraint was imposed
automatically by international conditions, and it probably would have
arisen at about this point regardless of monetary policy. In his opinion
this was a time when the System ought to be willing to explore all avenues
as objectively as possible. It was a time to overcome lethargy and to
explore, at least, any new avenues without formulating conclusions in
advance.
Mr. King expressed the view that the money market should continue
to have a feel of relative ease. He wished to align himself with the
views of Messrs. Irons, Mills, and Shepardson and of others who had spoken
in the same vein. One of the things that would be needed in the year
ahead was statesmanship on the part of commercial bankers, and he hoped
that this quality would be found. He hoped that it would be possible to
have some improvement in longer-term rates, but that seemed to lie within
the province of the commercial banks. If there should be some improve
ment, the System might undertake a reinforcing effect to assure, to the
extent possible, that the bill rate did not recede from its present level
and, as time went on, that the rate worked into somewhat higher ground.
Although he did not believe it was feasible to ask the Desk to aim at any
particular level, he hoped that over the forthcoming period the trend
could be upward. If there was to be any change in the discount rate, he
was inclined to feel that it should be upward. An increase might not do

1/10/61 -34
any great harm, but it would tend to deter any improvement that might be
hoped for in the longer-term rates of the commercial banks. Therefore,
he would leave the discount rate unchanged. He supposed that free reserves
probably would fluctuate fairly widely, but he would leave operations to
be guided principally by the feel of the market, keeping a tone of relative
ease. In his opinion the availability of more money was not going to solve
the present dilemma.
Basically, Mr. King said, the pendulum had swung over the years
from a position of too much power on the one hand to a position of too
much power on the other hand. Specifically, he had in mind increases
in wages which were artificial because they did not recognize any real
increase in output. For the Government at this time to indicate to
businessmen and particularly to world bankers that it still thought it
could legislate prices would be an unfortunate situation. He realized
that he had just talked about influencing the bill rate to move in a
certain direction. In fact, however, the System does operate in the bill
market; the purposes of the Federal Reserve call for operating in that
field. Therefore, he did not feel that any contradiction was necessarily
involved.
Mr. Fulton said that most Fourth District business barometers had
sagged to their lowest points of 1960 at the end of the year. The sluggish
ness of automobile sales possibly was due to bad weather toward the end of
the year; for the year as a whole, sales were 8 per cent above 1959.

1/10/61 -35
Department store sales barely measured up to the 1959 total for Christmas
season, although sales for the year were about 2 per cent ahead of the
previous year. Construction had held up fairly well throughout the
year, with the strength largely in the commercial sector. For heavy
industries, the picture was far from bright. Steel orders thus far in
January were about 5 per cent above December, but that month was marked by
the closing of the mills over a long holiday, with the result that December
was an extremely low period. Although some orders were coming in to fill
low inventories, by and large the situation was very spotty. The auto
mobile companies were cutting back on orders now on their books and
were deferring deliveries. Furthermore, foreign steel was now beginning
to come in in greater quantity and at lower prices. If foreign economies
turned down and steel production was not fully used, United States producers
expected that there would be cut-rate competition in greater volume. Wages
also were a problem. There had been one wage increase in December,
according to contract, and another was due next October. This would
increase costs to the extent that a price rise seemed inevitable, which
in turn would further weaken the competitive position of the industry.
Mr. Pulton then commented briefly on a talk given in Cleveland
last night by Mr. Per Jacobsson, Managing Director of the International
Monetary Fund, who emphasized the relationship between costs of American
and European producers. Mr. Jacobsson said in effect that if the cost of

1/10/61 -36
United States goods was watched closely, the competitive situation would
to a great degree take care of itself. United States producers must be
realistic about their costs, and the elements going into them would have
to be controlled carefully.
In further comments on the steel situation, Mr. Fulton said that
the outlook for this year was not too good. It was expected that production
would be about the same as in 1960, that is, approximately 100 million
tons, with some hope that by the fourth quarter production might get up
to an annual rate of about 120 million tons. Producers were faced with
the fact that modern mills had now been erected throughout the world
with United States funds. These mills would be operating with low-cost
labor, but they would be turning out good steel. Moreover, less steel
was being used per unit in the manufacture of automobiles and appliances.
With reference to the new index of steel production, Mr. Fulton
noted that the index used 1957-59 as a base period. There was a recession
in 1958 and a long strike in 1959, so the base figure was only about 97
million tons a year, or about 1.86 million tons a week, compared with
actual capacity of about 150 million tons per year at present. There
fore, although a national average of 73.1 for the latest week would at
first seem to reflect a fairly good situation, in fact production was
very low.
As to the foundries, which are regarded as a good indicator of
the future, Mr. Fulton said he had been told that the trend of production

1/10/61 -37
could be called sideways, but only because it could not get much lower.
Again, foreign competition was part of the picture. Some materials could
be laid down in Chicago via the St. Lawrence Seaway for a lower price
than the foundries in Chicago could make them.
The unemployment situation in the Fourth District was getting
worse, Mr. Fulton said. Nine major labor market areas were now classified
as having a substantial labor surplus as against six in July. The latest
available report did not include Cleveland, which by now was undoubtedly
in that category. In a recent survey of employers, 40 per cent of the
respondents expressed the opinion that there would be no change in
employment in the first quarter, 30 per cent expected a decline, and
only 14 per cent expected improvement. The layoffs in the auto industry
had affected the District directly because of the many parts made in Ohio
and Pennsylvania.
Summarizing, Mr. Fulton said that the Fourth District outlook was
not good. Nevertheless, he wished to associate himself with the view of
Messrs. Mills and Shepardson that an increase in ease would do nothing
for the economy except to make money rates sloppy, a situation that in
his opinion would not be desirable at this time. It would not encourage
banks to lend; their high loan totals were the factor that established
their policy. Neither would increased ease encourage people to buy.
Accordingly, he felt that this was a time to hold steady, with about the
same degree of ease, or a slightly firmer tone, in order to protect a
bill rate of approximately 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 per cent. He would not recommend
any change in the discount rate or in the directive.

1/10/61 -38
Mr. Bopp said there was nothing in the Third District to give
cause for much hope. The unemployment situation was particularly
disturbing; since last spring new and continued claims for unemployment
compensation had risen steadily, and they exceeded the high level reached
in 1958. However, spending, although showing sluggishness, had held up
fairly well. A late spurt brought department store sales for the Christmas
season to a level 2 per cent above 1959; for the year as a whole, sales
were about even with 1959. District banks had been experiencing increases
in loans and investments and in deposits recently, and their reserve positions
were reasonably comfortable.
Mr. Bopp indicated that he would not favor a change in the directive
or in the discount rate. As to open market operations, he would recommend
continuing along essentially the same lines. He was hopeful that the
Federal funds rate would be consistently below the discount rate and
that the bill rate would stay at about the level presently prevailing.
With respect to the longer run, Mr. Bopp commented that the ease
that had been achieved did not seem to have permeated the markets as much
as one would like, particularly the longer-term market, and at times the
money centers outside of New York seemed to experience considerable tight
ness. In 1954 and 1958 the System reacted to similar developments by
flooding the market with funds, hoping that if sufficient funds were injected
they would slop over to the long-term market. There had been some second
thoughts on that policy. However, the present situation did raise the

1/10/61 -39
question whether it might not be possible to be somewhat selective in
putting funds into the market. Possibly, for example, reserves might be
provided at an appropriate time by a reduction of reserve requirements for
central reserve and reserve city banks rather than entirely by the purchase
of bills. Diverse developments in the long-term market and in some areas
of the country during a period when generally easy conditions prevailed led
one to wonder whether something could not be done in the areas where one
would like to see something happen.
Mr. Bryan said that in the Sixth District nothing dramatic was
happening in the economic field. The figures still showed a slow, steady
deterioration. None of them seemed to be worsening significantly, but most
of them were deteriorating a little more than the comparable national figures.
In the nation, as in the District, a slow deterioration seemed to be in
process. It could be argued on a variety of hypotheses that the economy
was nearing a turn-around, but this remained hypothetical and at present
one must face the fact of deterioration. One could also argue on a
variety of other hypotheses that the economy was going to slide faster.
Continuing, Mr. Bryan said he had been reviewing System policy
over the past year and, in the light of that review, trying to make up
his mind what the System ought to do. It seemed that there had been
several significant developments in the past year. The System had largely
gotten the commercial banks out of debt, there was now a practical minimum
of borrowing, and the banks had built up their excess reserve position.

1/10/61 -40
There had been a rather dramatic shift in free reserves from the beginning
of the year to the present time, and since mid-year total reserves had
gone up rather dramatically. In his opinion, that was all to the good and
the System had not gone too far. On the other hand, while he had made a
number of criticisms in the early part of the year, he could not find any
essential criticism in what had been done over the year as a whole, particu
larly in the second half.
Mr. Bryan said he had again taken a look at the longer-run situation
in respect to reserves. Unadjusted reserves were just a little above the
long-run 3 per cent trend line, and on a seasonally adjusted basis reserves
were not significantly below the line. Therefore, he found himself reasonably
satisfied with the System's posture at the present time and he had the feeling
that nothing dramatic needed to be done. The policy he would advocate was
one of "staying where we are" and very slowly and very modestly adding a
little to the reserve supply to permit the banks to provide for the normal
and natural growth factor that is necessary in the economy. In this
connection, Mr. Bryan referred to a staff memorandum, distributed under
date of January 9, 1961, presenting tables designed to provide the Committee
a set of data that might serve as a test of past performance and a guide
to operations in the immediate future. For the next three weeks, he said,
he would be delighted if the figures could be attained that had been
projected, although he would add to those reserves something very modest,
perhaps $50 million, as a growth factor.

1/10/61 -41
Turning to the international situation and the balance of payments,
Mr. Bryan said he shared the feelings of alarm that had been expressed about
the situation. However, he was afraid that one could reach some erroneous
conclusions as to how the System ought to respond. As he recalled, the
last time the System reacted in its policy decisions primarily because of
foreign developments was when England went off the gold standard in 1931.
At that time, with unemployment constantly increasing and with every element
in the domestic economy calling for ease, the System responded by tightening
in order to protect the gold supply. He was correct, he believed, in saying
that every student of that action had concluded that it was a catastrophic
blunder. Before beginning to respond to the international situation by
means of monetary policy, he hoped the System would keep clearly in mind
that it was errors in other fields, not in monetary policy, that had created
the balance-of-payments difficulties. While abroad recently he had had
discussions with bankers of a high degree of sophistication who must be
aware daily of money flows, money rates, and exchange rates. Never once
had one of them mentioned American monetary policy as a source of weakness
of the dollar, while matters such as foreign aid and the budgetary program
were mentioned many times. One could easily be led into great difficulty,
Mr. Bryan said, if he thought that by the use of monetary policy the System
could correct a situation that it had not created and that it could not
fundamentally and basically correct.
Mr. Johns said he did not claim to have an answer to the manifestly
hard dilemma with which the System was now confronted. On the one hand

1/10/61 -42
there was the unsatisfactory state of the domestic economy, while on the
other hand there was a disquieting balance-of-payments situation and outlook,
with perhaps new evidence of deterioration in the confidence of the world
in the dollar. To help his own thinking, Mr. Johns said, he had been trying
to consider what it might be appropriate to do, in light of the domestic
situation, if there were no balance-of-payments problem or if one were not
aware of a problem, as may have been the case in the not too distant past.
On that basis it seemed to him one might well come to the conclusion that
the unsatisfactory state of the economy, as to which there seemed to be
almost uniform agreement, reflected a situation in which the banks and the
public at large still had unsatisfied liquidity desires. While the banks
had done a good deal to repair their feelings of illiquidity, it was not
possible to say as yet that they had altogether corrected that feeling.
True, the banks had paid off a good deal of debt to the Federal Reserve,
and they had accumulated more excess reserves than they had held for some
time. Even so, however, they seemed unwilling to commit their reserves,
or any significant part of them, to loans where the opportunity was afforded;
or failing that, as would be rather typical at this stage of the cycle, to
commit their reserves to significant amounts of investment. As to the
liquidity desires of the public, which he thought were present and indicated,
it was not quite clear how those desires were to be satisfied unless there
was some significant expansion of bank credit. Unless those desires were
satisfied, it seemed to him that the public would be likely to seek to

1/10/61 -3
repair its feeling of illiquidity by further curtailing expenditures, and
that meant more recession. On this premise--and he was still abstracting
the other problem--it seemed to him that the monetary authorities should
seek to supply reserves which would repair the banks' feeling of illiquidity
and dispose them to bring about some expansion of bank credit, thereby to
satisfy the liquidity desires of the public and to make the public more
favorably disposed to consumption and investment. Having said that, he
came back to the realities of the situation, for there was a very real
balance-of-payments problem. As to what extent that problem circumscribed
or even immobilized monetary policy, he did not have the answer. In a way
it seemed to him that in the long run it would not be desirable, considering
the balance-of-payments problem, to prolong the recession. However, he
found himself favorably disposed to the suggestion that at this juncture
the country should rely primarily on fiscal policy. Even though he had
some reservations about the efficacy of an easy fiscal policy and a tight
monetary policy, he would like to see fiscal policy used as quickly as
possible. Pending the time, however, when fiscal policy could begin to
take effect, it occurred to him that monetary policy ought to be moving
cautiously and judiciously in the direction of repairing the feeling of
illiquidity which he thought still pervaded the banking system and the public.
If fiscal policy and monetary policy were both delayed until there had
been a substantial deterioration in the economy, and particularly in
unemployment and employment, the result might be more deterioration and

1/10/61 -44
perhaps ill-advised fiscal maneuvers that would come back later to haunt
everyone. Therefore, he could not bring himself to believe that the time
was here for monetary policy to become restrictive; he would prefer to
indicate that the System would not permit the reserve position of the
banking system to deteriorate. In this connection, he had thought in
terms of some modest increment of reserves, in the hope that it would be
possible without too much delay to bring about an expansion of bank credit
and, on the part of the public, a more favorable disposition toward con
sumption and investment. While he hesitated to suggest a figure, the $50
million increment suggested by Mr. Bryan for the next three-week period
seemed reasonable.
Mr. Szymczak expressed the view, in the light of everything that
had been discussed at this meeting, that monetary policy had been about
right. However, he thought it would be desirable to explore further how
fiscal policy, debt management, and monetary policy could best fit together
in a period when there was a balance-of-payments problem. The possibility
of operating in other areas of the Government securities market had been
mentioned, and he would like to see that explored by the staff so the
Committee might have a look at it. After all, the Committee should take
a new look each time it met and had a new situation facing it.
After referring the recent developments that had been mentioned by
Mr. Marget with regard to conversion of dollar balances into gold,

1/10/61 -45
Mr. Szymczak said that regardless of whether monetary policy alone could
do anything to relieve the problems related to the balance of payments,
debt management, fiscal policy, and monetary policy, working together,
should be able to do something to contribute to confidence in the dollar.
His suggestion, therefore, would be exploration by the staff and the
preparation of a paper for the Committee.
Mr. Balderston said that to him the policy followed by the Open
Market Committee during the past year seemed in retrospect to have been a
sound one. For at least ten months the System had been pressing reserves
gradually on the commercial banks, and he had no regrets about what had
been done to date. At the December meeting he had urged the Committee to
continue to press reserves on the banks, with the thought that the banks
would either lend or invest. At present it seemed to him one might well
feel that the System had given the economy a full shot in the arm for the
time being, that it had supplied the reserves that could be used con
structively for a revival of the economy.
As to the gold outflow, Mr. Balderston commented that there seemed
to have been a fundamental change in the situation. For many months the
gold outflow was only a part of the total deficit, but now it appeared from
the available figures that the gold outflow was greater than the deficit.
If dollar holdings were declining at a time when the gold outflow was still
large, that meant that the outflow currently was due in part to conversion
of dollar balances into gold, not only by private individuals but by

1/l0/61 -46
foreign central banks. In view of that critical situation it seemed to
him that the gold outflow needed to be given just as much emphasis in one's
thinking as the domestic problem. He shared, of course, the view that
the System must not attribute more to monetary policy than it merited.
He remembered, for example, the British experience in 1955 when monetary
policy was saddled with more of a load than it could carry in the absence
of fiscal support. Therefore, he agreed that monetary policy alone could
not turn the tide. It would take the support of the Treasury and especially
of the Congress. However, he felt the time had come to stop pressing
reserves aggressively upon the banks. In concrete terms, he would like to
see the seasonal return flow of reserves mopped up completely, or almost
completely, the yardstick being the Federal funds rate. He would like to
see that rate at the discount rate, or very little below the discount
rate, with the bill rate as high as it had been and if possible somewhat
higher. The System had experienced good fortune in the large accumulation
of bills by the Government securities dealers. Once they worked out of
that situation, the bill rate would be under pressure, as he had thought
it would be before this time.
In summary, Mr. Balderston said, he believed that the Committee
should not only readjust its policy today but that it should watch
developments during the weeks ahead with extreme care. He suggested
the possibility of meeting again two weeks from today in order to keep
on top of the problem.

Chairman Martin commented that he had been reviewing the minutes
of the Open Market Committee, which he felt was a desirable procedure
for all members to follow periodically. Sometimes statements attributed
to him did not have quite the emphasis that he had intended, but this
illustrated the difficulty of conveying all of the inflections of the
comments that are made during a discussion involving a group of nineteen
men. Thus, the operation of an account by a large group has some definite
limitations. However, it also has some merit. Although sometimes too
slowly, perhaps, at least for his own satisfaction, the discussions of
the Committee do evolve a policy. On balance, he was inclined to think
that there were advantages, as well as disadvantages, in the current
procedure when working in so complex an area.
Continuing, the Chairman said it was his conviction at the moment
that the policy of the Federal Reserve ought to be one of remaining steady
in the boat. With a new Administration coming into office shortly, he
thought that the Federal Reserve should not be moving drastically in either
direction. In fact, if there was ever a time to be steady in the boat, it
would seem to be right now. Having said that, he realized that the System
must face up to the problems at hand. As had been mentioned a number of
times, monetary policy cannot do everything. Mr. Bryan had pointed out
well the 1931 experience, though he (Chairman Martin) wished to point out
one significant difference between that situation and the present, namely,
that in 1931 there was no question with respect to the credit of the United

1/10/61 48
States. As he had indicated at previous meetings, he felt that the principal
shadow over the domestic economy was the problem of the balance of payments.
True, that problem arose from a variety of sources, including foreign aid
and military support programs and primarily, as Mr. Shepardson had mentioned,
the shift from a seller's to a buyer's market which probably had finally
come to pass.
Chairman Martin went on to say that, as indicated by the discussion
this morning, there was occurring perhaps an evolutionary reappraisal
of System policy. It is a good thing, he suggested, to have dissenting
views before the Committee rather than to have all of the members think
ing in the same pattern. In time, perhaps, all of those views would
coalesce into a policy which would be a better policy than if everyone
just followed along.
The Chairman said he did not think the time had come to increase
the discount rate. Similarly, he thought it would be irresponsible to
lower the discount rate at this juncture. The total problem, which was
more serious than generally appreciated, involved more than an outflow
of gold. Rather, it reflected uncertainties in the whole world situation.
For example, there was the situation in the Congo and the Cuban problem,
along with the fact that the pound sterling was not quite as strong as
it might be. Accordingly, in terms of the gold supply of the world the
tendency of people in many places was to think that the situation might be
heading toward a world economic crisis of some sort.

1/10/61 -49
Personally, he did not believe that that was going to happen. Never
theless, it was incumbent upon the System to recognize that it was
possible for people to prefer gold to any currency. Some leakage of
gold was occurring, reflecting not only uncertainties about the dollar
but about world institutions generally. The dollar, which had stood out
as a symbol for a long period of time, had now lost some of its polish.
In his opinion, this was the foremost problem that the new Administration
would have to face, but he hoped that the System would not get too excited
and that it would feel its way along in terms of policy.
Chairman Martin then commented on difficulties of phraseology,
pointing out that terms such as "aggressive ease," "less aggressive ease,"
and "less easy" all may mean different things to different people. There
fore, he could understand the problem of the Account Management. However,
he felt the general consensus today probably was in the neighborhood of
maintaining the status quo and that the majority did not want to move too
much in either direction.
The Chairman said that personally he would not want to appear
to be embarking on a policy of sloppy ease at this moment. As Mr.
Johns had pointed out, the banks were not quite as liquid as they would
like. On the other hand they had made great strides in that direction.
The Chairman was not sure that forcing the banks too much toward seeking
loans aggressively would be a service to the people to whom they would
lend the money at the present time. Profit margins and other business

1/10/61 -50
factors would be under close review. As noted by Mr. King, probably the
period when productivity and wages had little relationship had come to
an end.
All of these things should be taken into consideration, Chairman
Martin said. With only a short time remaining before the new Administration
came into office, and in view of the fact that the country was in the midst
of a gold outflow, in his opinion the Federal Reserve should remain steady.
It was difficult, he suggested, to assess how mild the outflow of gold
actually would be. In his own mind he saw a certain similarity between
this period and the period of pressure on the bond market in 1951 in the
sense that at that time people were saying each day that there was no real
pressure because only a limited volume of transactions had taken place.
As at that time, however, there were forces accumulating which, unless
properly handled, might lead to real trouble. As to the gold problem at
the moment, no one could really correct it except the incoming Administration.
The Chairman went on to say that he was by no means pessimistic
and that he felt the business picture was perhaps better than generally
realized. As he had said before, in his view the biggest shadow over it
was the balance-of-payments problem, which exerted an effect in many ways
that were not generally appreciated, including the willingness of banks to
extend credit. This was something that it had not been necessary to deal
with in this country for many years, and therefore the problem had drifted
out of the area of serious discussion for a long time.

1/10/61 -51
After referring to the volume of suggestions currently being made
for various courses of action that might be taken in dealing with economic
problems, the Chairman said it was still a fact that the economy was doing
surprisingly well and that there was surprisingly little real suffering.
This was not to say that there was no suffering among the unemployed, but
the situation was not one of panic or disaster and the strong points in
the economy should not be ignored.
At this point Chairman Martin referred to the suggestion of Mr.
Balderston that the Open Market Committee meet again in two weeks. With
a new Administration shortly to take office, and in view of the fact that
the country was experiencing a continuing gold outflow and a good many
ideas about economic problems were being passed around, he felt that it
would be the part of wisdom for the Open Market Committee to plan to meet
in two weeks and then again after another two-week period. This would
afford an opportunity for the Committee to be brought up to date on
problems of transition between Administrations, to keep abreast of develop
ments, and to have discussions such as had taken place this morning.
Chairman Martin then commented that no specific change in the
directive had been proposed at this meeting. He again stated that he
thought the consensus was to hold close to the status quo.
The Chairman inquired of Mr. Robertson whether he would like to
be recorded as dissenting, and the latter replied by expressing agreement
that the consensus stated by the Chairman reflected the majority view.

-52-
No further comments being heard, Chairman Martin stated that, as
usual, each person's views would be recorded fully in the minutes.
Thereupon, upon motion duly
made and seconded, it was voted
unanimously to direct the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York until
otherwise directed by the Committee:
(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (including
replacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities to
run off without replacement) for the System Open Market Account
in the open market or, in the case of maturing securities, by
direct exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary in the
light of current and prospective economic conditions and the
general credit situation of the country, with a view (a) to
relating the supply of funds in the market to the needs of
commerce and business, (b) to encouraging monetary expansion
for the purpose of fostering sustainable growth in economic
activity and employment, while taking into consideration current
international developments, and (c) to the practical adminis
tration of the Account; provided that the aggregate amount of
securities held in the System Account (including commitments
for the purchase or sale of securities for the Account) at the
close of this date, other than special short-term certificates
of indebtedness purchased from time to time for the temporary
accommodation of the Treasury, shall not be increased or
decreased by more than $1 billion;
(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the account of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, in cases
where it seems desirable, to issue participations to one or more
Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short-term certifi
cates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time to time for
the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; provided that the
total amount of such certificates held at any one time by the
Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate $500
million.
Pursuant to Chairman Martin's suggestion, it was agreed that
the next meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee would be held
in Washington on Tuesday, January 24, 1961, and that the succeeding
meeting would be tentatively scheduled for Tuesday, February 7, 1961.

1/10/61 -53
Mr. Johns commented that plans were in process for a meeting
of the Conference of Presidents of Federal Reserve Banks on Monday,
March 6, 1961, with thought that a meeting of the Board and the Presi
dents would be held the following day. After a brief discussion, it
was understood that this schedule would be continued to be used as a
basis for planning.
At this point all of those present withdrew from the meeting
except the members and alternate members of the Committee, the Reserve
Bank Presidents who are not currently members of the Committee, and
Messrs. Young and Rouse.
During the course of a discussion, Chairman Martin suggested
that the Ad Hoc Subcommittee that had been authorized at the meeting on
May 17, 1951, and which submitted its report under date of November 12,
1952, be reactivated for the purpose of studying certain aspects of open
market operations, with the membership of the Committee increased to
include the Vice Chairman of the Federal Open Market Committee and the
Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors. With this adjustment the
membership of the reactivated Committee would include, in addition to
Chairman Martin, Messrs. Balderston, Bryan, Hayes, and Mills. The
Chairman also suggested that Messrs. Young and Rouse be designated to
serve as technical advisers to the Committee.

1/10/61 -54
This suggestion was approved unanimously, with the understanding
that Chairman Martin would initiate studies by the Committee at such
time as he decided was appropriate.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary