A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, October 2, 1962, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Deming
Mr. Ellis
Mr. Fulton
Mr. King
Mr. Mills
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Shepardson
Messrs. Bopp, Scanlon, Clay, and Irons, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Wayne and Swan, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Brandt, Brill, Garvy, Hickman, Holland,
Koch, Parsons, and Willis, Associate Economists
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market
Account
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of Governors
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
Mr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors

10/2/62 -2
Messrs. Eastburn, Ratchford, Baughman, Jones,
and Tow, Vice Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Richmond,
Chicago, St. Louis, and Kansas City,
respectively
Mr. Lynn, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Griggs, Financial Economist, Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on September 11, 1962, were approved.
Under date of September 18, 1962, there had been sent to each
member and alternate member of the Federal Open Market Committee, and
to each President not currently a member of the Committee, copies of
the report of audit of the System Open Market Account and a report of
audit of System foreign currency operations made by the Division of
Examinations as at the close of business June 8, 1962, and submitted
by Mr. Schaeffer, Chief Federal Reserve Examiner, in accordance with
the action of the Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting on
June 21, 1939, as reaffirmed most recently at the meeting on March 6,
1962. Copies of the reports have been placed in the files of the
Committee.
Chairman Martin inquired whether any of the members of the
Committee had comments or questions, and there was no indication to
such effect.

10/2/62
Accordingly, the audit reports
were noted and accepted without objec
t ion.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report on open market operations in United States
Government securities covering the period September 11 through
September 26, 1962, and a supplementary report covering the period
September 27 through October 1, 1962. Copies of both reports have
been placed in the files of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone commented
as follows:
The money market during the past three weeks continued
to display the generally steady atmosphere that has prevailed
for the past two or three months. The effective rate on
Federal funds was again at 2-3/4 or 3 per cent on every day of
the period. Indeed, on looking back I find that the effective
funds rate has been at 2-3/4 or 3 per cent on every day since
July 26, and on all except four days since June 11. An
abundance of funds continues to be available and to move through
the market at those rates, although last Wednesday the supply
dried up while demand expanded, and in consequence member bank
borrowings rose sharply on that day.
As in earlier periods, there has continued to be strong
demand for short-term investments and downward pressure on bill
rates despite the moderately firm atmosphere in the Federal funds
market. Corporations seem to have come back into the bill market
after only a temporary slackening in their buying over the tax
date, and reports from the market indicate that a good corporate
demand is likely to continue in the period ahead, particularly
with the cash inflow to the automobile industry about to accel
erate as sales of the new models get under way. Our operations
over the next few days will probably put some additional down
ward pressure on rates, for it appears from current reserve
estimates that we may have to inject another $750 million of
funds on top of the heavy purchases of recent days.
The long-term market has also continued firm in the past
few weeks, nourished by a feeling in the market that the

10/2/62
domestic business situation is getting no better. Also reports
from the Fund and Bank meetings have suggested to the market
that confidence in the dollar may have improved sufficiently so
that greater weight might be given to the domestic side in the
formulation of policy. This feeling has been further nurtured
by market letters that have appeared recently.
The Treasury's announcement that it would offer about $250
million long-term bonds at competitive bidding sometime in the
next six months had no impact on prices and rates in the market,
but did send banks and dealers into an immediate flurry of
activity in efforts to organize bidding syndicates. The
Treasury's projected technique has been a prime topic of dis
cussion during the past two weeks, and out of that discussion
have emerged a number of significant questions and problems.
One of the more important of these problems is the possibility
that bidders, for prestige purposes, will seriously overprice
the issue--an action that could destroy the new technique in
its infancy. Another question raised by the market involves
the 4-1/4 per cent statutory interest rate ceiling and whether
the Treasury would be prepared to accept a bid priced to pro
vide a yield in excess of 4-1/4 per cent. Still another pro
blem is that of reasonable balance in the strength of the
competing syndicates. Finally, the problem that most directly
concerns the System is the one outlined in Mr. Keir's
memorandum--whether the Committee would undertake its customary
even-keel approach, or more or less than that approach, during
a financing underwritten by a syndicate.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the
open market transactions in Government
securities during the period September 11
through October 1, 1962, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
The economic review at this meeting consisted of a visual
auditory presentation for which Messrs. Garfield, Reynolds, Axilrod,
and Altmann of the Board's staff joined the meeting. Copies of the
script of the economic review and the related charts have been placed
in the files of the Committee.

10/2/62
The introductory portion of the economic review, presented by
Mr. Noyes, was as follows:
At the time of the last visual presentation to this
Committee, on June 19, many analysts were revising their
forecasts of economic activity downward. Current activity,
as reflected in industrial production data through May and
a GNP estimate for the second quarter, was continuing to rise.
For some time, however, the rate of advance had been much
less rapid than in the first six months of recovery and appre
ciably less rapid than rates incorporated in earlier projections.
The latest figures available for retail trade, those for April
and May, were above earlier levels, but the course of consumer
buying over the whole recovery period was widely regarded as
erratic and to some extent disappointing.
Moreover, some of the series which often have moved early
in cycles were pointing downward. In particular, stock prices
had declined dramatically and many analysts were not wholly
satisfied that this decline represented merely an overdue reap
praisal of values. Concern over balance of payments problems
was being intensified by the Canadian dollar crisis.
While it was generaly recognized that the recovery and
expansion period which began after February 1961 was still
young, by usual standards, there was increasing discussion of
the possible need for early action to stimulate demand--and
specifically concerning a general tax cut.
Against the uncertain expectations of last June, the
developments of mid-summer appeared favorable enough so that
the idea of an immediate general tax cut did not prevail.
Industrial production rose a full point in July to 119, and
the unemployment rate was down a little from the 5-1/2 per
cent level reported earlier in the year. Retail trade and
manufacturers' new orders for durable goods both rose sharply
in July. The stock price decline had ended in late June and
by mid-August stock prices had recovered nearly 40 per cent
of their previous loss.
Altogether, business developments reported for July were
almost too good to be true and could hardly have been expected
to be followed immediately by further marked gains. Actually,
industrial production and retail trade in August showed little
change from their advanced July levels. Unemployment rose in
August, and a preliminary report just received indicates that
it remained at about the same level in September, emphasizing

10/2/62
the continuing underutilization of resources. Steel produc
tion currently is still under 60 per cent of capacity despite
some advance in August and September.
In the stock market, renewed weakness has appeared in
the past 10 days and yesterday prices closed 5 per cent below
the mid-September level. This recent decline has been from
levels nearly a fifth below the high of last December and may
reflect in larger degree than before concern over business
prospects. For the third quarter, the present estimate of
GNP is $557 billion, a modest rise of $5 billion from the
second quarter.
There followed sections dealing with balance of payments devel
opments; production, resource use, and prices; demand factors; and
financial developments.
The concluding portion of the economic review, presented by
Mr. Koch, was as follows:
These more or less quarterly chart show presentations
give the staff an opportunity to present a somewhat longer
view of economic and financial developments, both at home
and abroad, than can be given in our usual tri-weekly
reports. Therefore in conclusion today, let us try to
summarize some of these longer run developments insofar as
they provide background material for current bank credit and
monetary decisions.
First, as to domestic business conditions, economic
activity, after having surpassed the pre-recession level
quickly, has risen more slowly this year, particularly since
spring.
Second, for the first time in the postwar period, expan
sion in activity has not been accompanied at any stage by
rising industrial commodity prices. Moreover, wage increases
have been much more moderate than in earlier expansions. In
world markets, raw material prices have been under downward
pressure.
Third, at the present time available resources of both
labor and capital are not being utilized as fully as would
be possible without creating upward pressure on prices.
Fourth, current business inventory holdings appear
modest in relation to sales, and the current rate of in
ventory accumulation is not high.

10/2/62
Fifth, total business outlays on new plant and equip
ment are now rising very slowly. Such expenditures continue
to be a considerably smaller proportion of the GNP than in
the early postwar expansions, when production was closer to
capacity.
Sixth, the Government's share of the increase in final
demands has been somewhat larger than in the previous period
of cyclical expansion for the whole upswing, although Govern
ment fiscal action has not had much of a net stimulative
effect on the economy in the last two quarters. Tax reduc
tions and additional tax reforms, however, are generally
expected next year, possibly early in the year.
Turning to the balance of payments situation, we find
that although the over-all deficit has been gradually reduced
since 1960, it remains uncomfortably large. In the first
nine months of this year, it was at an annual rate of about
$1-3/4 billion, and would have been at about a $2-1/2 billion
rate if substantial debt prepayments had not been received.
Second, the 1962 deficit has involved a gold loss
larger than that of 1961, though smaller than in 1958 or 1960.
The amount of gold purchased by foreign countries continues
to depend a good deal on which specific countries are gain
ing reserves as well as on the size of our deficit.
Third, net capital outflows have not been running quite
as large so far this year as they were in 1960 and 1961,
mainly because there has been no further Japanese short-term
borrowing from U. S. commercial banks since March.
Fourth, two encouraging facts for the longer run are
that in recent years our price behavior has been more
favorable than that in competing industrial countries, and
that more ample reserves abroad should permit leading for
eign countries to admit U. S. goods more freely and to
relax their capital market controls.
Turning to domestic financial developments, there has
been a rather sharp expansion in commercial bank credit and
total bank deposits thus far this year. This result has re
presented sharp increases in time, savings, and Government
deposits rather than demand deposits. Thus, the narrowly
defined money supply has actually declined a little.
Second, the recent posture of monetary policy, coupled
with moderate private and Government demands for financing
and a large flow of savings, has been reflected in reasonably
stable interest rates. Short-term rates are about 1/4 to 1/2
per cent above, and long-term rates about 1/4 per cent below,
their levels at the beginning of the year.

10/2/62
Third, increases in private debt have been much more
moderate this time than in other cyclical upswings, and
consumers and businesses are in a fairly liquid, although
certainly not an excessively liquid, position.
Fourth, stock prices are being more realistically
appraised, and the events of the past ten days indicate that
the reappraisal process is still under way with uncertain
ties concerning business prospects probably more of a factor
this fall than in the spring.
These, it seems to us, are among the most important
economic and financial facts to be weighed in reaching mone
tary policy decisions. To attempt an even more capsule
conclusion, domestic activity continues sluggish, while the
international balance is improving only slowly. The
business situation is again poised at dead center. After
earlier pauses, expansion soon set in. This time, with the
expansion still young, the next move may again be up, but
there appears to be more possibility than before that the
country will soon be entering a recessionary period--once
again long before the recovery from the last recession has
enabled us to realize our potential in terms of manpower
and other resource utilization.
Monetary policy continues to be mildly stimulative
domestically and mildly restraining to short-term capital
flows internationally. The irreducible policy question
remains with us: would additional monetary ease stimulate
the domestic economy without hampering the balance of pay
ments improvement that is in process? No doubt the gains
to be had from further easing of policy would carry with
them some hazards. It is also possible that under present
circumstances additional stimulation might more appropriately
come from fiscal rather than monetary policy. In this con
nection, the time required to make policy effective is, of
course, one consideration; the impact on balance of payment
problems is another. Judgments as to the most appropriate
monetary policy will depend, as always, on the weighing of
many elements in the situation and in the nature of the
case must be based on appraisals of prospects by no means
certain.
Mr. Hayes presented the following statement of his views on the
economic situation and monetary policy:

10/2/62
The domestic business situation, although not greatly
changed since our last meeting, is if anything a shade less
encouraging. The complete August statistics now available
suggest even a mild downward tilt in that month, but it
would seem unwise to stress this in view of the widespread
downward influence of the August changeover in auto models.
September data are too flimsy to establish a trend. As for
quarterly data, preliminary third quarter estimates suggest
that GNP rose at about the same rate as in the preceding two
quarters, but much less rapidly than in the first three
quarters of recovery in 1961. Although inventory investment
explained much of the slowdown, with final demand behaving
rather well, the really striking fact since the 1961 trough
is the relative lack of vigor in business fixed investment.
The latter is of course importantly associated with the
fact that the economy is considerably further from full
capacity operations than in the last strong expansion, that
of 1954-57, and perhaps also with inadequate profit margins
and a feeling of uncertainty among businessmen as to the
Government's underlying attitude towards business. Business
sentiment has not been helped recently by the persistent
weakness in stock prices.
Despite the spate of cheerful press articles and
official comments on the balance of payments, it seems to
me that our international problems remain as serious as
ever. The one encouraging element has been the calm state
of the exchange and gold markets prevailing in the past
month or so and enhanced by a Bank-Fund meeting that was
notably lacking in scare-talk on the dollar's status. On
the other hand, much of this favorable psychology rests on
the belief that the United States is making steady progress
towards a solution of its balance of payments problem--and
if the published statistics for the third quarter fail to
bear this out, disappointment could lead to a quick turn for
the worse in foreign views concerning the dollar. It now
looks as if the third quarter deficit may be at an annual
rate of about $2.5 billion, and in the absence of special
debt prepayments this rate might have been as high as $4
billion. We may be lucky to achieve a full year over-all
deficit as low as $2 billion, as compared with $2.5 billion
in 1961, and in contrast with various official forecasts for
1962 in the $1 to $1.5 billion range. Thus the improvement
in the balance of payments this year seems likely to be
pretty modest, despite all of the Government's laudable

10/2/62 -10-
efforts to reduce various drains on our international
payments; and we seem to be still a long way from the
announced goal of basic balance by the end of 1963.
Higher imports have been the principal factor nullifying
our efforts in other areas, but capital outflows--both
short and long term--have also been important. I can see
reasonable hope that balance will be achieved in time, in
view of the contrasting cost trends now apparent here and
in Europe; but the grave question is whether confidence in
the dollar as a reserve currency can be maintained while
balance is gradually being attained. Time may be running
out for us.
I don't think recent credit developments are
particularly noteworthy. The data for reporting banks in
recent weeks seem to bear out the view of many bank lending
officers that there is no great strength in loan demand.
As for all the figures on money supply and liquidity, and
on reserves in relation to guidelines, I believe that they
are sufficiently affected by special factors to lend them
selves to highly contradictory interpretations and to use
in support of almost any monetary policy; but I am impressed
by the common-sense argument that bankers in many parts of
the country are eagerly seeking to make loans, and that
this readiness to lend money is having some appreciable
effect on the flow of capital to foreign countries. Several
European central bankers have recently commented on such
activities of the American banks.
Whether even greater liquidity than the present rather
adequate liquidity level would contribute much to further
economic expansion, I am inclined to doubt. If there were
no restraining international considerations, it might be
worth experimenting in this direction in view of the rather
soggy domestic outlook, even though I do not believe mone
tary policy would supply the needed answer. But with the
balance of payments problem as serious as I believe it to
be, the risks inherent in an easier monetary policy are
clearly too great. At the very least we should try to
encourage as firm a short-term rate structure as has pre
vailed in recent weeks, and preferably a little firmer,
i.e., with Federal funds at 3 per cent most of the time and
with 90-day bill rates well above 2-3/4 per cent. Purchases
of intermediate and long-term securities might well be used
to the greatest extent practicable in supplying seasonal
reserves needed in the coming weeks. Perhaps this is about

10/2/62 -11-
as far as we can go today in view of the uncertain domestic
outlook--but I have an uneasy feeling that our problem will
not become easier as the weeks pass. Unfortunately, we
shall have "even keel" considerations to deal with from late
October through much of November. I see no need to change
the directive or to consider a discount rate change for the
time being.
It does seem to me that the "box" we find ourselves in
is due at least in part to the Government's reluctance to
use fiscal policy promptly and flexibly to deal with some
of the demonstrated weaknesses in our domestic economy. I
realize that it has been a long-standing tradition for the
System to be quite reticent on appropriate fiscal policy,
but I believe the time has come to abandon that reticence.
The interrelationship between monetary and fiscal policy is
so close that I don't see how we can avoid such a conclusion;
and incidentally I have seen no evidence of great reluctance
on the Administration's part to take quite positive positions
in the matter of appropriate policies with respect to inter
est rates and other monetary matters. In my judgment a
vigorous and flexible fiscal policy would greatly ease our
domestic difficulties and would enable the System to cope
much more effectively with our perplexing international
responsibilities. If the Committee shares this opinion, I
hope that a spokesman for the System will find suitable
opportunities to make this view heard.
Mr. Bryan presented the following statement:
Nearly all of the new figures for the Sixth District are
for August. Nearly all of them indicate a slight weakening
of the economic situation in the District. Manufacturing
employment, retail sales as measured by department store
sales, bank debits, and average weekly hours are down. In
sured unemployment is up. Speaking in general, there seems
to me little difference between the behavior of the Sixth
District and national economic behavior.
We may find, of course, that this pattern is merely the
sort of seesaw that has become commonplace in recent months.
At the same time, we must be alert to the possibility of an
early end to the expansionary phase of the present business
cycle. We are still confronted with the conceptual and
definitional problems with regard to the money supply, prob
lems that have been so difficult now for so long a time. At
any rate we do face a situation in which the money supply,

10/2/62 -12-
conventionally defined, has moved down, and the rate of
growth in time deposits has slowed, so that a given volume
of reserves will apparently support a smaller expansion in
the total of bank credit. We must likewise face a recent
small increase in member bank borrowing and an approach to
some upper limit in the growth of deposit turnover.
In the light of this situation, we can answer our policy
problems partly by elimination. We must certainly eliminate
any idea that banks should be compelled to sell assets in a
futile attempt to gain the reserves that are necessary for
credit expansion. I believe we must eliminate any idea what
ever of reducing the reserve base. That leaves us with the
positive problem of how much we do in supplying reserves to
the banking system.
In striving to answer that problem, I believe we must
conclude that our reserve supplies must be fully equal to
the seasonal expansion. For October that would require us
to add approximately $57 million to the reserve supply at
a minimum. It can easily be argued that we should add more
because of deficits from our projections. Next, we must
certainly add a supply of reserves for a growth factor in
the economy. At 3 per cent, which I regard as a minimum in
present circumstances, we should need an additional $50
million.
How then do I come out in the matter of an instruction
to the Desk? Well, if we take the October trend line at 3
per cent, it figures to $19,936 million. If we add $107
million for seasonal expansion and for a growth factor, we
come out (using total reserves) at $20,043 million for
October. 1/ Put a plus or minus $50 million or so for
latitude to the Desk, and you would have my instruction.
I should add that I would make errors on the side of sup
plying more rather than less reserves. I should certainly
make the error on that side if there is any tendency for
member bank borrowing to increase.
The figures I have given can be reconciled with a free
reserve figure, but the assumptions necessary for any such
reconciliation are so many as to make the attempt a bit
futile in my judgment. In any case, though, I believe that
1/ Since the average daily balance of total reserves
September 1-28 is $20,042 million, this policy recom
mendation is essentially "no change."

10/2/62 -13-
to attain the total reserve figure I judge appropriate to
our present circumstances will almost certainly require a
free reserve figure of between $400 and $500 million.
It will be noticed that I say nothing about the level
of short-term rates. The omission is intentional. I
think we are rapidly approaching the time when we shall be
compelled to make the soul-searching choice between the
domestic economy and our balance of payments. My own choice
is clear to the Committee. Moreover, I believe it is time
for us to stop, or consider stopping, our stately minuet-
maybe stately is the wrong word--with the bill rate. Accord
ingly, if we write an appropriate prescription of reserves
for the domestic economy, we shall be compelled, I believe,
to let rates go where they will. This does not, I note,
preclude our dealing in securities other than bills.
Mr. Bryan then offered the following suggestion with respect to
the current policy directive, stating that it was presented with a view
to indicating what he thought might be done by way of quantitative
instruction to the Desk and not with the expectation that it would be
adopted by the Committee:
It is the current policy of the Federal Open Market
Committee to supply the reserves necessary for an expan
sion of bank credit without the restraining influence
arising from an increase in member bank borrowing. The
purpose of the Committee is to provide a credit base suf
ficient for a continuing expansion of the economy.
The Federal Open Market Committee believes its policy
can be effectuated in October by supplying approximately
$57 million of reserves for seasonal expansion and approxi
mately $50 million of reserves for a growth factor, which
is at an annual rate of 3 per cent. The Committee thus
directs the Manager of the Open Market Account to aim for
a figure of $20,043 million of total reserves for October
on an average daily basis, with latitude to the Manager
of the Account to operate around this figure in accordance
with money market developments.
However, if there is a tendency for interest rates
generally to increase or member bank borrowing generally
to increase, the Committee believes that the Manager of

10/2/62 -14-
the Account should increase the figure indicated in this
directive as a general target by an amount tending to off
set the pressures on the banking system arising from an
increase of member bank borrowing.
Mr. Bopp presented the following statement:
Three weeks ago we characterized Third District business
as generally lacking in vigor. Nothing has since happened to
change this assessment. Manufacturing employment, hours, and
output are sagging. Recent declines in unemployment rates
were of less than seasonal proportions. Strength in depart
ment store sales so far this September is more apparent than
real, being based on comparisons with a poor month last year.
Bank loans are continuing to rise in our District, with
loans to sales finance companies, other financial institutions,
and real estate loans pacing the advance. Business loans have
continued to increase, but at a slower rate than earlier in
the year. Demand deposits have shown little trend recently,
but time deposits, after a long period of sustained expansion,
have leveled off.
We continue to believe that an easier monetary policy
would be effective in stimulating the domestic economy. As
recent meetings of the Committee indicate, judgments differ
as to the current availability of credit. Some believe that
credit is now available in quantities adequate to support an
increase in economic activity if the demand for it were to
appear. Others believe still readier availability would
facilitate economic expansion.
It is clear, however, that an easier monetary policy
can produce greater liquidity in the economy whether or not
there is an increased demand for bank credit via loans.
Open market operations can by themselves generate larger
deposit balances because they would be invested. If, by
increasing liquidity, monetary policy can have a stimulative
effect during early phases of expansion, it remains to be
demonstrated why further liquidity may not continue to
stimulate. The effect may be marginal (and perhaps a declin
ing margin), but this is all we are seeking.
The real question concerns not the ability to increase
liquidity but the advisability of doing so. Given the
balance of payments problem, we cannot, of course, play fast
and loose with liquidity. But it seems possible now that
the balance of payments is improving and exchange markets
have become more stable to move cautiously in the direction
of more ease.

10/2/62 -15
Making allowance for periods of Treasury financing, we
would interpret such a position as meaning somewhat lower
market rates and somewhat larger reserve totals. We should
like to see the seasonal needs for funds supplied without
any significant pressure in the market, and would welcome an
increase in the money supply.
If this policy were adopted, some rewording of the
directive, along the line of that of May 29, 1962, would be
appropriate. We would not change the discount rate.
Mr. Fulton said that most of the August dip in economic activity
in the Fourth District appeared to have been recouped during the first
three weeks of September. Department store sales increased, and it
looked as though this month they might regain their all-time high. For
the year to date they were 3 per cent ahead of last year. Sales of new
cars were displaying more than seasonal weakness, possibly due to the
lack of availability of some models. Construction was down in both
Cincinnati and Cleveland and remained at the reduced level of August.
Unemployment had shown no significant change since July. As might be
expected, most of the steel centers had the greatest percentage of
unemployment. However, in conversations around the District, manu
facturers did not seem to feel that the outlook was too dismal. Instead,
there seemed to be a rather good feeling about the level of business
in practically all industries. The automobile people were optimistic,
the chemical industry was good, and the paper container industry was
good. The situation might be characterized as "nervous stability."
The machine tool industry was one that was not in good shape. Order
backlogs were being reduced, and foreign orders had been falling off
due to the ability of European plants to speed up their deliveries.

10/2/62 -16
Some corporations reportedly were restricting plant and equipment
spending until next year, if then, with the idea of finding out what
kind of tax revisions might be instituted. However, spending for the
purpose of keeping plants competitive was continuing.
In the steel industry there had been some pickup in orders, but
from a very low level. Orders for pipe were not doing well, reflecting
in part the completion of several large transmission lines. On the
other hand, orders were now coming in from the auto industry for
November and December delivery. Fourth quarter production seemed likely
to show modest improvement. The third quarter total would be less than
had been projected earlier, and total production for the year was
estimated at about 98 million tons. The outlook for next year was
95 - 96 million tons. The union had declared that it was going to ask
for more money through reopening the present labor contract; the steel
companies indicated there would be nothing for them to do except face
a strike. If the unions persisted in statements of the kind they were
now making, there would be a build-up of inventories in the early part
of next year, with a probable letdown in the second half.
Bank loans had been increasing in the District, with the increase
in term loans rather marked. Apparently there were sufficient funds
available to the banking system to permit the banks to make all of the
loans they legitimately should make. In fact, the banks were reaching
for loans.

10/2/62 -17
Mr. Fulton said he did not feel that, in the present circum
stances, there should be any increase in reserve availability. In
stead, an "even keel" would be desirable. In other words, he would
favor maintaining about the same market tone that had prevailed during
the past three weeks, while keeping an eye on the short-term rate. He
would not change the discount rate.
In the period from now until the end of this year, Mr. Fulton
added, the System would be required to supply a substantial amount of
reserves on a seasonal basis. In his opinion, consideration should be
given to a reduction of reserve requirements, which would provide a
means of injecting a quantity of reserves without direct impact on
short-term rates. He understood it had been a general objective to
reduce reserve requirements as opportunities presented themselves, and
the situation he had mentioned seemed to provide one of those opportuni
ties.
Mr. Mitchell expressed the view that the Committee should adopt
a policy of greater ease, and that this should be implemented by
operations in the intermediate market. Government securities dealers
had a good supply of intermediate-term securities that he presumed
could be tapped by the System. Maintenance of the level of short-term
rates, through efforts of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve, had
resulted in abnormalities that would cause trouble if a certain course
of developments should take place. In view of the international

10/2/62 -18
situation, the Committee could not afford to ignore the trend of
short-term rates. Nevertheless, it should expect them to go down.
It could not operate in the longer-term market without effects on
the short-term rate.
The directive should be modified, if only to indicate that the
Committee was aware of the widely-held view that the country might be
facing an imminent recession. It should not appear from the directive
that the Committee was unaware of that view.
Mr. Mitchell went on to say that his position on monetary
policy was not based on month-to-month changes in business activity.
Instead, it was based on the relationship of business activity to
productive capacity. As long as the economy was operating well below
reasonable levels of capacity, monetary policy should be expansionary,
and in his opinion it had not been adequately expansionary. The view
that fiscal policy probably could do the job better was a view to which
he subscribed. Probably other methods could also deal better than
monetary policy with the balance of payments problem. However, this
did not mean that the System should refrain from doing anything it
could to be helpful. In essence, he came out at about the same position
that he had expressed at recent Committee meetings. He continued to
advocate a policy of somewhat more ease.
Mr. King said the economic presentation today tended to confirm
certain thoughts that had been developing in his mind over a period of

10/2/62 -19
months. It appeared that the business cycles in this country had been
shortening, and that the peaks and valleys had been moderating. If
this was to be expected, what did it suggest in terms of monetary
policy? To him it suggested that the old benchmarks, reference points,
and guidelines probably were becoming obsolete. It suggested more
moderate shifts of policy from one side to the other during both the
expansionary and contractionary phases of the cycle.
In his view, Mr. King said, the recent increase in time
deposits represented a concealed increase in the money supply, and the
money supply would increase if the banks started reducing their rates
of interest on time and savings deposits. Already there were some
reports of actual or contemplated reductions. Therefore, he was not
too concerned about the conventionally-defined money supply. However,
he believed that the policy directive needed to be changed. The words
indicated that the Committee had been doing certain things in regard
to the money supply that the record would show it had not actually
been doing. According to the directive, the Committee's policy was to
permit a further increase in the money supply, whereas the narrowly
defined money supply had been static or contracting. In general, he
leaned away from the idea of changing the directive in the absence of
some change in monetary policy. In this instance, however, he felt
that some change was in order.
Mr. King also commented that he would not be too concerned if
the bill rate should decline somewhat, even as low as 2-1/2 per cent.

10/2/62 -20
There was such a thing as overstaying a position, and in his opinion
that may have been true in this instance. Therefore, he would not
object if less emphasis was placed on the bill rate, not forgetting
it entirely but not being so concerned about maintaining the rate as
during the past several months.
In summary, Mr. King said, he would not recommend any real
easing of monetary policy. The country had been going through a
period in which substantial overcapacity had developed. He had seen
this occur in industries of which he had direct knowledge, and he did
not believe that the availability of more credit at lower rates was
a material corrective factor. If he thought it was a material factor,
he would be inclined to move somewhat in the direction of greater ease,
but there was too much to lose by pumping more liquidity into the
economy at this stage. However, he would not be too concerned about
the bill rate unless it reached substantially lower levels than at
present.
Mr. Shepardson said he saw nothing in the staff report to
indicate any significant change in the level of economic activity,
although there may have been some slowing down statistically in the
rate of advance. Nor did he find any evidence of an insufficiency of
funds to meet worthy credit demands. At the recent meeting of the
Board of Governors with the Federal Advisory Council, several Council
members commented to the effect that there was a considerable supply

10/2/62 -21-
of funds for which lenders were vigorously seeking profitable uses.
Similar comments were heard from other sources. In light of this
situation, and with the understanding that the System would meet
seasonal reserve needs liberally, it seemed to him that current
monetary policy was appropriate.
Mr. Shepardson noted that there had been suggestions today and
at recent Committee meetings that a somewhat easier monetary policy
might stimulate the utilization of idle productive resources. It was
necessary, he thought, to have in mind certain fundamental factors
that could have a greater bearing on longer run economic growth, and
in this connection he presented the following statement:
We have been concerned for some time about our two-fold
but inseparable problem of less than full employment of our
domestic resources and the persisting adverse balance of pay
ments. In my opinion, one root cause of both these problems
was the inflationary wage-cost-price spiral that plagued much
of the postwar era. It hurt our ability to compete in for
eign markets. It inflated domestic costs so much that profit
margins and profit expectations were squeezed, thereby dis
couraging higher levels of business investment.
In the past four years we have moved a long way toward
checking this spiral. As Mr. Mitchell pointed out at our
last meeting, if the economy is not yet in an ideal position
as far as the wage-price spiral is concerned, it is better
off in this respect than it has been for a long time. I
agree, but the wage pressure still exists. Internationally,
our relative competitive position seems to be improving, and
producers are increasing their efforts to sell in attractive
foreign markets. Along with a change of governmental policies
concerning spending, loans, and grants abroad, these develop
ments underlie the gradual improvement that has taken place in
our basic balance of trade. Domestically, we have largely
disposed of inflationary price expectations, maintained a
reasonably prosperous level of business, made some resources

10/2/62 -22-
freer to shift to more efficient uses, increased the flow
of savings to accommodate productive investment, and thus
laid the groundwork for additional investment if and when
private concerns become attracted by today's prospects for
lower hut perhaps more stable profits.
I think the prudent monetary policy we have followed
has had a good deal to do with this improvement in the
fundamental economic health of our country. But many of
these adjustments are still in process and others, includ
ing some revision of tax and fiscal policy to improve in
vestment incentive, are still needed. Hence it is important
that monetary policy not retard or alleviate the pressure
for the completion of this transition. To me this implies
money readily available to finance soundly based economic
activity, but not so easy as to finance diversionary
activities, speculation, or continuation of outmoded or
overextended operations,
While greater credit availability, more liquidity, and
lower interest rates might encourage various shifts in types
of borrowing and kinds of asset holdings, they are not likely
to stimulate much additional spending by consumers and busi
ness, for most such outlays are in response to other and over
riding considerations. For example, somewhat greater monetary
ease might create some mild tendency for businesses to hold
fewer liquid assets and somewhat more inventory. While it
is possible that such a shift at this time might speed up the
momentum of general business advance, I am inclined to think
that any such influence would be very mild and short-lived,
and the subsequent letdown could very possibly come at a time
which would aggravate deflationary pressures developing from
other sources. At the same time the increased credit avail
ability and lower interest rates likely to result from an
easier money policy could easily trigger renewed capital out
flows abroad, shaking the newly buttressed confidence in the
dollar.
Viewed in this perspective, it seems to me that the few
marginal gains possible from even a moderately easier monetary
policy are more than offset by its immediate hazards. More
importantly, the possible effects of such easing, in creating
some temporary additional demands, might well slow or divert
the fundamental adjustments now taking place that are so
essential to the long-run health of our economy.
It seems to me that in the present situation, and with
the long-run concept in mind, current monetary policy is
appropriate. I would suggest no change.

10/2/62 -23
Mr. Mills commented that he would not recommend a change in the
discount rate. He was not particularly optimistic about economic pros
pects. However, any change in the policy directive at the present time
that might indicate acceptance of the probability of slower economic
activity would imply a greater shift in open market policy than he
thought would be justified. His concept of an appropriate monetary and
credit policy could be carried out within the context of the present
directive if open market operations were aimed at producing the levels
of free reserves that had developed in the first two weeks of the
period since the preceding Committee meeting, and if they sought to
avoid an abrupt contraction such as occurred in the third week. He
regarded that contraction as vitiating the potential beneficial effects
that were inherent in the reserve statistics of the first two weeks of
the period. He shared Mr. Mitchell's concern about the fixation on
maintaining a stable structure of interest rates because, under cover
of that assumed stability, he believed there were pressures and dis
tortions building up that could constitute a serious hindrance to a
flexible Federal Reserve policy in the weeks and months to come.
His further comments, Mr. Mills said, would touch on those
same factors and in a sense were a prelude to the subject that
Mr. Keir of the Board's staff had discussed in his paper (distributed
to the Open Market Committee under date of October 1, 1962); that is,
the question whether the System should support the long-term Government

10/2/62 -24-
bond market during the underwriting period of the Treasury's forth
coming offer of $250 million of long-term bonds for competitive
bidding by private syndicates. He thought it was a certainty that the
System would be involved in a peg if it drifted into acceptance of any
invitation to give support to the Treasury's new program. Mr. Mills
then presented the following statement:
The unusually high levels of U. S. Treasury balances
in its Tax and Loan Account depositories and in the posi
tions of U. S. Government securities dealers have originated
from Federal Reserve System policy actions intended to pre
vent short-term interest rates from falling too low and
long-term interest rates from rising too high. Each of
these situations is the offspring of official actions that
have interfered with the free interplay of natural forces
in the U. S. Government securities market and have made
the attainment of the policy objectives sought after more,
rather than less, difficult.
In the case of the U. S. Treasury's abnormally high
Tax and Loan Account balances, funds have been abstracted
from the general money flows by increased offerings of
short-term U. S. Government securities, the greater supply
of which was aimed at bolstering short-term interest rates.
The funds impounded through this policy would have served
better economic and financial purposes if they had been
retained in private hands and a downward pressure on the
money supply would have been avoided. Their release and
return now into private money flows would, to a certain
extent, strengthen the basis for bank credit expansion,
thereby lessening the need for seasonal purchases of U. S.
Government securities for the System Open Market Account
with a resulting unwanted downward pressure on short-term
interest yields. Action of this kind would be a desirable
step away from artificial market interference and what has
become a market pegging operation.
The exceptionally high positions of the U. S. Govern
ment securities dealers are likewise a product of official
interference in the U. S. Government securities market. In
observing the avowed interest rate objectives of Federal
Reserve System policy makers and the consequent effects of
their price pegging operations, the dealers have developed

10/2/62 -25
confidence in the permanence of the present interest rate
structure that has encouraged an expansion of their posi
tions for profit motives rather than out of any acknowledged
responsibility for making markets in U. S. Government secu
rities. If a large part of dealer inventories had not been
held off the market but had moved into investor holdings, an
upward pressure on short-term interest rates would have been
exerted that in turn would have simplified the management of
Federal Reserve System policy.
The complications to the conduct of a viable Federal
Reserve System policy that are inherent in artificial inter
ventions in the U. S. Government securities market are
apparent in the two situations discussed. I repeat my
belief that every opportunity should be taken for again
developing Federal Reserve System policy along free market
lines that are geared largely to a "bills only" principle.
Mr. Wayne reported that statistics, supplemented by the Richmond
Reserve Bank's own survey, indicated that Fifth District business had
not deviated significantly from its generally level course. A few areas
had continued to weaken, and the District's extensive textile industry
headed this list. But improvements elsewhere had thus far tended to
offset the declines.
Business activity nationally, it seemed to him, declined
slightly in August. While this might represent nothing more than a
continuation of the recent zig-zag movement around a gently rising
trend, he found it somewhat disturbing that the improvement realized
in July was not sustained. As for the immediate future, he saw no
substantial reason for believing that the fall upturn this year would
be much better than seasonal.
In considering policy, it seemed to Mr. Wayne that recent for
eign developments might deserve special attention at this time Foreign

10/2/62 -26
money markets had eased significantly in recent weeks, and the impend
ing reduction in special deposits in Britain suggested some further
easing in the weeks ahead. For this and other reasons, the dollar had
lately shown encouraging strength against the major European currencies.
This situation raised the question whether, for domestic purposes, a
somewhat easier policy could safely be followed. He was inclined to
be skeptical on this point for several reasons. In the first place,
he was not altogether sure there was any real substance underlying
the dollar's recent strength, especially in view of the estimates
respecting the balance of payments deficit in August. In the second
place, he doubted that the additional amount of ease permitted by the
dollar's new strength could provide any significant domestic stimulus.
Finally, he believed it was wiser for the present to allow the dol
lar's new strength, whether temporary or permanent, to be reflected
primarily in a reduced balance of payments deficit. This would
strengthen foreign confidence in our policies and place the dollar on
a firmer basis abroad. It would also give us a freer hand to direct
our actions more specifically at the domestic situation if this should
become more urgent later this fall. For these reasons, he would
favor maintenance of about the degree of ease that had been aimed at
over the past few periods, with the Desk giving major attention to
the tone and color of the market.

10/2/62 -27
Three weeks ago, Mr. Wayne recalled, he had proposed a slight
change in the directive to eliminate reference to "further" increase
in the money supply. He renewed this proposal. Otherwise, no change
in the directive seemed desirable. He would recommend no change in
the discount rate.
Mr. Clay suggested that the Committee modify its monetary
policy by giving somewhat less emphasis to international payments
considerations and somewhat greater emphasis to the problem of domestic
economic activity. For many months, he noted, monetary policy had been
shaped in terms of both domestic and international considerations. In
determining the policy to be pursued, Committee members had referred to
the relative emphasis that should be given to these two aspects. It
was in pursuing the matter in this way, for instance, that the decision
was made last June to reduce the degree of monetary ease by giving
greater weight to the international payments problem.
In the meantime, the international balance of payments problem
generally had come to be viewed somewhat more favorably. The inter
national payments situation and prospects had to be judged not only in
terms of the interpretation of the available data but also in terms of
the prevailing international attitude. Both of these facets of the
problem had shown improvement recently, just as both registered the
earlier deterioration that the Committee decided it had to deal with.
This was not to say that the international payments problem had been
solved and accordingly could be ignored.

10/2/62 -28
At the same time, Mr. Clay pointed out, the domestic economic
situation had become less encouraging. It had become increasingly
difficult to project a satisfactory degree of economic expansion ahead,
and the possibility of another abortive upswing such as that in 1960
loomed larger month by month. The problem of resource utilization that
plagued the economy very likely involved something more fundamental
than the course of this business cycle. Moreover, it would be naive
to assume that the cure for all our ills could be found in any
prescription of monetary policy alone. But that was not to deny the
importance of monetary policy making its appropriate contribution and
of endeavoring to assure that monetary policy did not impede but rather
encouraged economic expansion.
Mr. Clay noted that his suggestion for a change in emphasis
between international and domestic considerations and for a greater
degree of monetary ease was a very moderate one. It might be stated
as a policy under which reserve funds would be supplied liberally
enough to assure bank credit expansion beyond seasonal proportions and
under which operations would probe toward a slightly lower Treasury
bill rate. In the process, it could be expected that interest rates
would decline in the longer maturities as well, and that would be a
desirable development. In fact, that tendency should be encouraged by
making some open market purchases in those maturities. If, in the
Committee's judgment, the Treasury bill rate could not be permitted to

10/2/62 -29
decline, it would be all the more important that open market
operations be conducted in longer maturities with a view to en
couraging some reduction in longer term interest rates in that way.
No change was recommended in the Reserve Bank discount rate.
Mr. Scanlon said available evidence for September indicated
continuation of business activity in the Seventh District at a stable
or gradually rising level. While some businessmen expected a reces
sion beginning in the fourth quarter of this year or early 1963, the
more generally held view was that the present level of activity would
be maintained or that there would be a slight improvement during the
remainder of this year. During the summer months there had been some
decline in District manufacturing activity. Part of this was attri
butable to the closing down of automobile plants for the model
changeover, but other lines of activity also were affected. One
important industry, radio-television, cut back production sharply to
reduce inventories. At present the automobile industry was awaiting
public reaction to the new models before making further forecasts. In
the real estate field, there was some concern that apartment construc
tion might be approaching a peak. New units were more difficult to
rent, even with substantial concessions. A number of large commercial
structures planned for the Chicago area had been delayed, if not can
celed, because sufficient floor space could not be leased in advance.
Retail trade was following the national pattern; for the four weeks

10/2/62 -30
ended September 22, department store sales were 8 per cent above last
year. As the result of excellent crops and favorable prices, farm
income was going to exceed last year's level, and it appeared that the
higher level of income was likely to be maintained in 1963. Business
loan demand improved somewhat in the first three weeks of September.
In view of the continued stability of business activity at a
level moderately below what he considered desirable, Mr. Scanlon sug
gested that reserves be provided liberally to meet seasonal needs.
Beyond this, it would seem appropriate to provide additional reserves
to the extent that this could be done without excessive stimulation
of capital flows abroad. In the absence of a sufficiently strong
demand for capital, this presented the possibility of a further decline
in bill rates. He would be inclined to let the bill rate decline
slightly, but he would continue to keep a close watch on domestic and
international developments.
Mr. Scanlon concluded by saying that he would not recommend
changing the discount rate or the policy directive.
Mr. Deming reported that the Ninth District continued to move
along fairly well. Economic activity had expanded more in the first
three quarters of this year than the comparable period of 1961, due to
greater output of manufactured products and minerals along with a
better agricultural situation. A near-record small grain crop was
being harvested. There had been no significant changes in employment

10/2/62 -31
in recent months. Preliminary Minnesota employment figures for
September showed a slight gain from August, with unemployment down
somewhat. The Reserve Bank's most recent survey of business sentiment
showed no substantial change from the results of the survey taken six
weeks earlier. Two-thirds of the respondents felt that some improve
ment was probable during the next several weeks, while one-fourth
looked for stability and less than 10 per cent looked for a decline.
The percentage anticipating a decline was slightly higher than six
weeks previously, but not significantly higher.
During September there was a large loan increase at city
banks, with a substantial part of the increase in business loans.
Demand deposits were growing rapidly at both city and country banks.
Time deposit growth had slowed at city banks, but such deposits were
still running 50 per cent ahead of last year. At country banks, time
deposit growth continued at the rate that had prevailed thus far this
year.
Mr. Deming said it seemed to him there had been a worsening
of the balance of payments problem recently, but at the same time
some increase in confidence in the dollar. The present situation
might afford a little more latitude with regard to the bill rate than
had been thought possible in the recent past. However, the liquidity
of the banking system, and of the economy generally, appeared ample.
Banks were working hard to make loans, and with a reasonable amount

10/2/62 -32
of success in the Ninth District. There seemed no reason to make the
banks sell assets in order to expand their loans, or to cause them to
borrow. In his opinion, however, a loan expansion without such results
could be achieved under current monetary policy, and he would favor
maintaining about the same posture as at present. He would meet
seasonal reserve needs adequately, perhaps generously and somewhat in
anticipation of those needs, and he would try to keep member bank bor
rowing at its current low level. For a free reserve guide, he would
suggest approximately $400 million. As to the bill rate, while he
would not want it to decline too much, he would not worry if it dropped
another 4 to 6 basis points.
In summary, Mr. Deming said, he was not advocating a policy of
more ease. However, he would be inclined to place more emphasis on the
side of reserves than on the side of the bill rate. He saw no parti
cular reason to change the policy directive, and would be willing to
argue that there was no need to change the word "further," as used in
the first sentence. In its present form the directive said just about
what he was attempting to say with regard to monetary policy. He saw
no reason to change the discount rate.
Mr. Swan reported further economic gains in the Twelfth District,
but at a very modest rate. Department store sales were well maintained
in August and on into September. The unemployment rate in the Pacific
Coast States (seasonally adjusted) declined from 5.9 per cent in July

10/2/62 -33
to 5.7 per cent in August. Employment increases although small in
total were fairly general, with the largest occurring in construction.
Some encouragement could be taken from the fact that in manufacturing
there were gains in both durable and nondurable categories. The only
major manufacturing industry showing no improvement from July to
August was lumber and wood products.
At weekly reporting banks total credit continued to rise during
the first three weeks of September, with loan increases playing a
rather significant part. Business loans increased and real estate
loans continued to rise. One major branch banking system indicated
recently that the increase in real estate loans, which it had been
pushing for several months, had now gone about far enough to suit its
purposes from the standpoint of portfolio balance. In August, there
was a substantial increase in share accounts at savings and loan
associations.
Turning to policy, Mr. Swan indicated that he would favor
moving cautiously toward a little greater ease. In a sense he felt
that this had been done in the first two weeks of the past three-week
period. The results were about in line with what he would have liked
to see previously. The System would have to supply a substantial
amount of reserves to meet seasonal developments in the immediate
future, and it.should encourage a somewhat more than seasonal expansion
in bank loans. Admittedly, it was not possible to solve everything

10/2/62 -34
through monetary policy, but in his opinion some operation on the
margin was entirely justified. One of the reasons he had been
advocating only a modest move toward greater ease was that while he
had some question about the efficacy of still higher levels of short
term rates he also recognized that a too sudden or too large decline
in short-term rates might have adverse effects from the standpoint
of foreign confidence in the dollar. However, since mid-July the
bill rate had moved from a high of virtually 3 per cent to the present
level of 2-3/4 per cent with, as far as he could see, no significant
loss of confidence. He saw no reason at the moment for trying to
move back up from the present level.
In summary, Mr. Swan said, he would supply reserves fairly
freely. He would think in terms of a free reserve figure somewhere
around $450 million and a bill rate that would fluctuate around or
slightly below 2-3/4 per cent. He would define his prescription as
a modest move toward greater ease.
After stating that he would not recommend a change in the dis
count rate, Mr. Swan turned to the policy directive and said he had
some sympathy with the point expressed by Mr. Robertson at the
September 11 meeting. The present directive could well encompass the
type of policy that he (Mr. Swan) had in mind. The main question
seemed to center in one's interpretation of the final phrase in the
directive, which referred to maintaining a moderately firm tone in
money markets.

10/2/62 -35-
Mr. King withdrew from the meeting at this point to leave for
an out-of-town engagement.
Mr. Irons said that on the basis of figures for August and the
first part of September activity in the Eleventh District seemed to
continue without much change on a very high plateau. Most of the major
indicators showed increases around 6 or 8 per cent from the year-ago
range. He was not sure how the economy would come out of the present
plateau. In the past it had never been known in advance just how the
economy was going to move in such a situation. There was a tendency
to keep looking for figures that might provide a clue; sometimes he
thought it might be better to concentrate less on relatively small
changes in figures.
Attitudes in the District were good, according to Mr. Irons,
with no pessimism evident among businessmen and bankers. He did not
find any expectation of a great upsurge, but the majority sentiment
looked for some further improvement during the remainder of this year.
Department store sales were running 8 per cent above a year ago, with
the recent movement just about seasonal, and there was no change in
crude oil production. The allowables that had been in effect for some
time were expected to continue, but the industry had effected economies
and should show quite satisfactory profits at the end of theyyear. The
industrial production index showed no change in the past month. Non
agricultural employment was up, and unemployment was at the rate of

10/2/62 -36
4.7 per cent. Construction activity continued at a high level,
although it dropped off seomwhat in the past month. On the whole
this was going to be a good year for agriculture, with cash farm
receipts probably 6 to 8 per cent above a year ago. Thus the pic
ture in the Eleventh District was generally satisfactory. In his
judgment, there was no indication at this time that the economy was
inevitably recession bound.
Mr. Irons said that he came out again in his thinking in favor
of a continuation of current policy, with no change in the directive
or discount rate. The Account Management should be given considerable
leeway to operate according to the tone of the market, and he did not
think the Committee should set up any figures as an absolute guide.
However, if current policy were continued, including provision for a
full and adequate supplying of reserves for seasonal purposes, he felt
that this would probably result in free reserves somewhere around $400
million, give or take $50 million, Federal funds in the 2-3/4 - 3 per
cent area, and a bill rate around 2.70 per cent. As to the bill rate,
he would not put too much weight on any specific figure, but he would
watch the situation continuously to avoid getting out of line with
other factors and bringing about a situation that was not wanted.
Perhaps a range from 2.65 to 2.75 per cent would be satisfactory. The
Desk had a good impression in terms of tone and feel of the market,
and could take steps to maintain the bill rate within an appropriate

10/2/62 -37
range. He would expect member bank borrowing to remain small, as it
had been except for a day or two. The banks should not have to
borrow for normal seasonal requirements in the weeks ahead.
In conclusion, Mr. Irons said that to the extent possible,
without aggravating other factors and without having to undertake
substantial open market operations, he would consider it desirable to
operate in the intermediate area of the market in order to relieve
pressure on the short-term rate. He recognized that it might not be
possible to do this in substantial amount or continuously.
Mr. Ellis said that in New England the upward economic creep
was continuing. In August, the industrial production index gained
1-1/2 points. Data for September were very slender, but they did
reflect strong department store sales. Auto dealers reportedly were
pleased with customer acceptance of the new models, and some reported
a record backlog of orders.
Mr. Ellis noted that the recent report of the Wharton School
of Finance on investment funds had been blamed in some quarters for
the recent weakness in the stock market. There was a measure of
apprehension that the report would result in slower investment fund
sales, and that some funds might become net sellers rather than
buyers, with potential market impact. A check indicated that sales
men had encountered some cusrteosmiesrta nce traceable to the impact
of the report, and that sales were somewhat slower in September.

10/2/62 -38
However, the effects appeared to be minor and the funds apparently
were continuing to grow. There seemed to be no real prospect of
their shifting to the position of net sellers.
First District banks apparently continued to experience a
somewhat greater than seasonal loan demand. With demand deposits
dropping a little more than seasonally in August and September, the
average loan-deposit ratio reached a postwar peak in early September.
Since then, there had been some recovery of deposits, thus lowering
the ratio slightly.
Mr. Ellis noted that the results of open market operations
during the past three weeks had been within the area of expectations
at the September 11 meeting. Except for one brief period, the Desk
had avoided inadvertent tightness, which was in accord with the hope
expressed generally by the Committee. The market appeared to have
an understanding of the System's willingness to supply reserves
liberally as needed.
Mr. Ellis went on to say that there continued to be need for
concern about the international movement of funds. The position of
the dollar might be explained verbally for a while, but the real
impact was in the figures themselves. Therefore, he would like to see
the System allow the international position of the dollar to be firm,
and hold that firmness for a while, before probing to find the effects
of a lower short-term rate. While it was necessary to have in mind

10/2/62 -39
internal problems, the domestic economy was still advancing. Until
he saw a somewhat more serious economic prediction than was apparent
in today's staff presentation, he would regard any material change
in policy as both unnecessary and undesirable. In these circumstances,
and in view of the evidence of adequate liquidity and adequate avail
ability of funds, he was led to suggest that there not be any basic
changes in policy. For the forthcoming period, he would have in mind
free reserves in the area of $400 million, a Federal funds rate within
the pattern that had prevailed since last spring, and a short-term
rate of around 2-3/4 per cent. He would continue to endeavor to avoid
any inadvertent market tightness, and he would meet seasonal reserve
needs freely, with a view to keeping member bank borrowing at a low
level.
As to the directive, Mr. Ellis said he was disturbed by the
use of the word "permitting" in describing the Committee's attitude
toward expansion of bank credit and money, for he felt the word
implied a grudging attitude that was not appropriate at this time.
Without intending to suggest any change of a material nature in policy,
he felt that the first paragraph of the directive could be improved by
indicating that the Committee's policy was to encourage the expansion
of money and bank credit. He would not recommend any change in the
discount rate at this time.

10/2/62 -40
Mr. Balderston commented that he had heard a great deal this
morning with which he could agree. His own thinking brought him to
about the same position that had been described by Mr. Ellis. The
suggestion made by Mr. Hayes regarding the importance of fiscal
policy was one with which he concurred. However, as he thought about
that problem in relation to the determination of monetary policy, he
kept reminding himself that although Federal spending in excess of
receipts doubtless could be a potent stimulus if devoted to con
structive purposes, such spending in this country was not always as
constructive as it might be in terms of increasing the health of the
economy and its competitive strength. Much of the Federal spending
did not create permanent job opportunities, in fact tended to
damage the profit expectations that would stimulate private invest
ment and the creation of jobs.
Mr. Balderston felt that the nature of the over-all problem
had been described well by Mr. Shepardson. Existing excess capacity
and unemployment could be traced to wage rates that had tended to
keep many potential employees out of jobs and had resulted in prices
that made it difficult, in some lines, to compete in world markets.
The question was how to proceed from the present point. The progress
in re-establishing a basic international balance was all too slow,
and the figures presented this morning did not indicate that the
problem would be solved quickly. During the time necessary to

10/2/62 -41
re-establish that basic balance, the willingness of foreign central
banks to keep their reserves in dollars might diminish further.
Consequently, he concluded that the Committee could not dismiss
international considerations from its thinking and would not be able
to dismiss them over the foreseeable future. While he would like to
see some variation in interest rates to get away from the constant
talk of pegging, the System should be alert continually to the
impression being created in the eyes of foreign bankers, who were
watching all the time to see whether the proper discipline and
judgment were going to be exercised. Even though the situation now
confronting the Federal Reserve was not of its own making and could
not be corrected by monetary policy alone, nevertheless the central
bank was looked upon by the world as reflecting the mood of the
country in the area of monetary affairs.
All of this suggested to him, Mr. Balderston said, that the
System must continue to live with the problem of reconciling domestic
and international goals. He saw no better pattern to follow than the
one that the System had been following. Therefore, he came out at
the point of favoring continuation of the status quo.
Chairman Martin, after referring to the thoughtful tone of the
discussion at the September meeting and at this meeting, went on to say
that he had been planning to comment along somewhat the same lines as
Mr. King. First, however, he wanted to make it clear that he did not

10/2/62 -42
profess to know the answers to the present problem. He did not have
any firm conviction on a positive approach to its solution. Like
Mr. King, he thought a stage had been reached where the old benchmarks
and tests no longer applied. Mr. Bopp had stated effectively the
case for easier money. If the old benchmarks and the old standards
still applied, that would be the course to follow, but he (Chairman
Martin) doubted whether they did. He was convinced that one could
make just as good a case, in the present circumstances, that easier
money would retard growth and development as that it would assist.
The case could not be proven on either side, of course, but this was
the real problem with which the System was dealing.
The Chairman recalled having referred a number of times to
the real estate situation. At present he had just come back from a
personal study of apartment building in one area, and he was convinced
that the picture would be better if funds were not so readily avail
able; that the situation would be handled in a more satisfactory way,
with satisfactory rentals, if it were not for the fact that builders
could obtain all the credit they wanted at relatively low rates.
Also, unless conditions changed in the economy, he thought it possible
that the prime rate might be reduced. If that was in prospect, he
would prefer to have market forces take the lead, just as he would on
the up side, rather than to see the Federal Reserve in a forcing
position.

10/2/62 -43
The Chairman said he came out with the view that when you
are not clear what you should do--when there are two sides to the
question--the maintenance of the status quo is usually the best
course to follow. He felt that this would be the most appropriate
policy for the Committee to follow at this time.
In saying this, the Chairman continued, he wished to express
his concurrence with those who had commented about a lack of comfort
in the balance of payments problem. He had come away from the Fund
and Bank meetings with a rather dim view of the situation. While he
hoped that he was wrong, it would be foolish to ignore the possibility
of a payments crisis at some point. The pace of activity throughout
many parts of the world seemed to be slowing down at the same time,
and he doubted whether the old stimulants were going to be brought to
bear on a methodical basis, because nations would tend to reason
primarily in their own interests. While he hoped he was wrong, there
could be a critical period ahead. Admittedly, many storms had been
foreseen that never developed, but he felt it was the part of wisdom
to move cautiously.
With regard to the points that had been made about fiscal
policy, Chairman Martin recalled having remarked at the September
meeting about the persistent tendency over a period of years to place
on monetary policy too large a burden. Perhaps this would never change,
but he felt it was the wrong approach. Should any crisis develop, he
doubted whether monetary policy was going to be terribly effective.

10/2/62 -44
The Chairman repeated that he was not sure what should be
done in this kind of a situation. Since we were not living in a
laissez-faire economy, various efforts would be made. He hoped the
tax reform that had been overdue for many years would be accomplished,
and he thought it probably would. In broader terms, he noted that
it is only when substantial difficulties are encountered that ways
are found to meet them. In talking as he had, he might be taking too
pessimistic a view. Nevertheless, he had felt that he should make
these general observations, hoping at the same time that he was
completely wrong in his judgment.
So far as the System's posture was concerned, Chairman Martin
felt that it should supply all of the reserves that could be used
constructively. In many areas of the economy, however, it was his
judgment that additional reserves could hinder rather than help.
Chairman Martin then said that while he thought the sugges
tions made regarding the policy directive had merit, in his opinion
it was possible to operate satisfactorily under the present direc
tive. The use of the word "permit" had been debated before; perhaps
a better word could have been chosen initially. However, he was not
sure to what extent it was desirable to change words in the absence
of a fundamental change in policy. It seemed to him questionable
whether the directive could be much more than a skeleton outline within
which the Account Manager had to work, knowing the shades of opinion
around the table.

10/2/62 -45
Chairman Martin said it would be his inclination to poll the
Committee on the basis of no change in the discount rate and no
change in the policy directive, and see whether that carried. If it
did, any dissents would, of course, be recorded. If it did not carry,
the question of the wording of the policy directive could be opened
up for further discussion.
Question was raised whether this implied a continuation of
current policy, and the Chairman replied in the affirmative.
A poll was then taken on the basis indicated, and eight members
of the Committee recorded themselves in the affirmative. Messrs. Mills
and Mitchell dissented.
In dissenting, Mr. Mitchell said that he did not object
particularly to the language of the directive and that he would not
favor a change in the discount rate. However, he felt that monetary
policy should be easier.
Mr. Mills said his reasoning was similar to that of Mr. Mitchell.
He felt that a maintenance of the status quo was not appropriate to
present conditions and that the Committee should move very gradually
toward a somewhat greater degree of ease. He shared the Chairman's
concern about the longer run outlook and the possibility of a payments
crisis. However, the stronger the American economy, the better this
country would be able to stand any such crisis and assist its friends
abroad. To that end, in his opinion, a policy that would be modestly
more expansionary than the status quo should be adopted.

10/2/62 -46-
The Chairman then inquired whether there were other comments,
and Mr. Hayes said he would like to make it clear that in talking
about fiscal policy in the course of his statement today, his comments
were directed primarily toward tax reform.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York was authorized and directed, until
otherwise directed by the Committee, to
effect transactions for the System Open
Market Account in accordance with the fol
lowing current economic policy directive:
It is the current policy of the Federal Open Market
Committee to permit the supply of bank credit and money to
increase further, but at the same time to avoid redundant
bank reserves that would encourage capital outflows inter
nationally. This policy takes into account, on the one hand,
the gradualness of recent advance in economic activity and
the availability of resources to permit further advance in
activity. On the other hand, it gives recognition to the
bank credit expansion over the past year and to the role of
capital flows in the country's adverse balance of payments.
To implement this policy, operations for the System
Open Market Account during the next three weeks shall be
conducted with a view to providing moderate reserve ex
pansion in the banking system and to fostering a moderately
firm tone in money markets.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,
Hayes, Balderston, Bryan, Deming, Ellis,
Fulton, and Shepardson. Votes against this
action: Messrs. Mills and Mitchell.
Chairman Martin referred at this point to the announced intent
of the Treasury to offer within the near future $250 million of long
term bonds for competitive bidding by syndicates. He noted that
Mr. Stone had referred to the forthcoming program and that Mr. Mills

10/2/62 -47
had alluded to the memorandum from Mr. Keir, which dealt with the
degree of Federal Reserve support to the market that would seem
appropriate during the period of the underwriting.
Mr. Hayes said that he had read Mr. Keir's memorandum with
interest. If there was a point where he differed to any extent with
the author, it might be in the suggestion--made or implied in the
memorandum--that the Federal Reserve should make some statement to
the market regarding its policy, and furthermore that the Federal
Reserve should regard itself--within its own ranks--as having some
commitment in this respect. Mr. Hayes felt that the System should
avoid any real or implied commitment and should make no formal state
ment to the market. He believed that the System should try to
maintain an even keel during the period of the underwriting, just as
it had always done in times of Treasury financing. There might be a
slight difference, in view of the new technique being employed, from
the standpoint of the length of the period when the even keel would be
applicable; Mr. Keir's definition of the applicable period seemed to
him about right. In substance, however, he would hope the Federal
Reserve might simply indicate to the market, if asked, that it would
have every intention of trying to do what it had always done to main
tain an even keel during periods of Treasury financing. He would try
to avoid too specific a definition. The Government securities dealers

10/2/62 -48
were well aware of what had been done in the past, and they could
interpret to the investment banking community approximately how the
even keel had worked.
Mr. Mills said he subscribed to what Mr. Hayes had just
stated. He would be extremely cautious about saying anything. The
market should look to the good faith of the System to give every
reasonable encouragement to a Treasury financing, as it had done in
the past. Mr. Mills expressed concern that if programs of this kind
were conducted, and one of them did not go particularly well, the
Federal Reserve would be importuned to offer strong support to the
Government bond market and would run the risk of movig toward a peg.
Chairman Martin commented that to him it made good sense that
the System should not bind or commit itself in any way and that it
should exercise caution. He subscribed completely to what Mr. Hayes
had said. The Chairman then inquired whether there was any different
view.
Mr. Noyes noted that he had found the words "even keel" un
satisfactory. He inquired whether, if any comment were made, the
words might be excluded and the comment phrased in terms of avoiding
any major change in policy during the period of the underwriting. He
had observed that people frequently placed more meaning on the words
"even keel" than was intended.

10/2/62 -49
Chairman Martin replied that, while he agreed, no doubt one
of the first questions asked would be whether the System intented to
maintain an "even keel."
Mr. Hayes observed that through long usage the words "even
keel" did exist in the minds of many people in the market. If an
effort was made to avoid their use completely, people in the market
might feel that something had changed.
Mr. Bopp suggested that the System could not even commit itself
not to make any major change in policy. It could hardly make any com
mitment except to act in a manner that would be regarded as rational
in the prevailing circumstances.
There being no further comments from members of the Committee,
it was understood that the Committee agreed generally with the point
of view expressed by Mr. Hayes in his initial statement on this
subject.
Messrs. Koch and Broida withdrew from the meeting at this
point.
There had been distributed to the Committee a report from the
Special Manager of the System Open Market Account on foreign exchange
market conditions and on Open Market Account and Treasury operations
in foreign currencies for the period September 11 through September 26,
1962, together with a supplementary report covering the period
September 27 through October 1, 1962. Copies of these reports have
been placed in the files of the Committee.

10/2/62 -50
At the request of the Chairman, Mr. Coombs commented in sup
plementation of the written reports with respect to foreign exchange
market developments, the United States gold position, System foreign
exchange operations, and Treasury operations that had been undertaken
or were now in process.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the System
Open Market Account transactions in foreign
currencies during the period September 11 to
October 1, 1962, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
With reference to prospective System operations, Mr. Coombs
noted that under the $100 million swap facility with the Bank for
International Settlements, entered into on July 16, 1962, there re
mained outstanding $40 million under the System's July 16 Swiss franc
drawing along with $10 million under the August 7 drawing. (Of the
$50 million July 16 drawing, $10 million had been repaid.)
Mr. Coombs said he was hopeful that the System would be able
to acquire additional Swiss franc balances during the coming weeks.
However, it did not seem probable that the System would be able fully
to reverse the outstanding drawings by the maturity date of the swap
arrangement. The dollar had been strengthening against the Swiss
franc, but not to a point where sizable purchases could be made.
Accordingly, Mr. Coombs suggested that the Committee authorize
a three-month renewal of the swap arrangement with the Bank for Inter
national Settlements as well as the outstanding drawings.

10/2/62 -51
Without objection, the proposed
three-month renewal of the swap arrange
ment with the Bank for International
Settlements, as well as the outstanding
drawings thereunder, was authorized.
Mr. Coombs also referred to the $100 million swap arrangement
with the Swiss National Bank dated July 16, 1962, and to the outstand
ing drawing of $50 million made on the same date, none of which had
been repaid. The circumstances of this situation being the same as
previously indicated with respect to the swap agreement with the Bank
for International Settlements, Mr. Coombs suggested that the Committee
authorize renewal for a three-month period of the swap arrangement
with the Swiss National Bank as well as the outstanding drawing there
under.
Without objection, the proposed three
month renewal of the swap arrangement with
the Swiss National Bank, as well as the out
standing drawing thereunder, was authorized.
Mr. Coombs next reported discussion with the Governor of the
Austrian National Bank concerning the continued flow of dollars into
Austria, which had resulted in reducing to roughly 40 per cent the
relationship of gold to dollar holdings of the Bank. Current arrange
ments within Austria were understood to contemplate the maintenance of
a 50 per cent ratio, and it would require gold purchases of roughly
$80 million to restore that ratio. In these circumstances he had dis
cussed with the Governor of the Austrian National Bank the possibility
of a $50 million dollar-schilling swap arrangement in order to absorb

10/2/62 -52
an equivalent amount of surplus dollars on the books of the Austrian
National Bank. If this were done, gold purchases between now and the
end of this year might be limited to no more than $30 million. Further,
upon maturity of the swap arrangement, the transfer of the remaining
excess dollar holdings of $50 million into gold might be stretched out
over the first quarter of next year.
Mr. Coombs said he would be inclined not to seek renewal of
such a swap arrangement at maturity. However, if the swap resulted
in delaying the purchase of an equivalent amount of gold for a period
of at least three months, he felt that it would be worth while. In
the meantime there could conceivably be a reversal of the flow of funds,
which would provide a means of liquidating the swap, but he felt that
such a reversal was not in immediate prospect. In response to a
question, Mr. Coombs cited economic recovery in Austria as the general
basis for the inflow of funds. In particular, the tourist trade had
picked up substantially.
In discussion of the matter, Mr. Mitchell referred to the
Guidelines for System Foreign Currency Operations, as adopted by the
Open Market Committee on February 13, 1962, and commented to the
effect that they appeared to contemplate operations to deal with short
run reversible flows of funds. He did not understand that they

10/2/62 -53
contemplated operations that would interfere with fundamental adjust
ments, which appeared to him to be involved in the Austrian situation.1/
In reply, Mr. Coombs noted that reduction of the U. S. gold
stock was one of the elements in short-run psychology, which had a
great deal to do with the position of the dollar in the exchange markets.
Chairman Martin then commented that he would be inclined to
regard the proposed Austrian transaction as an operation constituting
an exception to the type of operations contemplated by the Committee's
Guidelines. The swap arrangement was proposed on a three-month basis,
without renewal, and he saw merit in undertaking this effort for the
purpose of spacing out prospective purchases of gold from the United
States.
In response to a further question, Mr. Coombs repeated he would
not want to hold out to the Committee the hope of a reversal of the
flow of funds into Austria such as to permit liquidation of the swap.
This was possible, but he would not want to suggest to the Committee
that it was a likely possibility. However, if the swap arrangement was
executed, he hoped that the Austrians would stretch out their acquisi
tions of gold until about the end of the first quarter of 1963.
1/ The Guidelines provide that System exchange transactions shall be
mainly geared to pressures of payments flows so as to cushion or
moderate disequilibrating movements of volatile funds and their
destabilizing effects on U. S. and foreign official reserves and
on exchange markets.

10/2/62 -54
In reply to another question, Mr. Coombs noted that the
execution of the proposed swap agreement would constitute the giving
of an exchange guarantee, not a gold guarantee. The swap agreement
would provide a means of postponing the purchase of the equivalent
amount of gold by giving the Austrian National Bank something that
was not the same as gold, or a gold guarantee, but something that
would relieve the pressure upon the Bank to purchase gold. Asked
whether he foresaw the possibility of difficulty in purchasing
Austrian schillings such as had been encountered in acquiring
Netherlands guilders for the purpose of liquidating System drawings
under the swap with the Netherlands Bank, Mr. Coombs pointed out that
the Austrian schilling was now at its upper limit. At that level there
was no problem, because the Austrians must sell schillings at the
ceiling under their obligation to the International Monetary Fund.
Mr. Hayes noted that it was necessary to have clearly in mind
the difference between the U. S. Government's negative attitude toward
the giving of gold guarantees and its attitude toward exchange
guarantees under swap transactions. Every swap that had been entered
into had involved an exchange guarantee on both sides.
After further reference had been made to the type of operations
contemplated by the Committee's Guidelines, Chairman Martin again stated
that he would regard the Austrian proposal as an exception. In the

10/2/62 -55
circumstances, however, including the cooperative attitude on the part
of the Austrian National Bank, he saw merit in making this exception.
Question was raised whether similar situations might not arise
in the case of other countries, and the Chairman replied that he thought
this was possible. He suggested that the Committee had adopted the
Guidelines with a view to possible changes after System foreign exchange
operations had been conducted over an experimental period.
Mr. Young indicated that the staff of the Committee would be
glad to review the Guidelines from the standpoint of suggesting pos
sible changes to the Committee.
Mr. Hayes commented, in support of Chairman Martin's earlier
statement, that the Guidelines had never been intended to be permanent
and rigid. At the outset the Committee had not been sure exactly how
the foreign currency operations program would develop. It was a
question of experimentation.
Mr. Young noted that it would be planned, after the three
month period of the Austrian swap arrangement, that the swap would
remain outstanding on a standby basis, so this would be one more step
in building up a network of such facilities.
In reply to a question with regard to the advantages seen in
an arrangement designed to stretch out over a period as long as six
months a loss of gold that would otherwise be in immediate prospect,
Mr. Coombs referred to the reaction of the European central banking

10/2/62 -56
community to a substantial loss of gold by the United States in any
single week. If the United States had to lose gold, it would seem
preferable to keep those losses orderly rather than to risk the
pressures that might be felt by the respective central banks if it
appeared from the gold figures that the line was being broken by
unusual purchases of gold by any one central bank. Mr. Coombs said
he could assure the Committee that the Treasury considered it
desirable to do whatever was possible to stretch out gold losses and
minimize substantial losses at any one particular time.
Thereupon, further negotiations with
the Austrian National Bank looking toward
the execution of a $50 million schilling
dollar three-month swap arrangement were
authorized.
Mr. Coombs reported recent discussions indicating that the
Bank of Italy might like to be included in the network of Federal
Reserve swap arrangements in the form of a $50 million dollar-lira
facility. As he saw it, the major argument in favor of such a swap
was the rounding out of a system of swap agreements with the major
countries in anticipation of possible future needs rather than any
present need. As long as the flow of funds into Italy remained basic,
with no speculative overtones visible, he saw no purpose in drawing
upon such a swap arrangement with the Bank of Italy. He rather
expected that the Treasury would continue its present efforts to deal
with the problem by various arrangements. Accordingly, he suggested

10/2/62 -57-
that the Committee authorize negotiations with the Bank of Italy
looking toward a $50 million dollar-lira swap facility on a standby
basis.
Without objection, negotiations look-
ing toward the arrangement of such a swap
facility were authorized.
Mr. Coombs stated that during the recent Fund and Bank meetings
a representative of the Bank of Japan had initiated discussions regard-
ing the possibility of a dollar-yen swap arrangement. Mr. Coombs noted
that the yen was not a fully convertible currency, but that Japanese
officials hoped to be able to make considerable progress in that
direction before too long. If this was done, he felt that it might be
useful to enter into a swap arrangement with the Bank of Japan. The
Japanese balance of payments had shown sizable swings over the past
year or so; there was clearly a large element of reversible flows in
the Japanese situation. There might also be certain advantages in a
swap arrangement from the standpoint of providing an incentive for the
Japanese to postpone purchases of gold; the Japanese gold-dollar ratio
was only about 17 per cent. In these circumstances, he inquired
whether the Committee would want to authorize negotiations looking
toward a swap arrangement with the Bank of Japan as and when the
Japanese yen moved to a point close enough to status of full con-
vertibility to justify such an arrangement.

10/2/62 -58
Mr. Coombs added that he saw certain advantages in entering
into standby swap arrangements with Austria, Italy, and Japan fairly
soon and then letting it be generally understood that the Federal
Reserve had more or less completed the network of such arrangements.
The three countries he had mentioned, along with those with whom swap
arrangements were currently outstanding, fell into the category of
important industrial countries. There seemed a relatively clean line
of demarcation between them and other countries of the world.
Mr. Coombs pointed out that according to the Committee's
continuing authority directive on System foreign currency operations,
the total of foreign currencies held at any one time was not to exceed
$750 million. (This maximum figure had been fixed by the Committee at
the meeting on July 10, 1962.) He suggested that the Committee might
want to consider increasing the $750 million figure to at least $900
million.
In this connection, Mr. Coombs said he was hopeful that the
Bank of Canada might pay down its outstanding swap arrangement by
some amount, since Canada was continuing to take in U. S. dollars at
a heavy rate. On the other hand, during this particular season of
the year the British might want to draw upon the outstanding sterling
dollar standby swap facility and/or to enlarge that facility. In
addition, there was the possibility that the Federal Reserve might want
to acquire quantities of certain foreign currencies outright, including
Netherlands guilders.

10/2/62 -59
Mr. Coombs likewise brought out that the authorization of the
Open Market Committee to conduct negotiations looking toward a swap
arrangement with the Austrian National Bank suggested the desirability
of amending the Committee's continuing authority directive on foreign
currency operations at this time by adding the Austrian schilling to
the list of currencies that the New York Reserve Bank was authorized
and directed to purchase and sell. If the Committee wished to con
sider the possibility of a swap facility with the Bank of Japan, it
might also want to add the Japanese yen to the authorized list of
currencies. In addition, consideration of swap arrangements with the
Austrian National Bank or the Bank of Japan would suggest that the
Board of Governors authorize the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to
open and maintain accounts with such banks.
In a discussion of the items referred to by Mr. Coombs,
Mr. Mitchell expressed the view that it would be inadvisable for the
Open Market Committee to consider the possibility of entering into
a swap agreement with the Bank of Japan in the absence of more
adequate background information. Going beyond this particular case,
he suggested that in advance of discussion by the Committee of other
swaps that might be proposed in the future, it would be desirable for
the staff to supply written documentation to assist the Committee in
forming a judgment.

10/2/62 -60
Mr. Young noted that there was a distinction between the
Austrian and Japanese cases. The Austrians had met the conditions
of convertibility of the International Monetary Fund, whereas the
Japanese were only now going through that process. It might be some
little time before the Japanese had met the convertibility conditions.
Therefore, consideration of a possible swap arrangement with the Bank
of Japan might well be deferred until the staff had provided the
suggested documentation.
After further discussion, during which Mr. Coombs expressed
agreement with the comments made by Mr. Young in regard to the
Japanese matter, Chairman Martin expressed the view that Mr. Mitchell
had raised a valid point on the matter of procedure. In the future,
it would seem desirable if the staff could furnish, in advance of
Committee discussion, background documentation along the lines suggested.
This had been done in several instances in the past when swap agreements
were under consideration.
With respect to the Committee's Guidelines, Mr. Mills suggested
that the impression may have been left from the discussion today that
the Guidelines were not fixed. He expressed doubt as to whether that
was the judgment of the Open Market Committee when the Guidelines were
approved on February 13, 1962. It was in order to bring up the
question of possible relaxation of the Guidelines, but as matters stood

10/2/62 -61
he felt that the Guidelines had been intended by the Committee as a
stricture in the handling of foreign currency operations.
Chairman Martin replied that this was why Mr. Mitchell had
performed a service in pointing out that the Austrian swap was pro
posed on a basis that would constitute an exception to the Guidelines.
If changes were to be made in the Guidelines, however, he felt that
the question should be considered fully by the Open Market Committee.
Comments by other members of the Committee reflected an
understanding that the Guidelines were not being changed at this time,
that the proposed Austrian swap would be entered into on a basis that
would constitute an exception to the Guidelines, and that further
consideration might be given by the Committee at an appropriate time
to whether the Guidelines should be formally amended.
There was unanimous agreement that consideration of the pos
sibility of entering into a swap agreement with the Bank of Japan, as
and when the situation with respect to the Japanese yen admitted that
possibility, would await the furnishing of appropriate background
documentation to the Open Market Committee.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the con
tinuing authority directive to the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York on System foreign
currency operations was amended so as to
authorize and direct the New York Reserve
Bank, until otherwise directed by the Fed
eral Open Market Committee, to execute
transactions in the System Open Market
Account in accordance with the following
directive:

10/2/62 -62-
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is authorized and
directed to purchase and sell through spot transactions any
or all of the following currencies in accordance with the
Guidelines on System Foreign Currency Operations issued by
the Federal Open Market Committee on February 13, 1962:
Pounds sterling
French francs
German marks
Italian lire
Netherlands guilders
Swiss francs
Belgian francs
Canadian dollars
Austrian schillings
Total foreign currencies held at any one time shall not
exceed $1 billion.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, October 23, 1962.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary.