A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, July 10, 1962, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Deming
Mr. Ellis
Mr. Fulton
Mr. King
Mr. Mills
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Scanlon, Clay, and Irons, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Wayne and Swan, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Brandt, Brill, Furth, Hickman, Koch,
and Willis, Associate Economists
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of Governors
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
Mr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Messrs. Hilkert, Heflin, Helmer, and Francis,
First Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of Philadelphia, Richmond, Chicago,
and St. Louis, respectively

7/10/62 -2
Messrs. Sanford, Eastburn, Baughman, Jones, Tow
Coldwell, and Einzig, Vice Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Philadelphia,
Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, and
San Francisco, respectively
Messrs. Link and Marsh of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York and Mr. Litterer of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis (Assistant
Vice Presidents)
Mr. Schott, Manager, Foreign Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Sternlight, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
the minutes of the meetings of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on May 29 and
June 19, 1962, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report on open market operations in United States
Government securities covering the period June 19 through July 3, 1962,
and a supplementary report covering the period July 4 through July 9,
1962. Copies of both reports have been placed in the files of the Com
mittee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Marsh commented
as follows:
Since the June 19 meeting of the Committee, the money market
has been firmer than in preceding periods as open market operations
have provided somewhat less availability of reserves in conformity
with the directive adopted at that meeting. Market atmosphere was
conditioned by developments in Canada and by a growing feeling
that international developments might require the System, despite
a lagging domestic economy, to move farther in a policy of less
ease. The fact that free reserves fell below $350 million for three
consecutive weeks tended to confirm these views even though the
free reserve figure jumped back to over $400 million in the week
ending July 4; the market has not paid much attention to the latter
figure.

7/10/62 3
Although open market operations were conducted with a view
to achieving a modestly lower loraeevfvs aeeirllv aeb ility,
seasonal market factors gyrated widely over the period requiring
the System to supply a massive amount of reserves during the week
ending July 4, ($951 million on balance in that week) with the
result that System holdings of Government securities in the
System Account reached an all-time high of $30,194 million on
July 3, 1962. The free reserfftcshviotuageerrtu erermene tn t
week is likely to be well over $400 million due mainly to a much
higher than expected level of float over the past week end;
efforts to reduce the reserve bulge were curtailed because of
the auction of 1-year bills today. The prospects are that the
System will have to sell more securities over the next few days
to absorb reserves in the statement week ending July 18.
Banks generally seem to have had ample reserves with which
to meet new demands for credit and there has been no redundancy
of reserves such as had been the case in earlier periods.
Federal funds rates have held for them ost part between 2-3/4
and 3 per cent.
The Treasury bill market was subjected to considerable sell
ing pressure around the end of June and the 4th of July holiday
most of which arose from banks adjusting their reserve positions;
sales of bills in the last week or so have been confined largely
to nonbank sources. The Treasury's continued offering of $200
million additional of bills in the regular weekly auctions has
helped to keep pressure on bills and the market has become quite
sensitive to the continued talk about higher interest rates.
Dealers have been cautious in acquiring new supplies of bills, and
in the auction last week the three-month bill rate rose to 2.93
per cent. The massive System purchases of bills last week reduced
dealer holdings substantially but rates again moved up yesterday
as the System sold a substantial amount of bills. In the auction
yesterday the average rate on the 91-day bills was about 2.97 per
cent and on the six-month bills about 3.10 per cent. Preliminary
ideas for the auction today, in which the $2 billion maturing
July 15 bills will be rolled over into a new one-year issue, sug
gest a rate in the neighborhood of 3-1/4 per cent.
The capital markets have reflected the uncertainties over the
international situation with accompanying prospects for a less easy
credit policy and also current rumors that the Treasury would offer
a long-term security either for new cash or in connection with its
August refunding operation. The atmosphere has been quite pessi
mistic and cautious with prices of Government securities declining
continuously after the developments in Canada came to a head.
Yields on most of the longest-term issues have risen well above 4
per cent, the rate on the 3-1/2's of 1990 being about 4.14 per cent

7/10/62
yesterday. This compares with yields somewhat below 4 per cent
which had prevailed for some time previously. Dealer positions in
intermediate- and long-term Government securities have been reduced
to a minimum and market activity has been quite light.
Prices of outstanding corporate and municipal issues have followed
a similar pattern but the supply of new issues has been somewhat re
duced over the past three weeks. The AA-rated Consolidated Edison
issue offered on June 19 at a yield of 4.26 per cent presented an
obstacle to the corporate market as it was overpriced at issue and
remained more than 75 per cent unsold until the syndicate was broken
on July 5. It then traded down about 3 points from the reoffering
price to a yield of about 4.45 per cent, and it is still only par
tially sold at that rate. The question may be asked whether the
capital markets are being seriously inhibited by the less easy
atmosphere in the money market. Inquiries indicate that buyers
have become more cautious and price conscious in view of the recently
developed uncertainties over monetary policy and interest rates.
However, this seems to be more a matter of investor psychology rather
than any lack of funds for investment as prospective buyers are
apparently holding off in expectation of higher rates. As the
calendar of new corporate issues shows only slow growth for the next
few weeks, these markets should be able to take care of themselves in
the shorter run without undue strain and there seems to be no cause
for immediate concern in this area. The large calendar of new issues
in September may present some problems at that time.
The Treasury's plans for financing are not yet certain but the
prospect is that it will continue to offer $200 million additional
new bills each week through August 16, which will practically complete
the cycle of thirteen weeks at $2 billion each. They are also thinking
of refunding the $7.4 billion mid-August maturities through cash
offerings rather than an exchange, which would permit them to borrow
a moderate amount of new cash, say $1-1/4 billion. This should carry
them through until early in October, at which time they will probably
have to borrow more new cash. Meetings are being held with market
representatives on July 24 and 25 to discuss the August financing and
the Treasury will probably announce its plans after the close of
business Thursday, July 26.
You will note from the Supplemental Report just put in your hands
that effective July 5 the name of Blyth & Co., Inc., was added to the
list of firms with which the Trading Desk is authorized to do business.
We have found that the firm is conducting dealer operations in size,
making primary markets, particularly in Treasury bills, and their
financial position and reputation is unquestionable. They should be
helpful to us in open market operations. In effect, Blyth will replace
Bartow Leeds on our list of dealers, as the latter firm was liquidated
after they were unsuccessful in raising new capital following the death
of Mr. Bartow.

7/10/62 -5
In response to Chairman Martin's invitation for comments on the
Manager's report, Mr. Mitchell inquired whether Mr. Marsh felt that in
the three-week period since the last meeting the churning in the market
and other difficulties in making projections caused difficulty in having
operations for the System Account conform to the terms of the directive
issued at the meeting on June 19.
Mr. Marsh responded that he thought in general the tone of the
money market had been approximately what the Committee wanted. The
market had been somewhat firmer than before the June 19 meeting, which
he believed was indicated to be the Committee's desire. The bill rate
had pushed up a little and the market's performance--the churning and
the problems created in making projections--apparently had been viewed
as signaling a substantial shift in monetary policy. However, Mr. Marsh
said that even though the free reserve statistics had fluctuated more
widely than might have been desired, he thought the objectives of the
Committee had been reasonably well carried out during this period.
Mr. Robertson inquired as to whether the rate pattern that had
developed during this period was about what Mr. Marsh felt the Committee
thought should take place, to which Mr. Marsh responded in the affirmative.
This was true of the Federal funds rate and the bill rate; generally
speaking, the pattern of short-term rates had been about what he under
stood the Committee wanted in issuing its directive at the June 19 meeting.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the open
market transactions in Government securities
during the period June 19 through July 9, 1962
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.

7/10/62 -6
Mr. Brill presented the following statement with respect to economic
developments.
We don't as yet have much data to measure the state of the
economy at midyear, but fragments available suggest that the
economy has lost whatever momentum it had earlier in the spring
1. June figures on manufacturing employment and average hours
worked indicate that the production index either barely held its own
last month or declined somewhat, following an increase of half a point
in May and one and a half points in April. While the comprehensive
man-hour data needed for a precise index calcultion are still not
available, we do know that manufacturing employment barely increased
last month, while average hours worked in manufacturing declined by
two-tenths of an hour, the second consecutive monthly drop.
2. The unemployment rate edged up slightly in June. Much of
the increase reflected rising uneemployment among adult male workers-
not, as many newspaper stories have suggested, the result of an influx
of teenagers. In fact, the labor force in June didn't show its usual
seasonal rise because fewer school graduates and summer workers were
seeking jobs than had been expected.
This failure of the labor force to show any significant increase
has persisted througout this recovery period. Analysis of population
data and the structure of the labor force suggests that published
figures may miss a large group of potential workers now recorded as
outside the labor force but who would take jobs if there was a more
rapid and substantial increase in economic activity. This "hidden
unemployment" is of particular importance among youths, women of
working age and for some men in the middle age group.
3. One area of demand that was of major importance in sustaining
economic expansion earlier in the year--consumer buying--appears to
have slackened somewhat in June. Auto sales were 7 per cent below the
May rate and department store sales were also own on the month. While
not conclusive, these data suggest that retail sales, which had edged
downward in May, probably declined further in June.
4. Reduced business spending for inventories also is currently
limiting the rise in activity. Inventories increased at a declining
rate in April and again in May; in June, there was likely either no
net addition to business stocks or perhaps a small decline. The using
up of steel supplies accumulated in the pre-strike-settlement period
accounts for much of the slowing, but in May there was also a halt to
accumulation of inventories by nondurable goods producers, and only
moderate accumulation at the wholesale and retail level. For the
quarter as a whole, business additions to inventories are estimated
at less than half the rate in the first quarter.

7/10/62
5. A special McGraw-Hill survey conducted in late June indicates
that business plans for capital spending this year continue at about
the levels indicated in earlier surveys. In one sense, this may be
regarded as a favorable factor, in that the stock market break has not
apparently depressed business spending intentions. It can hardly be
considered a bullish factor, however, for the level of spending im
plied by the survey would represent less of a rise over the balance
of the year than the increase in the year to date, rather than the
accelerating trend typical of sustained recovery and expansion.
Turning to the few bright spots in the economic picture, the
dollar value of construction put in place continued strong, rising
further in June to a new high after an appreciable advance in May.
Because of the way the figures are calculated, some of the June in
crease in activity merely reflects the rise in housing starts reported
in earlier months. Nevertheless, the reported increases in activity
were so widespread among types of construction as to suggest real
strength in this area, with financing ample and, at least for FHA
mortgages, available in May at lower cost than earlier in the year.
We don't know yet the effects on mortgage financing of the more
recent developments in money and capital markets.
Some solace may also be found in the reduced rate of business
inventory accumulation noted earlier. As a result of these reductions,
while sales have continued to rise moderately, stock/sales ratios now
are low. For all businesses combined, the inventory/sales ratio at the
end of May was the lowest since the spring of 1959, and by the end of
June were probably even lower. This suggestst hat if there is a pickup
in demand, it is likely to be transmitted promptly to the productive
processes without having to go through an extended period of using up
surplus supplies.
The question is what will provide the stimulus to maintain demands.
Some stimulation could be generated within the private economy. Most
surveys report that while consumer confidence has deteriorated somewhat,
consumer buying plans are still strong, even after the market break.
If it is sustained, consumer demand could induce more optimism on the
part of business, leading perhaps to some restocking of inventories and
to at least maintenance of present capital spending plans.
The Federal Government is also likely to provide some stimulation,
even in the absence of dramatic tax cuts or new spending plans. It may
not be generally realized how large a shift in the direction of fiscal
restraint has occurred in recent months. Seasonally adjusted figures
on Federal cash flows show a shift from a cash deficit of about $12
billion (annual rate) in the first quarter of the year to a near
balance between receipts and expenditures in the second quarter--a
bigger quarterly shift by far than any that occurred in 1959-60. In
part, the shift reflected larger than anticipated collections of in
dividual nonwithheld income taxes; in part, also, it resulted from a

7/10/62
shortfall in cash spending. If receipts and payments move closer
to Budget expectations in the third quarter, the Government would
then be again running a fairly large cash deficit.
Altogether, if one takes favorable assumptions with respect
to consumer buying and business response, plus a return to fiscal
stimulation in the magnitude now scheduled, we might see further
slow expansion in total GNP. It would hardly be enough, however,
to provide a growth rate in the economy sufficient to reduce signif
icantly the large volume of underutilized resources. Failing some
additional strong stimulus, it seems most likely that we will drift
through the summer without significant increases in over-all activity,
and with a creeping up in the rate of unemployed workers and unemployed
productive facilities.
Mr. Koch presented the following statement with respect to credit
development s;
A principal feature of financial developments since the slight
modification of monetary policy adopted at the June 19 meeting has
been the steady firmness in the money market. The 3-month Treasury
bill rate has increased from a little over 2.6 per cent to over 2.9
per cent. Federal funds have traded at the 3 per cent discount rate
most of the time, and member bank borrowing from the Reserve Banks
has increased moderately to a daily average of around $140 million.
Interest rates charged Government security dealers by New York City
banks have ranged from about 3 to 3-1/2 per cent, although dealers
have usually been able to obtain considerable financing outside New
York City at more attractive rates.
Bond yields have also risen. This first was apparent in muncipal
securities beginning about six weeks ago. In recent weeks the rise
has been most marked in the case of new corporate issues. The recent
yield rises in the capital markets reflect in part the firmer short-term
rate structure. They suggest the need to watch capital market develop
ments carefully lest the moderately less easy monetary policy contribute
significantly to a lower volume of new security financing and investment.
Free reserves averaged $365 million in the three weeks ending
July 4, as compared with $440 million in the preceding three weeks.
In the current week and lasting through most of the month, market
forces, particularly a rise in float and a return flow of holiday
currency from circulation, will provide the banking system with
several hundred million dollars of reserves. Required reserves are
also likely to drop as large Treasury balances are drawn down. Some
of the easier reserve position resulting from market forces will be
absorbed by the redemption of System held bills in the weekly auction

7/10/62 -9
and by the maturing of the remaining outstanding dealer repurchase
agreements with the System, but others will have to be absorbed by
open market sales of securities. After the week ending July 25, some
longer term reserves will need to be provided by appropriate System
open market action.
It is still obviously too early to tell what the recent change
in policy has meant, either internationally or domestically when it
comes to reserve expansion, bank credit and capital availability,
and liquidity developments. Outstanding bank credit did increase
appreciably in June, and the increase was concentrated in loans
rather than in investments. Moreover, the loan increase was well
distributed among most of the various types of loans. Business
demand for bank financing, however, has continued quite moderate.
Outstanding bank credit in July and August, in contrast to June, is
likely to show a much less pronounced advance, as the very high
Government balances are drawn down, even though some of these
balances continue in existence in private hands.
Capital market financing, particularly by corporations, was
also in substantial volume in June. Corporate June financing was,
however, significantly less than had been anticipated earlier, as
the sharp decline in stock prices led to the postponement of several
large convertible bond and common stock issues and a sharp reduction
in the number of small stock issues publicly sold. In recent trading
sessions, stocks have risen in price, and effective today margin
requirements for stock market credit are reduced from 70 to 50 per
cent. This reduction was made in recognition of the sharp reduction
in such credit in recent weeks and an abatement in speculative
psychology in the market.
In the second quarter as a whole, the total demand for funds-
short-term as well as long-term, Government as well as private-
declined rather sharply to about a $50 billion seasonally adjusted
annual rate. In the first quarter, it had been $60 billion and in
the fourth quarter of last year $65 billion. The recent drop was
due mainly to a decline in Federal financing and to lower business
borrowing to pay for additions to inventory.
Turning from credit and capital availability to liquidity,
the seasonally adjusted money supply in late June was slightly
above its late May level. It was down a little from the beginning
of the year and about 2-1/4 per cent above a year ago. Turnover of
demand deposits outside New York declined slightly in May, but is
still averaging about 8 per cent above a year ago.
The recent slower growth of the narrowly defined money supply
has reflected in part the sharp buildup in Treasury balances. In
late June and early July, these balances amounted to almost $9.5
billion, as tax receipts exceeded, and Government spending fell

7/10/62 -10
short of, expectations; as the weekly bill offerings were increased;
and as funds were acquired through the sale of special certificates
to foreign countries. As these large Government balances are drawn
down, the money supply will increase even without further bank credit
expansion. According to our figures, the Treasury could now probably
satisfy its cash needs until mid-September, by continuing to increase
the weekly bill issues by $200 million until the end of the cycle
in mid-August, and then by picking up another billion or so in a
cash financing of its August maturities.
Turning back to liquidity, time and savings deposits of com
mercial banks have recently been increasing at about the late 1960
1961 rate, that is, about 12 to 13 per cent a year, as compared with
the 25 to 30 per cent rate characteristic of the months immediately
following the change in Regulation Q. Total liquid assets, season
ally adjusted, declined a bit in May. In the second quarter as a
whole, these assets rose at a considerably slower rate than earlier,
due mainly to the reduced flow of time deposits to commercial banks
and lower private holdings of short-term Government securities.
I should like to conclude my comments by taking a little
longer-run look and by referring to the table I passed out to you
this morning. It is a capsule summary of the effects of monetary
policy thus far this year, that is essentially the policy that
prevailed prior to the last meeting. It summarizes effects whether
you consider them to be shown mainly by reserve availability,
liquidity growth, credit availability, or interest rates.
My reading of the table is that monetary policy in the first
half of 1962 comes out with a pretty good record assuming that the
domestic economy needed stimulation and that the outflow of capital
abroad was not unduly promoted. Most measures of credit availa
bility and liquidity have increased more rapidly than economic
activity, but not much more rapidly. The growth in bank reserves
seems reasonable, considering the changed composition of deposit
liabilities. Longer term interest rates declined until recently,
whereas shorter term ones have risen somewhat. Finally, a policy
of monetary ease followed continuously and for a longer period of
time during this expansion than in previous ones does not seem to
me to have produced either exceptionally aggressive bank lending
or investing, or the creation of an excessive amount of liquidity
in the economy.
Mr. Furth presented the following statement on the U. S. balance
of payments and related matters:
The international scene still shows a paradoxical situation:
our balance of international payments has been in a rather satis
factory state; but the dollar had further weakened on international
exchange and gold markets.

7/10/62 -11
This weakness has been accompanied by a wave of market
rumors. Dollar weakness and dollar rumors feed on each other,
and as Mr. Roosa pointed out in his report to the NAC staff the
other day, the rumors are likely to become more vicious with the
approach of the annual meeting of the International Monetary
Fund in September. In the intervening period, the task of
avoiding a speculative bear raid on the dollar will be as
important as the continuing task of improving our underlying
balance of payments.
Our international deficit completely disappeared in May,
and according to preliminary figures also in June. Consequently,
transfers of gold, foreign convertible currencies, and liquid
dollar assets to foreigners dropped to about $200 million in
the second quarter, only one-third of the figures for the first
quarter and for the quarterly average of 1961.
Satisfaction with this result is tempered by the suspicion
that much if not all of the improvement was due to the extra
ordinary shift in the flow of funds between the United States
and Canada. If we could assume that this influence was small,
our adjusted deficit would be not much more than half of last
year's rate, adjusted for extraordinary receipts. But if we had
to assume that the bulk of Canada's reserve losses was our gain,
the adjusted deficit would be right back at the $3 billion annual
rate that has dogged us for the past four years.
This uncertainty makes it even more difficult than at other
times to forecast the development of our international payments
for the current quarter. During the summer, our current balance
is seasonally weak, largely because of the volume of foreign
travel; on the other hand, we are scheduled to receive this
month extraordinary payments of $475 million from France and
Italy. These payments should offset the reflux of funds to
Canada expected for the current quarter.
As to the underlying economic factors, our trade balance
in April-May again showed a surplus close to $5 billion annual
rate. Continued strength of demand in most foreign industrial
countries, together with the continued slow rate of domestic
recovery, permit the expectation that this surplus will be
maintained in the foreseeable future.
The great unknown factor affecting both current and capital
accounts is the future of our economic and financial relations
with Canada. A reflux of volatile funds and a resumption of
normal investments is virtually certain unless the recent
stabilization efforts collapse. Moreover, the recent Canadian
actions are designed to reduce imports into Canada, and this
means mainly imports from the United States. They are equally
designed, however, in the long run to reduce the dependence of
the Canadian economy on inflows of foreign investment capital,

7/10/62 -12-
and this means to an even larger extent inflows from the United
States. We cannot tell whether or not the reduction in our exports
will eventually be offset by that in our outflows of investment
capital.
On foreign exchange markets, the dollar has been weak
against all continental European currencies, most recently
also against the German mark. In itself, this development is
not surprising: our recent balance of payments equilibrium
has been the result of a surplus in relation to Canada and a
corresponding deficit in relation to the rest of the world-
which presumably means mainly a deficit in relation to
Continental Europe. The countries that lost reserves were
mainly countries that keep their reserves largely in dollars;
the countries that gained reserves were those most eager to
convert dollar accessions into gold. Thus, our balance of
payments position involved the danger of a gold drain in spite
of over-all equilibrium.
This danger has been magnified by recent market nervousness
here and abroad. Reports about large withdrawals of European
capital from the New York stock market are inconsistent with
presently available U. S. data; but there can be no doubt about
the flow of funds, of whatever origin, out of dollars into
European currencies and especially into Swiss francs. This
flow apparently reached particularly large dimensions last
week. And part of these funds in turn are being converted
into gold through the London market. The price of gold was
driven up to $35.12 and the Bank of England had to spend most
or all of its gold-pool "kitty" accumulated earlier this year
in order to prevent the price from rising further.
Any large drain on our gold stock, however, would come
from the accumulation of dollars by Continental European
central banks rather than from the London gold market. Our
first-semester deficit of $800 million was reflected in net
gold sales and in net increases in foreign liquid dollar
claims of $400 million each. Claims of international institu
tions rose by $500 million so that claims of foreign countries-
apart from claims arising out of our swap transactions--actually
declined. But official holdings of three major gold-reserve
countries--France, Netherlands, Switzerland--rose nearly $600
million.
On Thursday, French official dollar holdings will be
reduced by debt prepayments of $350 million to the United States
and Canada, and by a gold purchase of $100 million. These
transactions should wipe out France's "excess" dollar holdings.
On the other hand, the flow of funds to Europe probably has
increased official dollar holdings of Switzerland alone by

-13-
7/10/62
more than $100 million. Since the beginning of the month, the
U.S. Treasury has sold $50 million of gold, half of it to
Switzerland. The remaining increase in European dollar
holdings likely to be presented for conversion into gold
may be roughly estimated at $300 million.
This figure is large but not unmanageable. Market
rumors nothwithstanding[stihc]e,r e is thus no reason to expect
spectacular gold losses if--and this is an important
qualification--if further dollar flows to Europe can be kept
within reasonable limits.
Mr. Treiber presented the following statement with respect to the
business outlook and monetary policy:
Economic activity appears to be in a period of hesitation
both statistically and psychologically. Although gains con
tinued to be widespread in May and June, increases in a number
of broad measures were smaller than in preceding months.
Declining steel production associated with a reduction in
steel inventories continued to exert a drag on industrial
production generally, while retail sales edged down slightly.
Construction, however, especially residential construction,
continued strong. This was also true of automobile production
until the interruption by a strike at a Ford parts plant in
June. Prices continue relatively stable.
The economy's performance this year has been basically
good although not as good as had been hoped for at the beginning
of the year. Little progress, however, has been made in reducing
unemployment.
Whether or not the stock market's behavior will lead to
cutbacks in the spending plans of consumers and businesses is
a major element of uncertainty. Surveys of consumer and business
spending plans provide some reassurance but cannot be considered
conclusive.
Loan volume at weekly reporting banks strengthened in June,
except for "other security loans", which declined as stock prices
plummeted. Particular strength was shown by loans to nonbank
financial institutions and by real estate loans. Bank investments,
particularly in "other" securities, were relatively strong in June.
Thus, total bank credit advanced markedly, exceeding the gains in
the corresponding periods of all recent years except 1958.
The banks have adequate liquidity. They are in a position
to meet the credit needs that may arise in the course of a further
advance in business activity.

7/10/62 -14
Today the Treasury is auctioning $2 billion of one-year
Treasury bills to refund a similar quantity of bills maturing
July 16. In a couple of weeks the Treasury will be announcing
its plans to refund $7-1/2 billion of notes maturing August 15.
It now appears that no major new cash borrowing will be needed
for the balance of the summer, particularly if the Treasury
continues to add to the weekly bill offerings and if the Treasury
conducts its August refinancing on a cash basis, taking in some
extra money in the process.
The international position of the United States remains
precarious as doubts about the international strength of the
dollar continue to be expressed in many places. The latest
statistics on our over-all payments deficit continue to be
very good, but much of this favorable showing reflects the
pronounced weakness of the Canadian dollar in the first three
weeks of June. For the second quarter of 1962 it now seems
probable that, thanks to the Canadian situation, our over-all
deficit may be less than $1/2 billion, seasonally adjusted
annual rate, compared with $1.9 billion in the first quarter.
Now that the Canadian position is being stabilized, our capital
accounts with Canada are bound to deteriorate over the coming
months as the leads and lags turn around in favor of Canada
and as Canadian borrowers come to our markets.
Fortunately, in the third quarter we expect some large
European debt prepayments; this will certainly help the
statistics for this quarter. On the other hand, we continue
to feel tae pressure of foreign borrowing operations--both
long-term and short-term--in the New York market, and we seem
to face a growing nervousness, both at home and abroad, as to
the dollar's long-run outlook. In part this is based on
skepticism with respect to the Government's attitude toward
business and the attractiveness of business investment in this
country. There is also growing uncertainty as to probable
fiscal policy moves aimed at stimulating the economy, and
uncertainty as to how such moves will be meshed with monetary
policy.
While the domestic outlook evidences a number of
uncertainties. I think that the policy of monetary ease that
we have been following has done about all it can in making
a sound contribution to domestic acivity. Our international
position, and particularly doubts over the dollar's long-run
outlook, is an increasing cause of concern. It is important
that monetary policy make a maximum contribution toward the
restoration of international confidence in the dollar. To
do so, monetary policy must be flexible and adjustable to our
international needs

7/10/62 -15-
I hope that over the next three weeks we will retain the
gains achieved in monetary policy in the last few weeks. I
think it would be desirable for the three-month Treasury bill
rate to be generally in the range of 2-7/8 - 3 per cent, and
for Federal funds to be in the range of 2-3/4 - 3 per cent.
With such a money market climate, free reserves might be in
the range of $300-350 million. I see no reason to change
the policy directive, nor would I suggest a change in the
discount rate at this time.
Mr. Bryan presented a statement substantially as follows:
Latest economic trends in the Sixth District are mixed.
Many of our figures have gone down, as for example, money
supply, bank loans, department store sales, and bank debits,
among others. Nonetheless, judging from nonfarm employment,
manufacturing employment, average weekly hours, and similar
broader and more fundamental indices, it seems to me that the
Sixth District is continuing a slow-paced increase in economic
activity. As I see it, that situation is essentially similar
to the nation for the period for which we have comparable
figures.
As for policy, I could not at the last meeting vote with
the majority, partially because I had perceived the figures
from last December and January as exhibiting a mild tightening
in reserve positions, and I was unable to see how we could
proceed on a restraining policy more subtle than we have been
doing: a subtle approach to restraint that I was in fact
advocating in saying that I thought no change was in order.
Likewise, it seemed to me that the appearance of great ease
in the monetary system arose from the probability that our
interest rate structure, toward which we have been feeling
our way for many years, had at long last produced a supply of
savings equal to the demand for them.
Now, I cannot find myself quarreling in any essential
way with our policy, but my equanimity arises only because
we have supplied reserves in amounts that have gone beyond a
three per cent growth rate (measuring by total reserves), which
I have thought for sometime exceeded a growth rate appropriate
to our situation. Indeed, our latest daily averages, both for
June and thus far for July, show adjusted and unadjusted total
reserves moving further upward beyond a three per cent trend
line.

7/10/62 -16
With regard to the future I should like to pose four
questions without attempts at anwswers. These questions trouble
me deeply. I do not imply that these questions cannot be
answered or will not be answered over time; what I am saying
is that I do not know the answers.
1. Is it reasonable to assume that an adjustment in
values as massive as has been exhibited in the equity markets,
here and abroad, can occur without at the same time supposing
that these adjustments will have equally massive effects?
I ask this question under the general canon of logic that
the effect is proportionate to the cause.
2. How can we expect to make a decisive contribution to
the balance of payments problem when the decisive and not self
correcting elements of that problem, to wit, military expenditures
and grants-in-aid, are not amenable to the interest rate instrument
that we are using?
3. How are we to assume that we can, with the interest rate
instrument, curtail American investment abroad, the while not
curtailing it domestically?
4. How are we, in the end, to reconcile fiscal policy and
monetary policy?
For many years, now, we have had an essentially simple
pattern of eentral bank action in the Federal Reserve System.
In times of recession--all recessions have been mild in the
postwar period--we have been prompt to ease reserves, to
lower interest rates, and thus to encourage borrowing and
investment. In times of boom we have pursued an opposite
course. I am troubled to know the pattern of our future
actions when our balance of payments and our fiscal problems,
not of our making, sit like ghosts at the table with us.
Mr. Fulton said that there seemed to be a pervasive attitude of
gloom among many businessmen of the Fourth District, particularly in the
heavy industry area. This was a feeling that we had had whatever boom
there was going to be and that the economy was topping out and would
decline after the fourth quarter of the year. The reasons for this were
attributed to the attitude of the Administration as interpreted by business
men, to the profit-squeeze which was a very real thing, and to the stock

7/10/62 -17
market decline. Mr. Fulton went on to say that industrial output seemed
to be going along pretty well except in steel. In the latter industry,
plant modernization plans that had been on the board for some time would
be consummated because these were necessary for steel to improve its
competitive position and to lower its costs. In industry generally,
companies were gradually working off excess inventories. Steel companies
were maintaining stocks higher than usual so that they could make immediate
deliveries to consumers. There was no indication, however, of accumulating
stocks of any kind either among dealers or retailers. There was no feeling
that price adjustments were imminent in any line and as a consequence
consumers were holding the lowest possible stocks.
Automobile sales took a nosedive in June and department store
sales were also considerable lower in that month, although for the year
to date they totaled 3 per cent higher than a year ago. Unemployment has
worsened on a seasonally adjusted basis, Mr. Fulton said, the improvement
that had occurred up to June of this year having disappeared. Construction
activity is still high in relation to a year ago, but considerably lower
in the fourth District than in the nation as a whole.
Bankers have about decided that there will not be a sudden increase
in loan volume this year. As a consequence, they have been lengthening
maturities on real estate and consumer credit loans and on certain securi
ties in an attempt to increase income. All in all the District seemed to
bear out the feeling that the economy has been topping out and that it has
no substantial vigor left to carry through the balance of the year.

7/10/62 -18
Mr. Fulton said that he was quite pleased with the results of
monetary policy during the past three weeks. The firmness in the market
had been good, but he would dislike to see the 91-day bill rate increased
to a point where it would cause pressure for an increase in the discount
rate. For the next three weeks, he would maintain the degree of firmness
of the past three weeks, would not change the discount rate, and would
use the short-term money rate as the guiding factor. The Manager of the
Account should have such latitude as he needed in order to maintain the
short-term rate at or no higher than the present discount rate.
With reference to the directive, Mr. Fulton noted that the last
sentence as approved at the June 19 meeting spoke of "providing a somewhat
smaller rate of reserve expansion." This might still be applicable, he
said, but since available free reserves had come down considerably in
this period, he felt it appropriate to change the wording and suggested
something along the lines of wording that would provide for a rate of
reserve expansion comparable to that of the past three weeks and which
would preserve a moderately firm tone in the money markets.
Mr. Mitchell presented a statement as follows:
Monetary policy is still on the Scylla-Charybdis course
but I fear the lesser of these two perils is causing us to veer
dangerously. No where in informed circles, and especially in
this Committee, can there be any doubt that the overriding
objective of U.S. economic policy is to keep the U.S. economy
strong and expanding. Here, at any rate, we are committed to
use every means at our disposal to do this by creating an
environment in which consumption and investment decisions of
citizens,businessmen, and investors will, in the main, direct

7/10/62 -19-
and determine the allocation of economic resources. Monetary
policy, its critics to the contrary, is notable for the pervasive
ness and impersonality of its effect and for its unique role in
a free economy--and ours, I should add, is an economy that is
far freer than any in Western Europe--no doubt I may as well say,
in the World.
The latest intelligence on the state of the economy is
disquieting. Concern about the slow rate of economic expansion
has given way to a fear in many circles that the expansion will
not continue. At best, industrial production was unchanged in
June. Unemployment rose slightly and disguised unemployment,
taking account of the slow increase in the labor force, rose more.
Part of the difficulty lies in the steel inventory adjustment,
but nondurable inventories also lag. More important, final demands
in May and June were sluggish, so sluggish as to offset the
favorable impact on economic activity that might have been expected
from the relatively high level of housing starts and auto sales.
Retail sales fell slightly in May and, according to indications
from department stores and auto dealers, declined further in June.
When the record is in we may have some instances of appallingly
poor performance. The disappointing prospects for plant and
equipment expenditures have been confirmed by recent surveys, and
we can no longer lean on the hope that, as in the past, the
surveys might have understated the prospective increase in capital
outlays. These indications of sluggish consumer and business
demand in large part pre-date the recent stock market decline.
The evidence is not clear yet but we are certainly in danger
of experiencing another abortive recovery, as in 1959-60; at
best we may have a disappointingly small rate of expansion.
There is, therefore, a clear need for a stimulative monetary
policy.
It is not responsive to our obligations to urge fiscal
policy measures on the Administration. These matters are out
of our hands. Though monetary policy certainly needs to take
fiscal policy into account, there is no justification in the
present circumstances for a tighter monetary policy on the
basis of a possible later easing of fiscal policy. It is
after the effects of fiscal action are clear that the impli
cations for monetary policy should be assessed.
For the present, therefore, monetary policy should be
moving toward greater ease. The economy is in need of greater,
not less, stimulation than it needed a few months ago. And,
quite apart from the economic rationale for greater ease, the
Committee ought to reconsider its present posture: in the
face of an apparent worsening in the outlook for economic
expansion, right on the heels of the largest stock market
decline in the postwar period, and at a time when, for whatever

7/10/52 -20
reasons, the balance of payments is showing improvement, the
Committee is on record as having moved toward a less easy
monetary policy.
I have said that the domestic economic situation calls
for greater ease. The only basis for qualifying this policy
prescription, from the domestic viewpoint, would be a showing
that monetary ease had been pursued so far and so long that
it would be useless to expect further easing to do any good.
Are we near that point?
The first and simplest answer to this question is that,
if interest rates mean what we have always thought they mean,
we have not carried monetary ease too far. Bill yields have
been maintained above 2-1/2 per cent. If the public were
excessively liquid, borrowers of short-term funds would not
have to pay 2-1/2 to 3 per cent to attract funds.
Has bank credit expansion been excessive? On a
seasonally adjusted basis, commercial bank credit increased
about $9 billion in the first half of this year, as compared
with about $7-1/2 billion last year and over $12 billion in
the first half of 1958. In interpreting this year's credit
expansion, it is essential to be clear on the effects of the
change in Regulation Q. What the advance in time deposit
rates did was to increase the relative importance of commercial
banks as financial intermediaries. The public was induced by
the increase in rates to hold more of its financial assets at
commercial banks and less of its assets elsewhere. For example,
the public purchased fewer municipal securities and put more
funds into time deposits at commercial banks. This in turn
made it necessary that the banks purchase an equivalent amount
of municipals, if State and local borrowers were not to go
begging. The alternative would have been a rise in interest
rates and a contractionary effect on the economy. As we know,
this did not happen, for banks bought municipals aggressively.
My point is that much of the increase in bank assets this year
reflects this shift in the flow of funds, toward commercial
banks as intermediaries, all as a result of the advance in
rates on time and savings deposits. If we interpret the entire
credit expansion as having been stimulative, we overlook this
important structural shift in the channels of finance.
On the basis of this analysis plus observation of interest
rate levels, I find no support for the view that ease has been
carried too far. And, the needs of the economy are such that
further ease is called for.
In the present state of financial markets, even the slight
move away from ease in recent weeks had a significant and
unfortunate repercussion. The actions of the Canadian authorities,

7/10/62 -21
plus the lower free reserve levels here, have caused a sizable
advance in both short- and long-term yields. Corporate new issue
yields have risen almost 20 basis points and caused a syndicate
break-up involving a large and important issue. This congestion
in the market and rise in yields came at a time when the volume
of new issues and the prospective calendar was quite light. It
was the result therefore of psychological factors on the demand
side, including a reaction to the apparent tightening in monetary
policy. If such reactions continue, they are bound to cause
further advances in interest rates, which will also spread to
the mortgage market.
The need therefore is for heavier open market purchases by
the System, to establish a higher free reserve level. I would
permit bill yields to decline somewhat from their present level
to perhaps 2-1/2 per cent, without fear of undue capital outflows.
This would help to put further downward pressure on longer term
yields. If bill yields fall too rapidly or too far, I would concen
trate System open market purchases in the intermediate-term area.
Mr. Mitchell went on to say that while he did not pretend to qualify
as expert in European psychology with respect to the balance of payments
situation he would coment thereon in the light of his recent trip to Europe
believing that some of the best and most accurate impressions are the
unconditioned pristine ones.
He found confidence in the dollar and U.S. policies to maintain
its present relationship to gold very high among central bankers. Moreover,
this confidence was not blind or unreasoned but based upon an understanding
of current economic, fiscal, and monetary problems and alternatives. Among
commercial bankers generally, there was less confidence but there was also
less wisespread understanding of the basic issues. Confidence was lowest
among those international bankers and financial concerns whose economic
interest is served by high yields on very liquid assets.

7/10/62 -22
In his view the role of higher short-term interest rates in favorably
affecting the balance of payments was being overstressed in the determination
of monetary policy in the United States. There are, in fact, only two
broadly based money markets, New York and London; and in both the United
States and Great Britain domestic considerations make lower short-term rates
advantageous. Raising short-term rates here might only force a reaction in
London to neutralize that action to the disadvantage of the British economic
situation as well as that of the United States. Moreover, he continued,
many of those who urge that the monetary authorities use their power to
raise short-term rates are persons or institutions, here and abroad, who
stand to increase their earnings from 10 to 20 per cent by a rise in the
price of their services.
Mr. Mitchell praised the efforts of Federal Reserve personnel who
have been establishing closer relationships with European central bankers.
They have, he said, established a rapport and an atmosphere of trust and
confidence with this group that is not too different from that which is
typical within the Open Market Committee. This was a notable accomplish
ment. The concrete evidences of monetary cooperation are now established
and he felt that they would become increasingly important to all countries
as they experience the vicissitudes of balance of payment surpluses and
deficits in the future.
Mr. Mitchell concluded by stating that he would shift the emphasis
of monetary policy in the next three weeks toward greater ease, avoid any
implication of discount rate change, and amend the Committee's directive to

7/10/62 -23
strike the inference that bank credit expansion has been adequate, or more
than adequate (last sentence of first paragraph), and make changes consistent
with such a posture in the last clause of the second paragraph.
Mr. King suggested that the only question to be decided by the
Committee today was that it should do about the wording of the directive.
Mr. Treiber had suggested that there was no need for a change in the directive
but his (Mr. King's) view was that if no change were made the Committee
would be approving a policy that would take on a cumulative effect if it
was renewed. If, in fact, the Manager of the Account had carried out the
June 19 directive--and Mr. King said he believed this had been done to
a reasonable degree--the Committee should take that action as a benchmark
and should not risk having the directive call for a cumulative progression
of the policy adopted three weeks ago. For this reason, he would subscribe
to changes in the last part of the directive more or less as indicated by
Mr. Fulton's proposal.
Mr. Shepardson said he could see no significant change in the economy
during the past three weeks that would call for a policy change from that
adopted at the June 19 meeting. He did not think it necessary or desirable
to apply that policy on a cumulative basis, but he would favor continuing
about what was aimed at in the policy adopted on June 19 when the Committee
shifted toward slightly less ease than previously.
Mr. Robertson said he agreed with everything Mr. Mitchell had said.
On the basis of the economic information presented to the Committee at
this meeting and at the Jme 19 meeting, it was his opinion the June

7/10/ 63
meeting had been precisely the wrong time for adopting a tightened
monetary policy. He believed that the results since that meeting had
already begun to show up and, in his opinion, the action at the June 19
meeting should be reversed and the Committee should adopt a policy in keeping
with the bad economic information before the Committee today.
Mr. Mills said that in his opinion the reasoning that was followed
in agreeing to the policy adopted at the June 19 meeting argued even more
persuasively for continuing that policy further at this time. The inter
national balance of payments problems were still with us with a vengeance,
and the mild counteroffensive that was adopted in credit policy on June 19
certainly deserved further implementation.
Speaking further of credit policy, Mr. Mills said that when it
comes to the use of the terms "ease" or "restriction," a policy that seeks
a level of around $350 millions of free reserves can in no sense be con
sidered restrictive. That amount of free reserves provides a basis for
credit expansion which over many years of Federal Reserve history has
allowed for ample or perhaps too large an expansion of credit, with
ultimate unsatisfactory repercussions. What possibly has happened is
that the market and participants in the market have been spoiled by a very
long and protracted period during which the System has injected new reserves
into the commercial banking system. Now, in consequence, even the very
mild, very modest shift that has been made in policy has brought question
ing on the part of the market and the financial community as a whole.

7/10/62 -25
While we are now in a summer period of lull and where the prospects for
new capital issues coming onto the market indicate that the volume will
be comparatively small for some weeks to come, Mr. Mills felt that an
excellent opportunity was afforded to the System for letting policy simmer
and for permitting the market and the financial community to become
accustomed again to the very mild change that has occurred--one which may
not have been sufficient to mark the counteroffensive against the balance
of payments problem that may be shortly called for. In terms of credit
availability, Mr. Mills said it was difficult to believe that a volume of
free reserves such as has been available signals anything but adequate
credit availability to the economy, especially in view of the fact that
both the commercial banking system and business concerns have the ability
to shift and interchange their assets to more constructive purposes when
the opportunities for doing so have become apparent.
When it gets to the field of intangibles and business psychology,
Mr. Mills said that it was very important to bear in mind the fact that
any change in policy at this time toward greater ease would undoubtedly
be regarded as weakness and vacillation on the part of the Federal Reserve
System and would be destructive of the faith and confidence in the System's
steadfastness in attempting to carry through a policy even in the face of
outside criticism.
In concluding his remarks, Mr. Mills referred to an article in this
morning's New York Times which commented on Congressional criticism of
Federal Reserve policy and charged that the rise in the level of free

-26
7/10/62
reserves during the latest week to a figure of $419 millionw as deliberately
designed as a System retreat from such criticism.
Mr. Wayne reported that current business activity in the Fifth
District had continued to improve gradually. Seasonally adjusted bank
debits, nonfarm employment, and factory manhours reached new historical
highs in May. Employment gains were quite general and, according to a
panel of District business leaders, continued in June along with a slight
further extension of the factory workweek. The May rise in manhours,
however, was a blend of divergent trends: nondurables gained on balance
despite losses in food and tobacco, while cyclically sensitive durables
declined slightly as a group in spite of a sharp gain in machinery.
Qualifying factors were also present in the recent survey to which he had
referred, Mr. Wayne said. Of particular note was the change in new orders
from increases that were still widespread six weeks ago to slight decreases
during the past three weeks. Also, respondents again appraised the immediate
future with reduced optimism. About two-thirds anticipated no immediate
change, substantially the same proportion that held this view three weeks
ago, but those expecting a decline increased from 15 per cent to 27 per
cent. Preliminary reports indicated that some crops, particularly tobacco,
in several counties of eastern North Carolina may have sustained serious
damage as a result of recent torrential rains and high winds. In the three
weeks ended June 27 District weekly reporting banks continued to show
substantial increases in real estate and all other loans.

7/10/62 -27
On policy, Mr. Wayne said that he was becoming increasingly concerned
over the domestic outlook. Witness the trend in new orders of durable manu
facturers, the most recent report of the National Association of Purchasing
Agents, the slow rise in industrial production, the increase in unemployment,
and the continued drop in contract awards, to mention a few items. These
may not signal a downturn, he said, but he would not expect them to behave
much differently if a recession were imminent. As a result, he wished even
more than he had three weeks ago that he could urge further easing--or at
least no additional tightening. He did not believe, however, that the
international situation gave the Committee this much latitude. In the
face of the heightened speculation in gold and the likelihood of capital
outflows to Canada, he thought the policy adopted at the last meeting should
be continued. For the three weeks ahead, he suggested action to maintain a
bill rate near three per cent, realizing that this opened up the question
of a change in the discount rate--a move that he was not yet willing to risk
in view of the probable adverse domestic impact. He was prepared to argue,
however, that it might be proper some time in the near future for the bill
rate to move gently above the discount rate even though this might occasion
increased discounting prompted by rate differentials. If this seemed like
an unorthodox recommendation, the response was that these are unusual times.
The Committee must be prepared to accept new policy combinations if policy
is to make its maximum contribution to the solution of the present dilemma.
Mr. Clay said that once again monetary policy had to be formulated
on the basis of the requirements of both the domestic economy and the inter
national balance of payments. Developments in the domestic economy clearly

7/10/62 -28-
did not call for any tightening of credit and upward movement of interest
rates. On the contrary, the domestic economy showed further evidence month
by month that it needed added stimulus rather than restraint. Accordingly,
he felt that the Committee could not very well support the view that monetary
policy had done all that it could do or needed to do for the domestic economy
and that now policy could be tightened without any negative impact on do
mestic economic activity. In a domestic situation that continued to fall
short of a satisfactory performance, it could not be assumed that at some
point the contribution of monetary policy had been completed and that policy
could be reversed without detrimental effects.
If, in the Committee's view, monetary policy must be tightened because
of international payments considerations, Mr. Clay felt that this action must
be supported on the premise that the international aspects are so critical
as to require credit tightening despite its negative impact on the domestic
economy. It was difficult to judge accurately just what are the full
ramifications of the international balance of payments problem, he said,
although there was no denying that it constituted a serious problem to which
this country must continue diligently to apply itself. Reports would seem
to indicate, however, that substantial progress was being made toward
improvement in the basic situation.
Mr. Clay noted that in recent weeks the shift in the Committee's
policy had led to a lessening in the degree of credit ease and to a higher
level of interest rates. While other factors may have played a role, the
Committee's operations and the expectations created by those operations had
had a pronounced impact on the money and capital markets throughout the

7/10/63 -29
msHater tuurcittuyr e. hoped that this credit tightening action would not
be carried further. The upward movetment in longer-term interest rates was
particularly disturbing to him in terms of its potential effect on economic
activity. In keeping with this view on moneptaorlyic y, no change was
recommended in the Federal Reserve Bankd scount rate. In conclusion,
Mr. Clay said that he coould go all the way with Mr. Mitchell's position,
except for Mr. Mills' point that the Committee might be charged with
vacillation. This, however, should not prevent corrections of any over
playing of the hand during the past three weeks.
Mr. Scanlon reported that industrial production and employment
leveled off in May and June in the major centers in the Seventh District.
Cotinued declines in steel had been accompanied by smaller reductions in
some other lines. Retail sales, after rising somewhat in May, declined in
June; one large retailer of ladies clothing reported the poorest June in
at least eight years, with business off 10 per cent from May.
Mr. Scanlon said that the Chicago Bank's contacts with academic and
business economists revealed wide acceptance of the view that the economy
was heading for a period of very slow growth for the remainder of the year.
Projections by these economists of Gross National Product for 1962 now
commonly were on the order of $560 billions or less. Much emphasis was
placed on the lack of expansive forces in the economy; the uptrends in
autobiles and defense outlays were believed to have had their main effect.
Business outlook statements made at a recent forum by a number of executives
of large firms headquartered in the Midwest expressed mixed views, Mr. Scanlon

7/10/6 -30
said, raging from moderately optimistic in the case of consumer and capital
goods producers to outright pessimism in the case of representatives from
the real estate and railroad industries.
The agricultural outlook was good, and farm income in 1962 was
expected to be moderately higher in the Midwest and in the nation. Crop
prospects were excellent as a result of favorable weather conditions. Cattle
prices had been holding somewhat above last year, and smaller than expected
spring and fall pig crops suggested that hog prices would remain reasonably
favorable.
Credit demands at District banks appeared to be consistent with
current business trends. During the three weeks ending June 27, business
loans at weekly reporting banks rose, but at an appreciably slower pace
than in comparable periods of the last three years.
Mr. Scanlon then reported on discussions during the past week with
a number of major Midwest manufacturers concerning the impact of the tariff
surcharges recently announced by Canada. While the probable effect was still
uncertain, it was believed that the tariff increases were large enough to
affect sales of ite.s such as semifinished steel and luxury type automobiles.
Farmm achinery and auto parts for assembly in Windsor--which are important
exports from the Midest--are not subject to tariff charges, hence producers
of these items would not be affected directly by the tariff charges. The
effects of the devaluation of the Canadian dollar, however, would be more
widespread. A construction machinery firm reported that the competitive
position of its Canadian subsidiary had been improved in third markets in

7/10/62 -31
comparison with the parent company. A farm machinery manufacturer raised
its prices about 5 per cent to offset the effects of the devaluation and
believes that sales were unaffected because of an improvement in crop
prospects in Canada. Other exporters had not raised prices and were absorb
ing the "cost" resulting from the devaluation.
As to policy, Mr. Scanlon said that the current sluggishness in
economic activity in the presence of what appeared to be rising uncertainty
as to the trend of business indicated that the destic economy would benefit
from policies that would help to stimulate consumption and investment. He
recognized that international capital flows must be given due consideration,
but these would not appear to preclude continuation of monetary ease at this
time. The results of open arket operations for the two weeks immediately
following the June 19 meeting were somewhat more drastic than he had under
stood the majority of the Committee intended, but in the circumstances
perhaps the Desk had no choice. He hoped that actions during the next three
weeks would help to impart a greater semblance of stability to monetary
markets than in recent weeks. In terms of free reserves, a figure around
400 million dollars would be appropriate. He would not change the directive
or the discount rate.
Mr. Deming said that the Minneapolis Bank economists summed up
their appraisal of the Ninth District economy last Friday with the state
ment: "With current agricultural prospects bright, and with expanding
employment and personal income, we find it difficult to be anything but
moderately optimistic about the District at this point in time."

7/10/62 -32
Mr. Deming wished to comment on two points. The first of these
was that, in general, the most recent reports about the current situation
based on the Bank's opinion survey cofirmed the economists' summary state
ment he had quoted. Somewhat more respondents saw key economic factors
up strongly than was true in the survey taken some six weeks ago. The
great bulk of respondents, however, still viewed economic activity as
being up slightly--less than 5 per cent from a year ago. With respect
to the short-run outlook, the replies from the opinion survey were quite
interesting, Mr. Deming said, when viewed against the answers given at
the end of May and at mid-April. Two out of three respondents regarded
further improvement as either probable or fairly certain, which represented
a drop from the 75 per cent in that group at the end of May and 87 per
cent in mid-April. Within this group, however, there had been a significant
rise in the proportion regarding further improvement as fairly certain
instead of just probable. The offset showed up in the group that looked
for stability at present levels. Only two or three of the Bank's respondents
saw any chance of a decline of activity in the near term.
Mr. Deming's second comment related to banking. He reported a
continuation into early July of a fairly strong loan demand. The June loan
increase at country banks in the Ninth District was the largest for any
period since the start of the series in 1947. At city banks the rise had
been exceeded in only one postwar year--1959. Demand had been general and
across the board, Mr. Deming said, adding that so far this year total bank
loans in the Ninth District had risen almost 8 per cent.

7/10/62 -33
With respect to credit policy, Mr. Deming said that Mr. Mills had
expressed his ideas as to the background for a policy decision. He had
nothing to disagree with in Mr. Mills' analysis and consequently he would
not change the Committee's policy. He saw no particular reason to change
the wording of the directive, although some slight change along the lines
suggested by Mr. Fulton would not be objectionable. He would make no change
in discount rate at this time.
Mr. Deming went on to comment that implementation of policy, however,
had given him some concern. He had a feeling that the brakes had gone on
harder in the two weeks following the June 19 meeting than he had contem
plated would be the case. He had attributed this to the churning in the
market and the difficulties of making projections of reserves, and, he
would have been prepared to accept the explanation that difficulties in
the estimates and the reaction of the market had made policy somewhat
difficult to carry out in those weeks. The Manager's report indicated
that that had not been the case, however. To be specific, on the basis
of the June 19 discussion he would have thought the Federal funds rate
would have been more often at 2-3/4 per cent than it was and less often
at 3 per cent. He would have thought the bill rate would not have gone
quite so far as it had gone. Mr. Deming said he was talking of small
differences but ones that had continued over a longer period of time
than he thought should have been the case. To sum up, he was completely
sympathetic with keeping policy just as stated at the June 19 meeting,
but his definition of the implementation would be to keep the Federal

7/10/62 -34
funds rate in the 2-3/4 to 3 per cent range but at least as often at
2-3/4 as at 3 per cent.
Mr. Swan said that Twelfth District conditions were mixed but
relatively satisfactory as compared with the United States as a whole.
Increased uneasiness was apparent in business circles, especially those
close to consumers, looking to the latter part of this year. There had
been some pickup in lumber orders and prices, and construction contracts
were up substantially in May. Department store sales were up in May and
June. Agricultural prospects were good with ample supplies of irrigation
water. There had been little change in the banking picture except for a
somewhat tighter reserve position in the past week or so. Savings deposits
continued to rise but at a much lesser rate than in the first part of the
year and at a slower rate than a year ago.
In terms of policy, Mr. Swan said that in view of the over-all
situation and the uncertainty that still existed, he personally would have
been happier not to have had the recent tightening in reserve positions.
There certainly was no basis whatever in the domestic picture for any fur
ther tightening. As to the international situation, he still came up with
a question as to how many of these problems were outside the realm of mone
tary policy and, further, whether the modest tightening the Committee had
been talking about afforded any basis for a counteroffensive such as
Mr. Mills had indicated against the balance of payments problem. If the
Committee was talking about the effect of competitive interest rates
in the international area, it should be talking about much larger increases

7/10/62 -35
than most of the members of the Committee would be willing to accept, given
the total international and domestic situation.
Mr. Swan said that he had some of the same concern that had been
expressed by Mr. Scanlon and Mr. Deming regarding the extent of the shift
in policy in the two weeks immediately following the June 19 meeting.
Perhaps the differences he was talking about were not very significant,
but the extent of the shift that had taken place had raised questions of
further tightening and of the possibility that the banking system would
get into a still tighter position as a result of a series of very small
moves or developments which of themselves would be very inconsequential,
but which might add up to a total position that would not be satisfactory
and which would reflect an unwarranted tightening in the over-all reserve
situation. If the bill rate should move about 3 per cent even for a brief
period, the pressure of banks for earnings would make administration of
a 3 per cent discount rate extremely difficult, and actions that might be
taken could bring about unexpected reactions. Assuming that an increase
in the 3 per cent discount rate would be undesirable, Mr. Swan felt that
a three-month bill rate farther below that figure than 2.97 or 2.98 would
cause many to feel much better than if the bill rate were permitted to
approach as closely to 3 per cent. He was using this as illustrative of
the sort of feeling that had concerned him and was concerning him at the
moment.
Mr. Swan said that he personally would like to see a little retreat
from the present policy position, but if there was to be no change in

7/10/62 -36
policy, he would still like to have the wording of the directive make the
intention of the Committee a little clearer than it seemed to him was the
case with that adopted June 19. If the directive were renewed as it now
stands, it would imply some further tightening. Therefore, he would hope
for some change in wording, particularly in the last sentence of the direc
tive to make clear that there would be no further tightening.
Mr. Irons said that conditions in the Dallas District were quite
favorable. Industrial production was up and nonagricultural employment
had increased. Construction was at an all time high; bank credit and deposits
were up. In the country as a whole, the recovery had lost some of its vigor,
but activity was still at a high level. The economy had done quite well in
the past few months in absorbing a number of shocks.
Mr. Irons said that he was satisfied with the policy action taken at
the meeting on June 19 at which he had not been present. With regard to
current policy, he indicated that he would like to see a continuation of
this slightly firming tendency, permitting short-term rates to drift to
higher levels if market forces caused the move. He would not recommend
a deliberate attempt on the part of the Account to force a sharply higher
rate level. He said that a bill rate ruling slightly below the discount
rate would be satisfactory, but he would not object if the discount rate
were pierced by a small margin and, in fact, would like to see the market
reaction to such a short-term rate level. Mr. Irons said he was not think
ing of a 3.15 or 3.25 per cent bill rate but something close to the 3 per
cent figure. A Federal funds rate at 3 per cent would be consistent with

7/10/62 -37
his thinking, more so than one at a lower level, and free reserves in
the market would be around the $350 million figure. He would make no
change in either the directive or the discount rate.
Mr. Ellis said that there was little that he could add to the
economic analysis that had been presented to the Committee, judging from
what had been happening in New England where economic activities did not
differ significantly from recent developments in the national pattern.
Employment was up a shade less than the expected seasonal rise and manu
facturing output was showing a fractional rise. At weekly reporting banks
substantial gains were reported in June.
Mr. Ellis expressed the thought that many economists would agree
that the economy had lost its momentum and that the high point was in the
immediate past or the near future. He suggested use of the concept of
"elbow room" to explain what the Comittee thought it was doing at the
June meeting. He had thought that there was some elbow room or "room
to aneuver" between the effort to stimulate domestic credit expansion
and the effort to hold down incentives for outward flow of short-term
capital. In moving to close some of this gap the Committee did not
intend to sacrifice its general position of ease. It was his understanding
that the Committee approved a very small shift in monetary policy and
one that would be only barely visible in the market. In the subsequent
period, there had been on the one hand a weakening of domestic develop
ments that had led some to expect more from monetary policy. On the inter
national side, there had been a more rapid upward move in rates than he

7/10/62 -38
personally had anticipated from the discussion at the June 19 meeting.
The Manager had put this in terms of a "substantial shift in policy as
interpreted by the market."
Mr. Ellis said that he felt the Committee certainly should not
aggressively pursue a shift in policy any further. He came down, then,
to the basic question--whether there was now sufficient ease. He still
felt that there was sufficient ease at the present time. Credit is freely
available. This led him to the decision that the Comittee should not
change the character of policy at the present time. It should presage
this from the tone in the market and should continue a ready availability
of free reserves. He thought this would be accomplished with a $350
million level of free reserves, using that figure as a floor for aims in
operations until the Committee had demonstrated to the market that it
really was not moving to a tighter position than was contemplated by the
small shift in policy on June 19. This would still allow for a 3 per cent
growth rate in reserve availability. Mr. Ellis said he also would like
to preserve some elbow room below the 3 per cent discount rate and shared
the views expressed by Mr. Swan in this respect. He thought a minimum
change in the directive would be desirable. He would eliminate from the
first paragraph the reference to declining stock prices and would change
the second paragraph to specify that operations be conducted with a view
to "providing moderate reserve expansion in the banking system and to
fostering a moderately firm tone in money markets."

7/10/62 -39
Mr. Balderston said he shared the views expressed by Messrs.
Deming, Ellis, Scanlon, and others that the policy adopted by the Committee
on June 19 was one that would continue to increase the reserves supporting
private credit but at a somewhat slower rate. He had no fault to find with
the operations of the Desk during the interim. He thought he understood the
problem with which it was struggling and the turmoil that was going on. But
he was concerned with the posture that the Committee adopted by its action
at the June 19 meeting, an action that may have come right at the peak of
the current expansion.
Mr. Balderston emphasized his concern that the posture that the
Committee then adopted, however right it may prove to be in the long run,
be understood. He gathered that the Committee was trying to walk between
less abundant ease and an actual tightening. Words are misleading here,
Mr. Balderston said. He had read in the press that the System had
tightened credit, which he believed was not the case. To be specific in
explaining his thinking, he thought that at the June 19 meeting the
Committee sought to lower the rate of increase in the reserve base for
private bank credit from the 3-1/2 per cent line that the Committee had
actually followed from December to June to some new goal that would fall
between 3-1/2 per cent and zero but certainly not below zero. The tremendous
buildup in the Treasury balances with member banks had brought about a dis
tortion in this guide, and he thought the Committee would not be able to
tell what road it was really on until after the Treasury balances were
reduded during the coming days. Only then would it know whether the line

7/10/62 -40
it was following represented an annual increase at a rate of 3 per cent
or 2 per cent or something else.
Mr. Balderston said that he hoped the public would not get the
impression that the System was zigging when it should be zagging. In
his opinion, it was very hard to have entered in the record after the
end of this year words as loose as those in the current directive. He
found the first paragraph of the directive adopted June 19 much more appeal
ing than the one it replaced, and he liked it with the deletion that had
been suggested by Mr. Ellis. However, he would change the second paragraph
of the directive at this time in order to make it a little more concrete.
He would accept all of what Mr. Ellis had suggested except that he was
concerned about that expression, "a firm tone in the money market." He
knew what it meant to him, but he was not sure what it would mean to
others. He thought, however, the Committee could change the last three
lines of the directive to indicate that policy should be directed with a
view to meeting seasonal needs after taking account of the expected decline
in Treasury balances with member banks. He would also like to see a ref
erence to the steady increase in reserves supporting private bank credit.
He did not believe at this juncture that the Committee should adopt as a
long-run goal an objective that would actually tighten bank credit: the
Committee's objective should be somewhere less than a 3-1/2 per cent growth
rate, but certainly not below zero. He thought the directive ought to be
changed, and he would accept the wording suggested by Mr. Ellis.
Mr. Francis said that business activity in the Eighth District had
been showing some weakness since May. Unemployment rose more than seasonally

7/10/62 -41
from May to June and both department store sales and bank debits decreased
after seasonal adjustments. At banks, on the other hand, business loans
increased sharply from May to June. Crop prospects were unusually good.
Time deposits continued up, demand deposits were unchanged, and loans rose
sharply while investments increased slightly.
Mr. Hilkert said that economic expansion in the Third District was
continuing but appeared to be losing momentum. Labor force developments
were favorable in May and June. Unemployment claims in Pennsylvania con
tinued below the levels of recent years, claims in Delaware showed a
similar pattern, unemployment rates decreased in most areas in May, and
in June reclassification of several labor market areas indicated further
improvement. Steel production in recent weeks had improved relative to
the nation, electric power consumption was up in May, and construction
contract awards continue to show good gains. On the other hand, manu
facturing employment and average weekly hours declined slightly in May
for both durable and nondurable industries, and department store sales
slackened in June.
In banking, the most striking development had been the continued
sharp increase in business loans, Mr. Hilkert said, although real estate
loans also had been increasing significantly. Time deposits were still
rising rapidly and so far this year had increased about as much as demand
deposits had declined. Over the past several weeks, country bank borrowing
at the Reserve Bank had increased somewhat, and reserve city banks had also
borrowed small amounts. The basic reserve position of reserve city banks

7/10/62 42
had been negative in the recent 3-week period, indicating substantial
Federal funds borrowing; nonetheless, in the last two weeks the city banks
were net lenders of Federal funds.
Chairman Martin said that, as he had commented at the June 19
meeting, what makes monetary policy interesting is the fact that so many
people have different views with respect to it and none of us can really
prove our points. Mr. Bryan had asked four questions this morning, but
he had not given us any of the answers. His own view, the Chairman said,
was that monetary policy had done what it could to help the recovery and
that it had about played itself out. He went on to say that it was easy
to get into a pattern of activity where we think that, by just easing money
or increasing expenditures or raising a deficit, we can achieve certain
things. He believed that in time a point was reached where ease played
itself out. Maybe that was not orthodox, to use Mr. Wayne's expression,
but an unorthodox procedure was required.
The Chairman said he did not think that the Committee was going to
be able to explain anything as clearly as the fact that it had had a very
easy monetary policy, although one less easy since June 19 than it was
before It seemed inevitable that people were going to use words like
"restrictive" and attach them to something such as had taken place in
recent weeks. Markets would always have some contrasts, the Chairman
said, and at any given time some people would use one word to describe
the situation while others would prefer a different word. He was sure
in his own mind of one thing: There had been a great deal of ease and,

7/10/62 -43
using that relative term, lately there had been a little less ease. Some
had referred to reserves that would provide for a rate of growth. He did
not know what growth rate was correct, but he did have confidence in growth.
As to the effect of the recent change in policy, one of the reasons that
had been given for a rally in the stock market was the indication of some
"tightening" in System policy. This did not prove anything, Chairman Martin
said, but it illustrated how different interpretations could be put on
these things by different people.
As he had indicated before, Chairman Martin said that he believed
the System could be faced with a real crisis between now and the Annual
Meetings of the Bank and Fund in September. It would be foolish for those
in this room not to be questioning themselves in all respects. To use
Mr. Ellis' words, the Committee needed some elbow room so that it could
react in whatever direction was called for.
Chairman Martin said he did not believe the Federal Reserve was
going to achieve anything at the present juncture by ease compounded by
ease. However, he certainly did not think the Committee wished to tighten
at this juncture. The difficulty in writing a directive became more apparent
every time the Committee met. The Committee was engaging in a delicate
operation. He agreed that, as one looked at the figures and noted the
minimum amounts of free reserves since June 19, one could say that this
had not been a delicate operation. He happened to have gotten more and
more sympathetic with the Desk as he had continued to observe the operation
over the years. He had come to realize the great difficulties of the

7/10/62 -44
operation, and when he viewed the projections made by the Desk and by
the staff here in Washington and considered the human factors that were
involved and that came into play in these markets, he was convinced that
the Committee was asking for too much in the way of precision in measuring
these results. It would have been all right to have seen $375 million
of free reserves instead of $306 in one week, but to try to put those
figures together and to bring about the result was, to say the least, an
extremely difficult thing to contemplate. He was saying that the Committee
should be very careful about thinking that the projections of reserves
could be made too precise. The staff should continue to strive for the
best precision possible, but the Committee must be aware of the problem
that it faced.
The same thing was true when it came to language in the directive,
the Chairman said. He had gone back and read the minutes of the meetings
many times, as he was sure that the other members of the Committee had
done. He had read the directives repeatedly, and if one were to read
these without the background of the meetings he could understand how a
person might think they were just words. This was one of the problems
whenever he was called up to discuss this question before a Congressional
Committee. Words could mean one thing to one person and another to any
one else. This was particularly true in the shading that sometimes was
suggested in these discussions. For this reason he wanted to reiterate
the things he had said before about the difficulty of writing these
records. It certainly was not feasible for 19 persons sitting around this

7/10/62 -45
table to draft this kind of a directive in precise language that would
suit all the aims expressed. It might be possible to come nearer to it
if the Committee could spend two or three days each time in working on
their expressions, but to some extent that was a question of the best
use of the time of the people concerned.
So far as today's meeting was concerned, Chairman Martin said that
it was certainly evident that nobody wanted the world to think that the
Committee went blithely on as it had been doing over a long period of
time saying that there was not enough ease. In his judgment, a fairly
good case could be made that the amount of ease over a period of time had
been misdirected. That perhaps was true for nonpurpose loans on securities
and loans in the unregulated area where the Federal Reserve was unable
to reach certain credit. But this was not new and the answer required
legislation, which in the Chairman's opinion would not be easy to get.
As to the wording of the directive, Chairman Martin said that the
phrasing Mr. Ellis had suggested was perfectly all right with him, as
would be the wording along the lines suggested by several other persons.
He thought the present policy was right, and he felt that a clear majority
of the Committee considered that it applied at the present time and did
not want the situation to get any tighter. He repeated that this was a
delicate operation, but the international situation was such that, with
the difficulties in the gold market that were familiar to all, and with
the weakness in the dollar abroad, the Committee would be remiss in its

7/10/62 -46
duty if it was not showing an awareness of the situation through monetary
policy at this time. If the System had to raise the discount rate as a
result of developments in the balance of payments, it would not look too
foolish in doing so if it had followed the current policy of a little less
ease.
Chairman Martin said that so far as he personally was concerned he
did not think that additional ease was going to help the economy at this
juncture. As a matter of fact, he thought it would have the reverse effect.
He had no reason to quarrel especially with others except to say that those
who disagreed with this particular view were, in his opinion, wrong.
The Chairman then inquired as to whether the members of the
Committee wished to make some change in wording of the directive that would
maintain the same policy as that adopted at the June 19 meeting, with the
clear understanding that it did not favor any further tightening than had
been achieved recently. While the specific wording of the directive might
vary so far as he was concerned, Chairman Martin said that he did not think
it feasible to try to spell out in precise terms how the policy of the
Committee should be implemented. At his request, Mr. Sherman then presented
a directive that would have deleted from the opening paragraph any reference
to declining stock prices and which would be changed to incorporate in the
second paragraph the wording that had been suggested by Mr. Ellis in his
comments as follows:
To implement this policy, operations for the System Open
Market Account during the next three weeks shall, to the extent
consistent with the behavior of financial markets, be conducted
with a view to providing a[strikeout]somewhat ro[/safsm ttera ilkleero ut] MODERATE
reserve expansion in the banking system [strikieno ut]rtehcaenn t months [a/nsdt ritok eout]
fostering a moderately firm tone in money markets.

7/10/62
After several of the members of the Committee had indicated that
wording was acceptable to them, as was the clarification of policy in
dicated in Chairman Martin's statement in the preceding paragraph, the
Chairman inquired whether any of the members of the Committee wished to
vote against its adoption, and Messrs. Mitchell and Robertson stated they
would dissent.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York was authorized and directed
until otherwise directed by the Committee
to effect transactions for the System Open
Market Account in accordance with the
following economic policy directive:
It is the current policy of the Federal Open Market Committee
to permit the supply of bank credit and money to increase further,
but at the same time to avoid redundant bank reserves that would
encourage capital outflows internationally. This policy takes
into account, on the one hand, the gradualness of recent advance
in economic activity, the availability of resources to permit
further advance in activity, and the unsettlement of financial
markets. On the other hand, it gives recognition to the bank
credit expansion over the past year and to the role of capital
flows in the country's adverse balance of payments.
To implement this policy, operations for the System Open
Market Account during the next three weeks shall, to the extent
consistent with the behavior of financial markets, be conducted
with a view to providing moderate reserve expansion in the
banking system and to fostering a moderately firm tone in money
markets.
There had been distributed to the Committee a report from the
Special Manager of the System Open Market Account regarding System and
Treasury operations in foreign currencies and on foreign exchange market

7/10/62 -48
conditions for the period June 19 through July 4, 1962, as well as
a supplementary report for the period July 5 through July 9, 1962.
Copies of these reports have been placed in the files of the Federal
Open Market Committee.
Chairman Martin called upon Mr. Sanford for comments on foreign
exchange market conditions and System operations during the period since
June 19, and Mr. Sanford made a statement substantially as follows:
Throughout the period since the Federal Open Market Com
mittee meeting of June 19, the dollar has been weak against the
European Continental currencies; it has been on or close to the
floor in terms of the Swiss franc, French franc, guilder, lira,
and Belgian franc and more recently has sagged against the DM,
though remaining above the floor. On the other hand, the dollar
shows a net advance, in terms of the pound. In the special case
of the Canadian dollar, this currency is now being quoted some
what above its par of $0.92-1/2, whereas three weeks ago it was
at its lower support price.
Turning first to the Swiss franc, the strength in that
currency relative to the dollar has resulted in substantial
intervention by the Swiss National Bank, whose reserves in
creased $100 million in the two weeks ended June 30 and $57
million since that time through Monday, July 9. Using part
of the dollar gain, the Swiss National Bank purchased $25
million of gold from the United States on July 5. Several
factors have contributed to the inflow of funds into Switzer
land: (1) market uncertainties related to the Canadian exchange
crisis and the decline in world stock markets; (2) the re
patriation of Swiss funds for mid-year window dressing; and
(3) nervousness arising from the recurrent rumors of an impending
United States gold embargo.
Going to the French franc, only brief easing late in
June from its ceiling position occurred on market expecta
tions that the French franc portion of Canada's International
Monetary Fund drawing would be converted into dollars in the
market; this did not materialize as the drawing was converted
directly by the Bank of France. At this point, I would mention
that the Bank of France has given us preliminary notice of a
considerable package of transactions to be effected on July 12.
Included are: (1) the prepayment of nearly $300 million of debt
to the Export-Import Bank and of $62 million to Canada, and

7/10/62 -49-
(2) the purchase of about $110 million of gold from the
United States to be added to French reserves.
The Italian lira had a brief decline in the early part
of the reporting period, which was caused by a moderate out
flow of funds after the Italian Government announced its
intention to nationalize the electric power industry. But
with seasonal influences exerting their pressure, the lira
was soon back to its ceiling and, after consultation with
the Italian authorities, a total of $8 million in lire has
been sold by the Bank of Italy for Treasury account. Such
sales (from Treasury Borrowings of lire) are designed to
absorb dollars which would otherwise flow into official
Italian hands and increase Italy's potential gold demands. We
have been informed that the Italian Government will prepay $178
million of debt to the United States, sometime in July or August.
The other currency that I would comment on especially now
is the Deutsche mark. That currency was already advancing as
the period opened, principally because of repatriation of funds
by German banks to counter stringent liquidity conditions in
Germany and to acquire domestic assets for mid-year balance
sheet purposes. The Bundesbank purchased a sizable amount of
dollars, and further upward pressure on the mark appeared likely.
Discussions with the Bundesbank indicated to us that any further
strengthening of the mark might best be met by intervention in
New York as well as Frankfurt. Accordingly, the System sold a
total of DM 18 million in the period between June 20 and June 25.
Up to this time, the DM did not go above $.2506-1/2. On Thursday.
July 5, however, a very rapid advance in the rate occurred in
Frankfurt, before the opening of the market in New York. This
rapid rise was attributed to two factors: (1) with all the other
Continental currencies at or near their ceilings, the DM had
become the cheapest European currency to acquire, and (2) there
appeared to be occurring some extraordinary flow of funds into
Germany, for the purpose of acquiring a new Federal Republic
Issue of 6-1/2 per cent securities. Again in consultation with
the Bundesbank we sold a total of DM 19 million on Thursday,
July 5, DM 6.5 million on Friday, and DM 18 million yesterday,
July 9. At the close Friday in New York, the DM was quoted at
$0.2509-1/4 whereas it had been as high as the equivalent of
$0.2511-5/16 in Frankfurt; and on Monday, July 9, it was quoted
in New York at $0.2512-5/8 before the System entered the market
at an early hour and closed at $0.2512-1/8, as compared with the
equivalent of $0.2513 at its highest point in Germany. Today,
early reports from Germany place the DM at about our closing
level last night. These operations were aimed at preventing erosion

7/10/62 -50
of the rate structure such as might have occurred if there
had been no intervention.
Sterling fluctuated between $2.8092 and $2.8098 until
June 25, when it was adversely affected by reported sales
by Continental holders in order to acquire Canadian dollars
to cover short positions in that currency. After this dip,
the rate held around $2.8085 until the last few days, when
it has declined to around $2.8055, owing in part to reported
flows from sterling into DM's. The covered interest arbitrage
differential, figured in terms of Treasury bills, is virtually
nil at this time (July 9).
The massive demonstration of United States and other
foreign cooperation extended to Canada was generally well
received both in Canada and abroad and put an immediate end
to the heavy attack on the Canadian dollar. While the exchange
rate has advanced to above par and the Bank of Canada reportedly
has on occasion gained some dollars in moderating the upswing
in the rate, only a slight reversal has been evident in the
adverse pattern of commercial "leads and lags" that previously
developed. In addition to Bank of Canada market intervention
on both sides, the U. S. Treasury has purchased some moderate
amounts of Canadian dollars, both to meet future requirements
and to assist the Canadian authorities in their support oper
ations. A forward market for Canadian dollars has reappeared
and the three-month forward Canadian dollar has been quoted
at a discount of about 2.00 per cent per annum. With Canadian
Treasury bills at about 5.35 per cent and United States bills
at 2.90 the covered interest arbitrage differential in favor
of Canada is about 0.44 per cent per annum. Some short-term funds
have on occasion been reported flowing into Canadian Treasury
bills and finance paper.
Transactions consummated for System Account during the
period since June 19 include:
1. The acquisition of Belgian francs equivalent of
$50 million under the reciprocal swap arrangement
previously approved by the Federal Open Market Com
mittee. Such Belgian francs are on deposit with the
Societe Nationale de Credit a l'Industrie, carry the
guarantee of the National Bank of Belgium, and earn
interest at 2-3/4 per cent, the same rate that the
Treasury pays on the special certificate of indebt
edness held by the Belgians.
2. The acquisition of Canadian dollars equivalent
of U. S. $250 million under the reciprocal swap
arrangement previously approved by the Federal Open
Market Committee. Such Canadian dollars are held

7/10/62 -51
in a money employed account with the Bank of Canada
and are earning interest at the rate of 2 per cent,
the same rate that the Treasury pays on the special
certificate of indebtedness held by the Canadians.
3. Sales of DM 61-1/2 million, (equivalent in
dollars is $15-1/4 million), as previously reported
to this meeting.
The Chairman suggested that, unless there was objection, the
Committee ratify and confirm the transactions in foreign currencies since
June 19, as reported by Mr. Sanford and as presented in the written reports
submitted to the Committee.
Mr. Ellis stated that he had no objection to ratification of such
transactions but that he would like to have a discussion later during the
meeting of certain aspects of the foreign currency operations.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the
System transactions in foreign currencies
during the period June 19 through July 9,
1962, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Sanford stated that he had just received over the telephone a
report and some recommendations from Mr. Coombs, who had returned to New
York from Europe last night. The substance of Mr. Coombs' comments as
presented by Mr. Sanford was as follows:
The European exchange markets are being swept by
recurrent rumors that the U. S. is drifting towards
devaluation, a gold embargo, exchange controls, or similar
drastic measures. Much of the anxiety has apparently been
generated by the stock market decline which has revived
memories of the 1929-33 experience, while widely publicized
reports of developing antagonism between the Administration
and the business Community have weakened foreign confidence
still further. The London gold market has been subjected to
heavy buying pressure with demand during June running at
more than twice the April figure. As a result the reserves
accumulated by the Gold pool have now been drawn down nearly

7/10/62 -52
to zero. I believe it will be possible, however, to reactivate
the gold sale consortium to which European central banks have
contributed $135 million if the demand for gold should threaten
to create an unduly heavy drain on the U. S. gold stock.
Heavy buying pressure on the Swiss franc has also developed
with the result that the dollar holdings of the Swiss National
Bank had risen by last Friday to a point $210 million in excess
of their informal ceiling of $175 million. In the light of
this situation my negotions with President Schwegler and Dr.
Ikle of the Swiss National Bank over the past weekend resulted
in agreement on their side to a stand-by swap operation of $200
million incorporating most of the provisions in our swap arrange
ments with other central banks. Schwegler and Ikle suggested,
however, that it would be preferable from their point of view
if the swap arrangement were broken into two parts: first a
$100 million stand-by swap directly between the Federal and the
Swiss National Bank, and second, another $100 million stand-by
swap between the Federal and the Bank for International Settle
ments. In both cases we would swap dollars against Swiss francs,
with the BIS obtaining Swiss francs through a third swap arrange
ment of its own with the Swiss National Bank. Our swap with
both the Swiss National. Bank and BIS would be initiated on a
stand-by basis with the prospect, however, of an immediate
drawing of $50 million under each one for purposes of mopping
up $100 million of the present surplus dollars held by the
Swiss National Bank. Both swaps would carry an idential
interest rate on both sides based upon the U. S. Treasury bill
rate; in both cases we would be offered time deposit facilities
at the BIS for investment of any Swiss franc balances we might
hold. The swap arrangement would be for three months but the
Swiss have requested a special provision for liquidation of the
swap on two days' notice at the initiation of either party; this
request apparently arises from the insistence of their lawyers
that the Swiss National Bank must be covered against the contin
gency of an outbreak of war.
Supplementing this swap arrangement I believe that the U. S.
Stabilization Fund would be prepared to undertake further forward
operations up to, say, $25 million while the Swiss National Bank
itself would expect to undertake forward operations on its own.
Finally the Swiss National Bank might be prepared to let its
dollar holdings remain somewhat above the present $175 million
ceiling but would probably wish to purchase gold in moderate
amounts, say $25 million. I would strongly recommend to the
Committee their approval of these swap arrangements. Unless
we can through such arrangements mop up a sizable proportion
of the dollars recently taken in by the Swiss National Bank we
face the prospect of very large gold losses which might easily

7/10/62 -53
trigger off an avalanche of demand from other quarters. In this
connection I would like to note that the buying pressure on the
Swiss franc now seems to be spreading to other European currencies,
with the Bank of Italy, the Bank of France, the Netherlands Bank,
the Bundesbank and the Belgian National Bank all reporting sizable
dollar receipts on Thursday and Friday of last week.
Next I should like to report that a Bundesbank official strongly
hinted to me over the weekend that the Bundesbank would like to be
included in our network of swap arrangements, in the usual amount
of $50 million. I think this would be a useful step and would
like to ask the Committee approval in principle of such a swap,
with final approval of the Federal Open Market Committee to be
sought by telegram covering the specific arrangements proposed.
After Mr. Sanford had completed presentation of Mr. Coombs' report
and recommendations, he went on to say that the latter had indicated con
siderable urgency and expressed the hope that the swap arrangements with
the National Bank of Switzerland and the BIS could be completed within
the next few days for announcement July 20. As to the proposed swap with
the Bundesbank in the amount of $50 million, Mr. Coombs' recommendation
was that the Committee give its approval in principle to a swap on the
usual terms with the understanding that the details would be presented to
the Committee for approval before the arrangement was completed.
Chairman Martin noted that at the May 29 meeting the Committee
authorized the Special Manager to pursue negotiations with the National
Bank of Switzerland looking to a dollar-Swiss franc short-term swap in
the amount of $150 million, and he called for comments at this time on
the recommendation now being made for a dollar-Swiss franc swap for a
total of $200 million to be split, $100 million to the National Bank of
Switzerland and $100 million to the BIS, the arrangement to be for a three
month period on generally the same basis as other swap arrangements.

7/10/62 -54
In the course of the discussion of these proposed swaps, Mr. Bryan
stated that he understood that their purpose was to mop up some of the
excess dollars that were going to Switzerland. He had approved entering
into such agreements with some reluctance at the outset, on the general
grounds that the central banks were merely attempting to iron out fluctua
tions in the market and not attempting a fundamental correction of a
balance of payments problem with this device. Noting that the dollar was
now weak in relation to practically all of the important European currencies,
he posed a question as to the possibility of an avalanche that would over
whelm the central banks. Mr. Bryan said that he was troubled as to how
long the central banks might go on mopping up these surplus currencies.
Chairman Martin responded that there was no question but that
the purpose of the swap arrangements had been and still was the ironing
out of temporary fluctuations. It was possible, of course, that there
could be an avalanche. As to this particular swap with the Swiss, to
date no such arrangement had been completed. The Swiss were not in the
International Monetary Fund, he noted, and in his view it would be a poor
time to withdraw from making this type of arrangement which could help
iron out these temporary movements of funds. Because there might be
critical problems to deal with between now and the Annual meetings of
the Bank and the Fund in September, it was his opinion that the completion
of a swap arrangement with the Swiss along the lines proposed would be
desirable.

7/10/62 -55
After Mr. Mitchell had commented that he felt this would
represent an important additional arrangement, Mr. Ellis inquired
whether the Swiss would regard it as a temporary arrangement.
Mr. Sanford stated that the Swiss were obviously interested
in international cooperation. They were embarrassed by the rise in
their dollar holdings and this proposal was one way of preventing
those dollar holdings from getting converted immediately into gold-
an arrangement that they believed to be in the interest of the whole
international community. How soon it could be reversed was a matter
of guess, but in the last analysis it would keep the movements of
gold on a more orderly basis. At some time, of course, the swap
would have to be liquidated, but if the arrangement worked as
contemplated it would at least have reduced the gold loss by the
United States for the time being.
Mr. Swan noted that if the Swiss swap arrangement were
authorized, the present limitation of $500 million of foreign cur
rencies that might be held in the System Account under the continuing
authority directive would have to be increased.
Chairman Martin responded that, if the Committee approved the
proposed arrangements, he had in mind increasing the total authorization
to $750 million, an amount that would cover the $200 million swap for
Swiss francs and also the proposal for a swap arrangement with the
Bundesbank in the amount of $50 million.
Mr. Ellis said that his question regarding these proposals
derived from the concept that led the Committee into this operation in

7/10/62 -56
foreign currencies. He noted that the Committee's discussions at the time
this program was authorized contemplated that the currency operations
would attempt to deal with temporary and reversible movements of funds.
He saw no problem in the proposed arrangements as such, but he felt that
every time one of these proposals came up it should be subjected to the
original tests that the Committee had in mind in adopting the Authorization
and Guidelines for these operations. His question was whether the Committee
was developing an additional philosophy to be used in guiding the foreign
currency operations that went beyond the original concept of short-term
temporary adjustments.
Mr. Mitchell said that he did not understand the approach of Mr.
Ellis. The Committee had been talking about helping the balance of pay
ments situation. Presumably all of the members believed the dollar was
not overvalued and that in these circumstances its convertibility could
be sustained once there was a chance to make a few adjustments. In terms
of the Committee's authorization, it seemed to him that the Committee was
trying to protect the dollar against a psychological run or the effects
coming from it. He did not believe that this was a program that could be
put on a three-month basis, rather, it was one the Committee would hope
could be renewed until it met its objective.
Chairman Martin remarked that the swap arrangements were obviously
buying time, as Mr. Sanford had suggested earlier. He then noted that
Mr. Coombs' recommendations were for (1) approval of swap arrangements with
the Swiss National Bank and the BIS in the total amount of $200 million to

7/10/62 -57
be split evenly between the two banks, the terms to be on the basis outlined
in Mr. Coombs' message to the Committee earlier during this meeting; (2)
approval in principle of a swap arrangement with the Bundesbank in the
amount of $50 million, the details resulting from negotiations to be sub
mitted to the Committee for approval. If these were approved, the Chairman
said, it would be necessary to increase the limitation in the continuing
authority directive, and he proposed an increase from $500 to $750 million.
He then inquired whether the Committee wished to approve these
three proposals.
Mr. Mills stated that he would approve but that he had strong
reservations along the lines indicated by Messrs. Bryan and Ellis. He
felt that there had been some altering of the concept of the Committee's
engagement since the plan for the foreign currency operations originally
had been adopted. He had reservations about the whole program, but he
would approve the new proposals. The Committee should go into each of
these arrangements with its eyes open and not in the belief that it was
following the same path as when the arrangements were originally discussed.
Chairman Martin said that he agreed that the Committee should go
into each arrangement with its eyes open. He then suggested that unless
there was disagreement the Committee:
1. Approve the completion of a dollar-Swiss franc swap
arrangement with the Swiss National Bank and the Bank
for International Settlements as recommended by
Mr. Coombs in the total amount of $200 million;
2. Authorize the negotiation of a $50 million swap arrange
ment with the Bundesbank, the terms to be submitted to
the Committee for approval; and,

7/10/62 -58
3. Increase the limitation in the continuing authority
directive from $500 to $750 million.
No disagreement with these proposals was indicated.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the Federal
Open Market Committee approved the following
continuing authority directive on System
foreign currency operations:
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is authorized and
directed to purchase and sell through spot transactions any
or all of the following currencies in accordance with the
Guidelines on System Foreign Currency Operations issued by
the Federal Open Market Committee on February 13, 1962:
Pounds sterling
French francs
German marks
Italian lire
Netherlands guilders
Swiss francs
Belgian francs
Canadian dollars
Total foreign currencies held at any one time shall not
exceed $750 million.
Mr. Sanford stated that he would like to bring one other point to
the attention of the Committee. The New York Bank has been studying various
methods of accounting for profits (such as the small ones that have resulted
from the recent sales of DM) and possible losses from foreign exchange
transactions, from the point of view of the valuation of the foreign
exchange portfolio and the point of view of settling with the other Reserve
Banks. This was not a pressing matter, and it was a complicated subject.
In due course, he expected that recommendations would be developed for

7/10/62 -59
discussion with the Board's staff concerned with such matters, and
subsequently with the Federal Open Market Committee.
The date for the next meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
was set for Tuesday, July 31, 1962.
Assistant Secretary