A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, August 21, 1962, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Deming
Mr. Fulton
Mr. King
Mr. Mills
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Bopp, Alternate for Mr. Ellis
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Scanlon, Clay, and Irons, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Wayne and Swan, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Brandt, Furth, Garvy, Hickman, Holland,
and Parsons, Associate Economists
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market
Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of
Governors
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
Mr. Broida, Economist, Government Finance
Section, Board of Governors
Messrs. Latham and Francis, First Vice Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and
St. Louis, respectively
Messrs. Ratchford, Baughman, Jones, Tow, and
Coldwell, Vice Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Chicago, St. Louis,
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively

8/21/62 -2
Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston
Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
There had been distributed to the Committee preliminary and
revised drafts of minutes for the meeting of the Committee on July 31,
1962.
A suggestion was made for a minor change in the last sentence
on page 33 of the revised draft, and agreement was expressed with
this suggestion.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the
minutes of the meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee held on July 31, 1962,
were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report on open market operations in United States Govern
ment securities covering the period July 31 through August 15, 1962, and
a supplementary report covering the period August 16 through August 20,
1962. Copies of both reports have been placed in the files of the
Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone made
the following comments:
Perhaps the most noteworthy change in the market during the
past three weeks has been the shift in the atmosphere of the
capital market. Around the time of the last meeting, and for
some weeks preceding it, the view was widely held that an early
tax cut was a real possibility and that the market, which was
already anticipating a budgetary deficit of sizeable dimensions,
would be called upon to absorb an additional $6-$7 billion of
new debt. This prospect was a major factor in the upward move
ment of intermediate- and long-term rates that occurred in late
June and July; and the fading of that prospect, which was well

8/21/62 -3
under way even before the President's speech a week ago yester
day, has been a major factor in the recent decline in such rates.
A few developments in the corporate market will illustrate the
extent of the downward rate movement. The Southwestern Bell
Telephone issue, rated Aaa, came out on August 7 at a 4.45 per
cent yield; a single A-rated utility issue came out a week later
at the same yield; distribution of two Aaa-rated issues that had
been in syndicate for some time at yields of 4.30 and 4.33 per
cent has picked up sharply; and last Tuesday underwriters were
sufficiently encouraged to offer a Aaa-rated utility issue at
4.27 per cent. Investors, however, are resisting that rate.
Meanwhile, the new Treasury 4-1/4 per cent bond, which was
offered at 101 to yield 4.19 per cent at the time of the last
meeting, traded yesterday at 102-14/32 to yield about 4.09 per
cent.
There has been a good deal of discussion as to why the
initial response to the 4-1/4 per cent bond was so sluggish.
Our conversations with the market suggest that the major diffi
culties were insufficient time for investors' decisions to be
processed and an inadequate yield in comparison with available
alternatives in the corporate market. Ours is only one of a
number of post-mortems being held on that experience, and it may
be hoped that out of all the discussion on the 4-1/4's will come
some suggestions useful to the Treasury in future financing
operations.
I should mention that conditions in the short-term market
were generally steady during the period. Three-month bill rates
fluctuated in the 2.80-2.90 per cent range, while the six-month
issue moved generally between 2.98 per cent and 3.05 per cent.
Rates on Federal funds were consistently at 2-3/4 or 3 per cent,
with a substantial flow of funds apparently occurring at those
rates.
Turning to Treasury financing over the weeks ahead, the
Treasury is seriously considering taking advantage of the cur
rent favorable market by making an advance refunding offer
shortly after Labor Day. This refunding, if it occurs, will be
followed in late September by an offering for cash to meet the
Treasury's early October needs. The amount of that financing
will of course depend on whether the Treasury continues to add to
the supply of bills in the regular weekly auctions. If the Treas
ury adds $100 to next week's issue, as it presumably will, the
recent round of additions to the bill cycle will be completed.
No decision has yet been made as to what will be done about the
bills beyond next week.

8/21/62 -4
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the open
market transactions in Government securities
during the period July 31 through August 20,
1962, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Noyes presented the following statement with respect to
economic developments:
The favorable information that has become available since the
last meeting, most of which related to the performance of the
economy in July, has largely offset, both numerically and psycho
logically, the effect of the depressing figures for May and June.
Most favorable were the larger than expected increase in industrial
production and the sharp rebound in new orders for durable goods,
but retail trade, income, and other important measures also showed
good gains. Less favorable were the final report of the National
Industrial Conference Board's survey of capital appropriations, the
Dun and Bradstreet survey of businessmen's expectations, and the
failure of the ragged series on housing starts to reverse the drop
it took in June.
It is difficult to summarize labor market developments in a
few words. Movements appear to have been sideways, on balance,
with the data continuing to carry ominous indications of trouble
ahead, if and when there is a resumption of expansion in the labor
force.
The very sketchy information we have from weekly data for
early August suggest that the improved July levels of production
and sales were holding in the first part of the current month.
The most encouraging aspect of recent developments, in my
judgment, is that they have been almost completely free of those
overtones which we associate historically with the final stages of
a boom. There is no general expectation of inflation, no bulge in
credit buying, no scramble for inventory. The improvement, while
very moderate, seems to be basic and healthy. It does not appear
to be associated with any "one shot" increase in Government ex
penditures or revision of taxes--in fact, the trend would seem to
be toward somewhat more stimulus from the Government sector in the
current quarter and those ahead than in the one just past, when
to everyone's surprise Government cash receipts and expenditures,
after adjustment for seasonal variation, moved to a precise
balance--a sharp cutback from the $3.2 billion deficit in the
first quarter. Nor does the improvement seem traceable to the
changes in depreciation allowances, or the prospective investment
tax credit. Whatever stimulus may come from these changes still
lies ahead.

8/21/62 -5
I have said rather wistfully on several recent occasions that
it seemed to me the best thing that could possibly happen--and
perhaps the only thing that would prevent an almost untenable
situation--would be some autonomous improvement in basic
economic conditions, not directly associated with either fiscal
or monetary policy.
It would be foolhardy to suggest that the July and early
August data point clearly to any such change, but the wish seems
a little less unreasonable today than it did a month ago.
To avoid any possible misunderstanding, let me be explicit
on two points: first, the moderate improvement in July still
does not carry activity to rates which could be said even to
approach an adequate level of resource utilization; second, far
from calling for any lessening in the ease of credit availability,
it suggests to me that perhaps we may finally get some of the
long-awaited domestic business loan demand that would add to the
forces of recovery and expansion, and that everything possible
should be done to encourage such a development.
Mr. Holland presented the following statement with respect to
credit developments:
If one could judge the attainments of monetary policy by
interest rate indications alone, the past three weeks would seem
to be a period in which several different objectives attributed
to policy have been furthered. The money market was firmer;
covered interest rate incentives to the movement of liquid funds
abroad were substantially reduced; while yields turned downward
and availability of funds eased in a number of credit and capital
markets in which key domestic demands for funds are accommodated.
The Manager of the Account has already outlined the ground
swell of improved investor sentiment that swept through the
markets for debt securities, moving these markets into strong
technical positions. Heightened investor interest was apparent
in every instrument from Treasury bills to long corporate bonds.
Market yields moved down correspondingly, except in the short
term sector where official action added to available supplies.
These developments by and large emerged from happenings out
side the banking system. During this period, free reserves
ranged narrowly around $350 million, save for the week of August
15 in which a late float bulge and the churning of cash flows
incident to Treasury interest payments and the financing settle
ment led to a temporary and little-utilized rise in average free
reserves to $436 million. Borrowings from the Federal Reserve
were up somewhat, but excess reserves--chiefly at country banks-
also seemed to be running somewhat lower than earlier. Federal
funds rates moved up to 3 per cent during most of this period, but

8/21/62
a large volume of funds appeared to move into the money centers at
such a rate and no bind in the availability of Federal funds
developed. In contrast to earlier experience, this funds rate
movement did not bring a companion firming of bill yields; city
banks did unload substantial quantities of bills, but nonbank
investor demand steadfastly held the bill rate below the funds
rate.
Total bank utilization of reserves declined during late
July and the first half of August, on a seasonally adjusted
basis. Required reserves behind private deposits dropped
almost $150 million below the standard projected in the staff
memorandum, despite a contemporaneous decline of Government
deposits which might have been expected to bolster private
deposit totals. This flagging bank reserve utilization had its
counterpart in an estimated further $200 million decline in the
average money supply during the first half of August, and in a
marked slowdown in time deposit growth after mid-July. The slow
ing of time deposit expansion appears entirely accounted for by
declines in nonsavings accounts; passbook savings have actually
been somewhat stronger at reporting banks recently than in
previous months. An upsurge in bank credit and deposit totals
may be expected after August 15, reflecting bank purchases of
an estimated one-half billion dollars more of the new Treasury
issues than they held of the maturing obligations. At the same
time, private deposits are expected to drop sharply, at least
for a time, reflecting shifts to Treasury accounts of the
proceeds of $1 billion or so net nonbank purchases of the new
issues.
During recent weeks banks have been expanding further
their holdings of municipal and Federal agency issues-
particularly the latter--and have been reporting sizable but
erratic fluctuations in securities loans and loans to other banks
and finance companies. The total of private demand for bank
credit by nonfinancial users, however, continued to be relatively
moderate. If anything, recent city bank fugures might be read as
suggesting some slackening of the rate of increase in real estate
and consumer loans. I should call the attention of the Committee,
however, to an underlying tendency for business loans to increase
which appears to be more than transitory in its direction and
more than seasonal in its nature. In the past month, business
loans at city banks have advanced about one-quarter billion
dollars. This is a greater increase than in the comparable
periods of prior years, and it appears to be centered not only
in the types of borrowers from whom one would expect some
beginning growth in seasonal needs but also in lines with more
cyclically sensitive needs for bank funds, such as metals manu
facturers and public utilities. Before such an uptick in business

8/21/62 -7-
loan demands is extrapolated into the fall, consideration
needs to be given to the influences mitigating against loan
increases of major cyclical significance. These include the
large current cash flow of businesses and the relative absence of
incentives for inventory accumulation. For firms with access to
alternative sources of financing, a more pervasive influence
dampening the rise of bank credit may be the comparative cost
of funds. The rate margin of short-term open market paper below
the bank prime rate is conspicuously wider than in preceding
periods of cyclical expansion, and the same appears to be true
with respect to new offering yields on corporate bonds compared
with average bank term loan rates. Such changes in interest rate
relationships inhibit our ability to reason from past experience.
By diverting some credit demands from banks to other sources, they
depress the banking totals to a much greater degree than they do
the underlying economic activity in question; they make it easy
to infer over-bearish conclusions from banking developments.
This same difficulty also plagues observers of the liability
side of bank balance sheets, as the emergence of relatively
rewarding rates of return on time deposits and other near-monies
has increased interest incentives to minimize balances in check
ing accounts. What is the significance of a money supply thus
depressed? Certainly depositors who exchange demand balances
for near-monies do not give up spending potential, but in enjoy
ing a heightened rate of return for nonspending they may lose
some spending incentive, that is, they may be led to postpone
or otherwise reconsider some marginal acquisitions of goods and
services. Can such a marginal loss of stimulus be offset by, say
more than proportionate additions to liquid asset holdings?
Common sense would say yes, at least within limits, but the ques
tion of how much is enough seems essentially unanswerable. At
this stage of our knowledge, we can only hope to discern from the
facts if any extreme situation is developing.
The facts show that consumers and businesses are spending
slightly less on goods and services, are borrowing less, and are
engaged in somewhat more net financial investment, in relation to
their incomes, than in the corresponding expansion phase of the
previous two cyles. Their net financial investment has flowed
into near-money liquid assets and into other securities. In the
process holdings of liquid assets have increased more than in
the recovery stage of other recent cycles, but are now back to a
level that appears no higher in relation to capacity output than
was characteristic of the 1959 expansion, and this ratio remains
well below the levels reached earlier in the 1950's. Those
publicly-held financial assets which showed a disproportionately
greater growth relative to potential capacity output were total

8/21/62
securities other than short-term Governments, and the stock market
shakeout has reduced the aggregate market value of these holdings
to their lowest ratio in five years.
What these figures suggest is that the private economy has
acquired a capacity to spend out of financial assets which, when
related to its ability to absorb such spending, is not particularly
out of line with recent experience. If anything, current holdings
seem on the low side. The inclination to spend, meanwhile, is less.
These seem to me to be circumstances in which it is reasonable
to expect to find still operative some of the traditional
marginal responsiveness of private decision-makers to changes
in general credit and liquidity conditions.
Mr. Furth presented the following statement with respect to the
U. S. balance of payments and related matters:
At the end of the second quarter of this year, our balance
of payments figures were not bad, largely because of temporary
inflows from Canada, but the prestige of the dollar in interna
tional gold and exchange markets was very low.
Lately, the situation has been reversed. The deficit in
our international payments has again increased, in part because
of the reflux of funds to Canada, but the market position of the
dollar has improved.
In July, we received advance payments from France and Italy
totalling $470 million. Disregarding these extraordinary
receipts, however, transfers of gold and convertible currencies
to foreigners amounted to $450 million. In the first two weeks
of August, transfers apparently continued on the same scale.
Perhaps half of these transfers were due to the expected reflux
of funds to Canada; moreover, seasonal factors may account for
part of the continued flow of dollars to Italy and also to France.
But even so the adjusted deficit, while much smaller than in the
third quarter of last year, has been larger than expected earlier
this year.
In July, the transfers to foreigners were mainly in gold.
Since the end of July, all the transfers have been in dollars or,
to a lesser extent, in foreign convertible currencies. Sooner or
later, however, France is going to convert part of its dollar
accruals into gold.
Abroad, the boom in Europe and Japan continues to subside,
but without showing signs of an imminent downturn. There is thus
no reason to expect a decline in our exports to foreign industrial
countries, except to Canada. On the other hand, financial and
political disturbances in less developed areas, including
especially South America, continue unchecked, and there is no

8/21/62
reason to expect an increase in our commercial exports to those
important markets.
In view of the continued sluggishness of our economic ex
pansion together with the decision of the Administration to
forego, at least for the time being, the use of expansionary
fiscal policies, our imports are not likely to rise rapidly. Our
export surplus may therefore be expected to remain at about the
level of the first half of the year.
On the other hand, our economic situation will not make the
United States any more attractive to international investment
capital, and we must expect the net outflow of long-term capital
to continue.
Private demand for gold in the London market seems to have
declined, although it remains high enough to keep most of the
newly mined gold out of monetary reserves. But the net drain on
the Bank of England, which ultimately means a drain on our gold
stock, has been greatly reduced if not completely eliminated.
On the major exchange markets, sterling is weak and the
Canadian dollar very strong. The U. S. dollar stays at the
floor against the French franc and the Italian lira, reflecting
the continued reserve accumulations of these countries. But the
dollar has remained off the floor against the other major
European currencies, and this fact should contribute to a more
rational market attitude toward the prospects of our dollar and
of our economy in general.
Mr. Treiber presented the following statement of his views on
the economic situation and monetary policy:
The most important development related to the economy that
has occurred since the last meeting of the Committee is the
President's decision not to seek a cut in taxes at this time. As
the President stated in reporting his decision, "the pace thus far
this summer, while not as good as all of us would have liked, has
brought still further gains." The economic statistics for July
are on the whole somewhat better than those for June. Yet some
of the improvement was due to the absence of certain adverse
factors that were present in June.
On the basis of available data there are at least three
possible views on the economic outlook:
(i) A pessimistic view, envisaging a downturn before
the end of the year. Proponents of this view would
stress recent weaknesses in foreshadowing statistics.
(ii) A middle-of-the-road view, envisaging the economy
moving sideways or mildly upward. While proponents
of this view see no signs of real upward momentum,
neither do they see much evidence of developing
downward pressures. They would point out, for

8/21/62 -10-
example, that inventories remain low in relation to
sales, and they would give minimum weight to some of
the foreshadowing statistics on the ground that to
some extent their recent behavior has reflected
temporary factors.
(iii) An optimistic view, seeing gain in underlying strength
since a variety of uncertainties and shocks have
been weathered smoothly.
I lean toward the middle-of-the-road view. In any event, it is
clear that the economy will remain well below its output
potential for some time to come.
July data on bank credit show little change in basic trend
compared with May and June. While there was a reduction in
total bank credit in contrast to increases in the preceding
months, this was due mainly to the absence of major Treasury
financing. Except for the continued strength in real estate
loans, loan demand was not impressive; there are, however,
indications of a somewhat more than seasonal pick-up in early
August, especially in business loans. While the adjusted daily
average money supply declined in July for the third month in a
row, time deposits continued to rise. The money supply plus
time deposits continued to expand.
As the President said last week, in reporting an improve
ment in our balance of payments in 1961 and 1962, "we still
have some distance to go." For the first half of 1962 the
seasonally adjusted annual rate of deficit was about $1.4
billion. Preliminary estimates for July indicate that we were
just about in balance when we include the $471 million debt
prepaying by France and Italy; the more significant and ominous
fact is that without the debt prepayment we would have had a
$450 million deficit (unadjusted) for the month. Canada's
financial difficulties were an important factor in our good
showing in the second quarter. In the third quarter we have
felt, and will continue to feel, the effect of a return flow
of funds into Canada, following the recent financial measures
taken by Canada. Preliminary balance of payment data for
August are discouraging. Indeed, we still have some distance
to go in solving our balance of payments problem; meanwhile we
face the constant risk of a weakening of foreign confidence in
the dollar. While the problem may not now be critical, it
certainly is pressing.
The President's decision not to seek a tax cut at this
time, and not to seek spending authority beyond that already
requested, is an important factor to be taken into account in
determining what is appropriate monetary policy. There has
been much talk in recent weeks about the possibility of a

8/21/62 -11-
change in the "policy mix." It now appears that, for the time
being at least, there is to be no basic change in that mix.
There is to be no fundamental change in the burden to be borne
by fiscal policy.
As for monetary policy, if one looks just at the domestic
economy he might conclude that more monetary ease is called
for. I doubt, however, that more ease would really provide
any substantial stimulation to the economy. An easy credit
condition has been continued longer in this recovery than in
any other in recent decades. Large amounts of bank reserves
have been made available, more than offsetting the losses
resulting from the gold outflow. We still have basically easy
credit conditions. The banks are comfortably liquid and anxious
to lend. The public's holdings of liquid assets are ample.
Our balance of payments problem also counsels no greater
ease in monetary policy. While somewhat higher interest rates
here would help our balance of payments, in view of the domestic
uncertainties it does not seem advisable to make any change in
monetary policy at this time.
A major decision on fiscal policy having just been made by
the Administration, it would seem desirable for the Federal
Reserve to maintain the status quo while the air clears--while
the implications of the fiscal decision become more clear. The
maintenance of the status quo is also suggested by the prospec
tive Treasury advance refunding.
As for money market guides in maintaining the status quo
I would suggest that the Federal funds rate be in the 2 3/4-3 per
cent range, with the rate at 3 per cent much of the time, and
that the three-month Treasury bill rate be in the 2 3/4-3 per cent
range, with the rate preferably in the upper part of the range
much of the time. I see no reason for any change in the directive,
other than perhaps to delete the references to the unsettlement
of financial markets and the behavior of such markets. I see no
reason to consider a change in the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Bryan said a considerable quantity of new statistics for the
Sixth District had become available. Unfortunately, figures for a
Reserve District tend to lag behind those for the nation; the statistics
to which he referred related mostly to June rather than July. These
showed that nonfarm employment and manufacturing employment were up, and
that there had been an increase in demand deposits and currency. A number

8/21/62 -12
of other statistics also looked moderately favorable. Construction con
tract awards were down sharply, but that figure was for May.
Mr. Bryan noted that the money supply, conventionally defined,
had been down for three consecutive months. Also, it seemed to him
that the rate of growth of time and savings deposits was definitely
showing a tendency to slow down. He further noted that there had
recently been a rather sharp drop in required reserves, which had the
effect of making the free reserve figures look higher than they would
otherwise. The Committee, he suggested, might have to be particularly
alert in the next few months to avoid an inadvertent tightening that
it did not desire.
Mr. Bopp reported that developments in the Third District had
been mixed. Department store sales continued to show year-to-year gains,
but the rate of gain was decreasing. Manufacturing employment declined
in July, but the decrease was seasonal and small. Steel production had
been increasing. Amid all the pluses and minuses, both nationally and
regionally, one fact seemed to show through: unemployment was still
undesirably high. In the Third District, there were still six major areas
of substantial labor surplus. Nationally, the slight decline in the rate
of unemployment reflected primarily the small change in the labor force
rather than an increase in employment.
Banking in the District also showed a mixed picture, Mr. Bopp said,
but on balance there was some evidence of a gradually less easy situation.

8/21/62 -13-
As for policy, Mr. Bopp expressed the view that the data for July
were not sufficiently conclusive to warrant a departure from a program of
stimulating the domestic economy through monetary ease. He continued to
view the underutilization of economic resources as the primary problem
facing the Committee. Although the balance of payments was also a serious
problem and was far from solved, it had nevertheless been improving and
the risks of monetary ease seemed somewhat less. Perhaps more important,
however, it now appeared that less could be expected from a stimulative
fiscal policy than seemed possible earlier; and this, too, would argue for
further stimulation through monetary policy.
Mr. Bopp said that he would not recommend any change in the dis
count rate at this time. However, a change in the current policy directive
which would indicate a greater willingness to encourage expansion seemed
to him in order. With two modifications, the directive issued at the
Committee meeting of May 29, 1962, would accomplish this purpose. That
directive read:
In view of the modest nature of recent advances in the
pace of economic activity, the continued underutilization of
resources, and the uncertainties created by the disturbed
conditions in some financial markets, it remains the current
policy of the Federal Open Market Committee to promote further
expansion of bank credit and the money supply, while giving
recognition to the country's adverse balance of payments.
To implement this policy, operations for the System Open
Market Account during the next three weeks shall be conducted
with a view to maintaining a supply of reserves adequate for
further credit and monetary expansion, taking account of the
desirability of avoiding sustained downward pressures on short
term interest rates.

8/21/62 -14
A minor change would be necessary: In the first sentence the word "re
mains" would have to be changed to "is." The reference to disturbed
conditions in some financial markets could also be removed.
Mr. Bopp said he would interpret such a directive as meaning some
what lower market rates, with Federal funds trading more consistently
around 2-1/2 to 2-3/4 per cent, reserve availability fairly liberal, and,
in view of the slowing upward trend of time and savings deposits, more
consideration given to expansion of total reserves and the money supply.
Mr. Fulton reported that business activity in the Fourth District
had expanded somewhat during July, with evidence of slight gains carried
forward into August. Auto sales rebounded vigorously in July, and this
vigor apparently was carrying over into August. Department store sales
peaked in the latter part of July, and since then had remained at the
July level. The lack of material improvement in unemployment stemed
principally from the slowdown in the auto industry that occurs prior to
the model changeover; there had been some favorable changes in unemploy
ment in other industries. While the trend of electric power production
had faltered, the level was not down too much from the latter half of
July. The volume of building permits issued in Cleveland and Cincinnati
suggested that building activity was being maintained.
As to the steel industry, Mr. Fulton said there had been only
moderate improvement from the low June and July figures. August shipments
were said to be about the same as in June. Inventories at the mills and in

8/21/62 -15
the hands of customers were being maintained at what was called a "lean
position." It was understood that a major auto producer had indicated
to a mill that its requirements for the fourth quarter would be 30 per cent
below normal, as the company was continuing to liquidate inventories.
Nobody seemed to know, with auto production as high as it had been, how
the auto companies had obtained inventories to last for such a long time.
There was a suspicion that after the turn of the year the companies would
begin to inventory some steel against the possibility of a reopening of
the steel wage contract, which could be reopened prior to the end of June.
If steel operations should return to a more favorable level,
Mr. Fulton said, the Fourth District would show a substantial degree of
activity, since other industries were not doing too badly. The principal
question was whether the auto industry, which takes a large tonnage of
steel, would have two good years in a row. One industry source had
expressed the view that 1963 should be a 6.2 to 6.4 million car year, which
would be a good year. In brief, steel prospects seemed to revolve largely
around the auto industry. And with steel so predominant in the Fourth
District picture, this relationship meant that the economic health of the
District was likely to depend in considerable measure on the auto industry.
Mr. Fulton expressed the view that the execution of monetary
policy had been good and that the Committee had achieved about what it
sought. He felt that free reserves in the range of $350-$400 million would
be appropriate. The discount rate should be maintained without change, and

8/21/62
-16-
the directive seemed appropriate except for the clause relating to
unsettlement in financial markets, which he would favor deleting.
Mr. Mitchell presented the following statement:
I continue to believe that monetary policy can make a con
tribution to economic expansion without significantly adverse
effects on the balance of payments. Since the last meeting of
the Committee there have been more encouraging than disappoint
ing economic statistics. But in these day-to-day and hour-to
hour bulletins there are many reversals and, as in the recent
past, good news has been followed by setbacks. What is more
significant today is that the President has indicated that unless
there is a notable change for the worse in economic developments
there will be no tax cut before 1963, when Congress will give
consideration to a broad-based tax reform measure. In the
interim it is more important than ever that monetary policy
encourage economic expansion.
For those who are concerned with changes in the money
supply, and over the months and years I believe all of us have
to regard this guideline as significant, it is a matter of
increasing concern that we have had no monetary expansion since
November of 1961. This stark fact has been alibied in a variety
of ways: (1) bank assets have shown a near-record gain and time
deposits have risen spectacularly, (2) monetary expansion in the
three months previous to December 1961 was sufficient for some
time, (3) turnover increases indicate that velocity changes are
making up for any short-fall in money supply, (4) the money
supply cannot be made to rise without the risk of inflation.
What is the point about each of these arguments?
The gain in bank assets largely reflects the growth in
time deposits following the raising of the Regulation Q ceiling.
Without this special circumstance, bank assets would have in
creased by less than 2 per cent in January-July 1962. More than
half the growth in commercial bank credit since December is
attributable to the extraordinary increase in time deposits.
Much of this extra growth in time deposits represents a shift
in the flow of savings toward commercial banks as intermediaries.
The corresponding increase in bank assets cannot be regarded as
stimulative to the economy.
The trouble lies in the fact that some of the guides urged
on us confuse the act of monetary creation, for which this Com
mittee primarily exists, with a more or less ministerial act of
accommodating the growth of banks as savings institutions or
financial intermediaries. It has become a routine operational

8/21/62 -17-
procedure to provide and withdraw reserves to accommodate cur
rency and gold flows and to superimpose monetary decisions on
the altered base. It should normally also be a routine opera
tional procedure to provide the reserve base for Government
deposits and for time accounts in commercial banks. Neither of
these bank liabilities is directly related to monetary creation.
By deleting the changes in reserves associated with Government
and time deposits as well as currency and gold stock, a much
clearer conception of the Committee's work and objective can be
attained. Looked at in this light, the activities of the
Committee in the past nine months have resulted in no money
creation--absolutely none. The entire increase in reserves
since last autumn--about $300 million--was needed merely to
support the growth in time deposits.
Did we create enough additional money in the fall and late
summer of 1961 to last for 1962? On the contrary, that short
lived monetary expansion was itself long overdue. In 1960 there
had been an actual contraction in the money supply. From the
trough of the recession in February 1961 through the end of the
year, the money supply rose less than 3 per cent while GNP in
constant prices grew by 7 per cent. In other words the money
supply did not grow during the period of recession and its
growth was inadequate during the period of recovery. The dis
appointingly-slow expansion in GNP since the end of 1961 has
coincided with the failure once again of the money supply to
increase.
Can we depend on velocity changes to make up for our
deficiencies in adding to the money supply? It is true that
over the past 11 years (1952-1962) turnover has been rising
secularly at the average rate of about 5 per cent per year.
This rise has been associated with technological changes in the
use of the means of payment, the ensuing stepped-up frequency
of payment and a great variety of changes in spending-financing
patterns, many of which were encouraged by the secular rise in
interest rates over the past decade. Moreover, all during the
fifties, in addition to secular changes in turnover, we can
observe cyclical reactions superimposed on the secular develop
ments. Monetary velocity has tended to rise more rapidly in
periods of high interest rates and has slackened in periods of
relatively low interest rates. But just as the secular rise in
interest rates has dominated the cyclical variation, so the
secular rise in velocity has overwhelmed its cyclical movement.
These facts suggest that deficiencies in our actions may tend
to be offset by an automatic response in the turnover ratio.
But too much dependence should not be placed on this reaction.
To a significant extent the rise in turnover may represent a
reaction forced on the economy by inadequate growth of the money

8/21/62 -18-
supply. Just as a community with a water shortage will adapt
itself to this inconvenience in various ways, the American
economy has adapted itself in recent years to the slow growth in
money supply by economizing its use, thereby pushing up deposit
turnover. A faster growing money supply, however, would have
interfered less with economic expansion.
Are there inflationary risks in monetary expansion? At a
time when the economy is operating well below capacity and cost
push influences are notably absent, inflationary dangers are
remote. Furthermore, despite the very large increase in time
deposits this year, liquidity positions are far from ample.
Having considered and rejected four rationalizations for
the failure of the money supply to grow, I conclude by consider
ing how we may go about achieving needed monetary expansion.
The fact is that at the present time the banking system would
expand the money supply by acquiring assets if we were to supply
the necessary reserves. The road block is the present free
reserve target and the way around it is to engage in more
aggressive open market purchases.
At this time, such a policy would put less downward pres
sure on short-time interest rates than at other times of the
year. The economy is entering a period of seasonal loan ex
pansion and seasonal rise in bill yields. At a minimum the
Committee should anticipate these seasonal forces by supplying
reserves more aggressively and earlier without fear of undue
reductions in short-term market yields.
Beyond this I believe some reduction in bill yields could
be tolerated. I would let bill yields decline to 2-1/2 per cent,
if necessary, to achieve money supply growth. Furthermore, I
would minimize the impact on bill yields by purchasing as much
as feasible in the intermediate and longer term maturities.
Mr. Mitchell concluded by stating that he would endorse the
changes in the policy directive that had been suggested by Mr. Bopp.
Mr. King suggested that there should not be overlooked, in dis
cussing the lack of growth of the money supply, as conventionally defined,
the effect of the action taken as of the beginning of this year increasing
the maximum permissible rates of interest payable on time and savings
deposits. As he anticipated when the action was taken, that had been a

8/21/62 -19
factor on the side of restricting the growth of the money supply, and it
should be given consideration.
Turning to the policy directive, Mr. King expressed the view that
it should be changed. He presented for consideration the possibility of
deleting the last two sentences in the first paragraph of the outstanding
directive, which he felt served mainly to elaborate the statement in the
first sentence. The deletion of those two sentences would make the
directive rather brief, he noted, and someone might wish to suggest other
language in substitution.
Mr. King noted that the Government securities market had been
showing some strength recently. In his view, this reflected a fundamental
force in the economy at the present time, and no effort should be made to
put a floor under the rate structure if there was a tendency for rates to
decline somewhat. Instead, the Desk should operate in such manner as to
allow the bill rate to do more or less what it wanted to do at this
particular time. He did not believe that natural forces would operate to
such an extent as to endanger objectives with which the Committee had been
concerned, at least not to the same extent as might have been the case
some time ago. In conclusion, Mr. King said that he would not favor a
change in the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Shepardson commented that the economic situation looked a little
more encouraging at present than at the time of the previous Committee
meeting. The season of the year was approaching, he noted, when one would
normally expect an upturn in economic activity, and the System should be

8/21/62 -20
prepared to provide the needed reserves for such expansion as might
occur. At the same time, he felt that the general level of credit
policy had been entirely appropriate, and he would suggest no change.
Mr. Mills said there appeared to have been no pronounced economic
developments since the preceding Committee meeting on which to base any
change in System policy. No one seemed able to determine whether this
reflected the usual summer slackness or whether it reflected a relatively
general economic sluggishness, and this was a further argument for going
along with existing policy. He agreed with those who would favor eliminat
ing from the policy directive the phrase having to do with unsettlement
in financial markets.
Mr. Mills went on to say that he felt sure everyone had listened
with much interest to Mr. Mitchell's exposition of policy reasoning. He
believed Mr. Mitchell's point of view required an answer, even though an
extemporaneous reply would obviously be less fully developed than Mr.
Mitchell' s presentation.
After these prefatory remarks, Mr. Mills commented that the lack
of credit creation cited by Mr. Mitchell was a matter of concern, and an
element in the lack of general economic growth that the nation had been
experiencing over the past several months. However, when a reduction in
required reserves was noted, a case could be made that that development was
a reflection of an absence of demand for bank credit, rather than any
conceivable inadequacy of free reserves on which to base an expansion of
credit. Granted that the level of required reserves may have been in
fluenced by factors such as the marked shift in U. S. Government deposits

8/21/62 -21
and Treasury financing operations, nevertheless there was no question
but that required reserves had dropped, and he thought there were good
grounds for tracing this decline to the absence of existing demands for
credit. Reserves had been available in adequate amounts, in his opinion;
a superimposed reflection of that fact was the tendency for the long-term
interest rate to fall. That tendency had been abetted by an ample flow
of investment funds into the market and by a lack of exceptional demand
for the use of such funds. As he saw it, these were economic elements
on the side of adding force to business growth whenever a demand for
credit did develop. In the present posture of the economy, he believed
that the adequate availability of credit, both long- and short-term, was
not open to serious question.
Mr. Wayne reported that although Fifth District business apparently
advanced in July, the evidence was both mixed and incomplete. Bank
debits rebounded to a new high after declining in June. Department store
sales in July rose 2 per cent to a level exceeded only in March and May
of this year. The Reserve Bank's triweekly survey of District business
leaders, which was thought to have pretty well established its usefulness
as a barometer of business opinion and guide to current developments,
particularly in manufacturing, showed improvement in general sentiment for
a second three weeks following a period of declining confidence that
extended from February to June. Surveyed businessmen also reported small
recent gains in employment and trade, and further declines in unemployment.
Manufacturers in the survey indicated virtually no change in employment
or shipments, but a rising trend in inventories and wage rates and

8/21/62 -22
significant declines in new orders, weekly hours, and prices. These
trends, which appeared earlier in durable goods, had now spread to non
durables and were especially apparent in textiles. Real estate loans
had continued to expand at District banks, and business loans, seasonally
low in July, rose sharply in the first week of August.
Mr. Wayne said that, as he saw it, the economy was continuing its
gently undulating movement with a slight, barely perceptible upward tilt.
Currently, it seemed to be making a mild recovery from its third dip
during the present upswing, but there were no indications of sustained
improvement. As had been true for many months, ample bank credit was
available at moderate rates of interest. Recently a small group of
prominent business leaders in the Fifth District was asked about the
availability of credit and its relation to the current sluggishness of the
economy. Without exception they replied that the business hesitation was
in no way caused by any shortage of credit or by prevailing levels of
interest rates. One member of the group stated that for the first time in
years he had been solicited by representatives of New York banks for loans,
but that he had not borrowed because he could not profitably use the funds.
These and other more general pieces of evidence indicated that no easing
of credit was likely to increase the tempo of business. Since there had
been, on balance, no significant improvement in the international situa
tion, there was no room for maneuver there.
For these reasons, Mr. Wayne said, he would favor continuation of
approximately the same degree of monetary ease that had prevailed for the
past four or five weeks. By this he meant a bill rate at 2.85 per cent,

8/21/62 -23
give or take four or five points. For free reserves, he would suggest a
target range of $350-$400 million. The Manager of the Account, however,
should have discretion to depart from those targets temporarily as
market conditions dictated.
Mr. Wayne said he would renew the present policy directive-
although he would not be troubled by elimination of the clause referring
to unsettlement in financial markets. He would not favor any change in
the discount rate.
Mr. Clay commented that the improvement in the level of domestic
economic activity in recent weeks was an encouraging development. While
recognizing this fact, a more accurate perspective on the state of the
economy could be obtained by taking a longer-run view of the situation
in order to consider the underlying forces at work. In other words, the
perspective could be improved by not focusing attention too narrowly on
either the more favorable data for the last month or the less favorable
data for the preceding month.
In approaching the analysis of economic developments in this way,
it became apparent that the basic situation had not changed recently and
in fact had remained essentially unchanged throughout this year. There
was still the problem of obtaining adequate expansion in economic activity
relative to capacity in terms of available manpower and other resources.
The manpower aspect of the problem must be judged not only in
terms of the current level of unemployment and the prospects for added
employment in the months ahead. Account also must be taken of the lack of
significant growth in the civilian labor force during the current upswing,

8/21/62 -24
despite the growth in working age population, and the strong probability
that a marked labor force growth would take place in the months ahead.
Furthermore, industrial capacity continued relatively ample, and there
was as yet no evidence to indicate an acceleration in business capital
outlays, upon which any strong expansion in economic activity appeared to
depend. Taking all factors into account, the prospective pace of economic
advance remained in keeping with the moderate proportions of the year to
date.
It was Mr. Clay's view that on balance the domestic economic situa
tion continued to call for an expansive credit policy. Member bank
reserves should be applied in sufficient volume to permit bank credit
expansion on a seasonally adjusted basis. The moderate decline in open
market yields in recent weeks had been a favorable development. Taking
into account the international balance of payments problem, he felt that
the Committee's objective on the Treasury bill yield might appropriately
be in the 2.80-2.85 per cent range for the period immediately ahead, but
it did not appear to be necessary to press for a higher yield at this time.
On the other hand, some further downward movement in longer yields would
be desirable. Market forces might tend to produce lower long-term yields
in the period ahead, and in that event the Committee should not take any
action to prevent such a development. Mr. Clay recommended no change in
the Reserve Bank discount rate.
Mr. Scanlon reported that during the past several weeks develop
ments in the Seventh District had presented a mixed picture. Retail sales
rebounded in July and this trend apparently was continuing in August.

8/21/62 -25
Changes in the employment situation were of a seasonal nature. Many Mid
west business economists were predicting continuation of about the current
levels of activity for the next several months, with a general business
decline thereafter. Auto sales during July and early August were at a
high level, and inventories of 1962-model cars were being reduced rapidly.
The demand for producers' equipment was mixed. The demand for electrical
generating equipment was a bright spot, but in general capital goods
industries continued to report sluggish business, with little likelihood of
a substantial pickup. While there had been a moderate gain in steel
orders, the rate of output was low, and inventories were being reduced.
Home building continued slow in the District.
Warm weather in July had improved crop conditions in the North
Central States, Mr. Scanlon said, particularly in the central corn belt.
Corn production was expected to be 2 per cent higher than in 1961, despite
a 1 per cent decrease in acreage, and it appeared that the soybean crop
would reach a record high.
Loans at District weekly reporting banks were down in July and
early August, as compared with the preceding year, and bank holdings of
Government securities were also reduced.
Turning to policy, Mr. Scanlon said that to him open market opera
tions during the past three weeks seemed to have followed a course midway
between "providing moderate reserve expansion" and "fostering a moderately
firm tone in money markets." The result had been a further decline in bank
credit and the seasonally adjusted money supply, while short-term market
rates gave mixed signals. In his opinion, during the next three weeks
greater emphasis should be placed on providing for moderate reserve expansion.

8/21/62 -26
As to the policy directive, Mr. Scanlon expressed agreement with
the deletions suggested by Mr. Treiber. He added that he would not favor
a change in the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Deming said the Ninth District apparently felt rather good
about the current economic situation, and it had reason for that feeling.
Crop prospects improved substantially further during the critical July and
early August period, and near-record small grain production was now
assured. The only exception to this statement was seen in South Dakota,
where rust had cut back production estimates substantially. Among other
crops, surplus moisture and cool weather had retarded corn and soybeans
in the eastern sections of the District. Even so, total tonnage of
District grains would be large and, with favorable livestock marketings at
good prices, would boost cash farm income in the last half of 1962 by
5 to 10 per cent over the comparable period of 1961.
Retail sales had been improving, Mr. Deming noted, and should show
further gains now that a long newspaper strike had been settled. Non
agricultural employment in July rose modestly; bank debits were up 5 per
cent (seasonally adjusted) in the month. July personal income was more
than 7 per cent higher than a year ago, a substantially better year-to
year gain than recorded for the United States as a whole.
The Reserve Bank's current survey of recent developments and ex
pectations indicated that these favorable developments continued through
mid-August. Respondents also indicated confidence in immediate future
developments, although on August 15 slightly more saw stability continuing

8/21/62 -27
at present levels and slightly fewer saw improvement as fairly certain than
six weeks ago. The proportion believing that same improvement was probable
remained about the same. Only one or two respondents saw a decline as
probable or certain in the next several weeks.
Recent District banking developments had been mixed and diffi
cult to interpret. At country banks, total deposit growth in July was
about normal but, as had been the case in all months this year, time de
posit increases were much larger than in the comparable month last year.
Country bank loans showed virtually no change in July, a not unusal
occurrence. (Last year they fell rather sharply.) The loan-deposit ratio
of these banks was about the same as in July 1960, a bit lower than in
July 1961, and down a bit more from its peak. At city banks, total
deposits dropped in July for the first time since January. In most Julys,
total deposits at these banks had increased. This July the decline re
flected entirely a drop in U. S. Government deposits; other deposits were
up but time deposit growth had diminished. City bank loans also declined
slightly in July, again the first decline since January. So far in
August, however, city bank loans were up and, if the August trend continued,
would be up substantially more than usual for that month. The loan-deposit
ratio at these banks was about 4 points above its low of last winter, but
still 7 points below its peak of June 1960.
More striking, and perhaps more significant, than these recent
happenings were developments in total bank credit during the first seven
months of this year. So far in 1962 total loans at all member banks had

8/21/62 -28
registered the largest increase for that period of all the postwar years
save one, 1959. In that year, however, most of the loan increase was
financed by liquidation of investments; this year there has been little
net investment shrinkage. As a result, bank credit expansion in the
District had been at a record level, exceeding slightly the previous high
of the first seven months of 1958. There had been little borrowing from
the Reserve Bank, and about as many sales as purchases of Federal funds.
There certainly had been no pressure on Ninth District banks.
As to policy, Mr. Deming said that for the coming three weeks
he would like to have policy continue about as at present. In his view, the
Desk had achieved rather well the objectives of the Open Market Committee
during the past three weeks. It had succeeded in maintaining an adequate
availability of credit without putting appreciable downward pressure on the
short-term rate, and he would like to see those conditions continue.
As to the directive, Mr. Deming said he would have no particular
objection to deleting the phrase that referred to unsettlement in financial
markets. Aside from that, he would suggest no change in the directive, and
he saw no reason to change the discount rate.
Mr. Swan reported that available July data for the Twelfth District
contained no great surprises. In the Pacific Coast States employment
again was up, while the seasonally adjusted rate of unemployment dropped
from 6.1 per cent to 5.9 per cent in July after having risen from May to
June. The July increase reflected a resumption of previous levels of
construction activity following the settlement of a major labor dispute, a

8/21/62 -29
delayed pickup in agricultural activity, and a continuance of the increase
in defense-related employment. On the other hand, lumber demand weakened
considerably in June with dampening effects on production and prices,
which reflected more than the usual seasonal decline. Department store
sales appeared to have shown little gain from June to July. However, the
daily average rate of new car registrations in California was higher in
June than in any other month of 1962, and the June rate was exceeded
appreciably by the daily average rate in the first half of July. In
general, the situation in the District continued somewhat mixed, but
with perhaps some moderate improvement.
Mr. Swan went on to say that District weekly reporting member
banks showed losses in demand and time deposits for the three weeks ended
August 8. Savings deposits continued to rise but the increase was more
than offset by a fairly substantial decline in other time deposits. This
resulted in increased pressure on reserve positions. District banks were
net purchasers of Federal funds in this period, and they were substantial
borrowers from the Federal Reserve Bank in the week ended August 8. There
after the situation shifted a little; in the week ended August 15 the banks
were net sellers of Federal funds, while borrowing from the Reserve Bank
dropped off quite sharply. District banks were expected to be net sellers
of Federal funds again in the statement week ending tomorrow.
Turning to the national picture, Mr. Swan said it seemed to him
that July business developments had clarified the outlook only to the extent
that an imminent downturn in activity was less likely. On the other

8/21/63 -30
hand, the data also continued to suggest the unlikelihood of any
early resumption of a stronger rate of expansion. The abandonment of plans
for an immediate tax reduction, current plans for plant and equipment ex
penditures by businesses, current inventory policies, and the results of
the most recent survey of consumer buying intentions combined to suggest
nothing more than a continuation of present levels of activity, or at best
a slight further rise, in the immediate future.
Consequently, Mr. Swan believed, in terms of policy, that certainly
there should be no trend toward lesser ease. Instead, he would like to
see a modest but nevertheless definite move in the other direction. He
subscribed to the desirability of placing greater emphasis on moderate
reserve expansion than on the maintenance of a moderately firm tone in
money markets. What he had in mind could be accomplished, he thought,
without an undue decline in short-term rates. He would not change the
discount rate at this time.
As a minimum change in the current policy directive, Mr. Swan
favored removal of the reference to unsettlement in financial markets. He
had some sympathy with Mr. Bopp's suggestion for going back to the May 29
policy directive. On balance, however, he felt that perhaps it would be
better to change the existing directive slightly.
Mr. Irons reported that during the past several weeks there had
been a slight but fairly general strengthening of activity in the Eleventh
District. July figures and August indications reflected a slight upward
movement. For the year to date, department store sales were up 6 per cent

8/21/62 -31
from the previous year. In petroleum, refining was up slightly while pro
duction and drilling were holding about steady. An eight-day allowable
basis continued in effect. The industrial production index for Texas was up
another point to a record high, and nonagricultural employment had risen
slightly--also to a new record. Construction activity was up quite sub
stantially, reflecting the booming construction conditions in two of the
major cities--Houston and Dallas--as well as some other areas. In agricul
ture the situation was about normal for this time of year, with conditions
ranging from drought to heavy rainfall in different parts of the State.
Indications were for a larger than normal cash farm income this year,
with an increase in agricultural output. The rate of unemployment in Texas
was running about 5 per cent.
On the financial side, Mr. Irons saw no evidence of inability to
satisfy credit demands and no evidence of illiquidity on the part of
District banks. Total loans had declined a bit but business loans were up,
along with investments. Deposits--both time and demand--also were up.
Excluding two banks that were consistent buyers, purchases and sales of
Federal funds were not far from being in balance and borrowing from the
Reserve Bank was nominal, running at about $6 to $8 million daily average.
There had been no complaints from banks about inability to meet credit
demands. In fact, they indicated satisfactory ability to meet an addi
tional loan demand if that should occur.
Turning to the national picture, Mr. Irons said he did not see any
thing new in the picture that would call for an appreciable change in

8/21/62 -32
monetary policy. The question of a tax cut had now been settled for some
months, and it might be well to wait and appraise the effects of that de
cision on business attitudes and reactions. The attitude of businessmen
in the Eleventh District was favorable: they were not expecting a boom
that would "go through the ceiling," but the economy was operating at
record levels in most areas and they saw some further advances ahead.
In the circumstances, Mr. Irons said, he felt the situation was
such as to justify continuing the policy of the past several weeks. All
seasonal requirements for credit should certainly be met, and perhaps they
should even be met liberally. On the other hand, he would not attempt to
force reserves on the banking system at this time. In his view, free re
serves of $ -$400 million, a Federal funds rate of 2-3/4 - 3 per cent,
3 5
and a bill rate around 2.8 per cent would represent a satisfactory situa
tion for the period ahead.
As to the policy directive, Mr. Irons said he would see no particu
lar objection if the Committee wanted to take out the language relating to
unsettlement in financial markets. However, he was inclined to feel that
the Committee had been making too many minute changes in the directive,
and he was not entirely sure that unsettlement no longer existed in finan
cial markets. He would not favor a change in the discount rate at this
time.
Commenting on the Eighth District, Mr. Francis said that business
activity appeared to have leveled off since June following a moderate
advance during the first six months of the year. For the past six weeks

8/21/62 -33
bank debits had remained at approximately the June level, interrupting
a rising trend that had been evident since January. Business loans, which
rose from March to June, remained virtually unchanged in July. Unemploy
ment, as measured by compensation claims, showed little change. It
appeared that District department store sales may have risen more than
seasonally in July and early August.
The growth of bank deposits had leveled off, Mr. Francis said.
After a slight advance in June, demand deposits continued their general
decline, while time deposits continued to expand.
Cash farm receipts for the first half of the year were about 3 per
cent above the first half of 1961. Crop conditions indicated that farm
income would continue above 1961 levels during the remaining months of
this year. Most crops were good to excellent, but pastures had been
damaged rather severely by drought in the central Missouri area.
Mr. Latham reported that statistics were not sufficiently avail
able with respect to New England to determine its participation in the
improvement noted for the country as a whole in July. In general, however,
New England business appeared to be relatively good. Although it had not
measured up to expectations, it apparently had weathered the setback
occasioned by the stock market decline and adverse economic forecasts.
Although District employment, production, and construction
leveled off in June, preliminary reports suggested some renewed strength
in July. Department store sales continued strong, with a 6 per cent
increase reported for the four-week period ended August 11 compared with

8/21/62 -34
a year ago. Consumer income continued to show improvement. July employ
ment figures for the State of Connecticut were generally favorable, both
with respect to nonmanufacturing employment and average weekly hours of
factory workers. (Connecticut accounts for approximately one-quarter of
New England employment.)
Check clearings continued at abnormally high levels during June,
July, and August, Mr. Latham said, averaging 8 to 9 per cent in number above
a year ago. Total bank loans and investments, particularly investments in
municipals, also continued at high levels. During the past three weeks,
savings deposit growth had been at a 16 per cent annual rate. Both loan
and deposit growth suggested a continuance of the present rate of growth
of monetary velocity.
Mr. Balderston noted that the adverse over-all balance of pay
ments continue to add to the dollar holdings of foreign central banks
despite advance payment arrangements that could not be expected to continue,
or to be repeated. Further, the trade balance was already as favorable
as could be expected to obtain in the near future since European countries
and Japan had been enjoying booms. It appeared, therefore, that the
solution must be sought in this country's foreign spending, lending, and
investing. That part of the spending and lending done by the Government
clearly was not the responsibility of the Federal Reserve System. On
the other hand, the part that represented the lending and investing of
private funds was within the province of the System. The more bank credit
the System provided, the greater was the tendency of American banks to

8/21/62 -35
make foreign loans and the greater was the tendency of foreigners to sell
securities in this country's capital markets. In short, this country's
liquidity seemed to be leaking beyond the confines of the domestic
economy, thus adding to foreign holdings of liquid dollar assets.
To him, Mr. Balderston said, the problem seemed to be one of con
tinuing to seek the optimal combination of international and domestic
goals. On the domestic side he watched, like others, the money supply and
its curious shifts. He also kept watching the extent to which banks re
sorted to the discount windows. When the banks became pressed to accom
modate their customers, he assumed they would not hesitate to borrow
more from the Federal Reserve Banks. Thus far, however, the increase had
been minimal. On the international side, he had increasing concern because
each month that passed without a solution of the basic problem--without
achieving a sustainable over-all balance--seemed to bring closer the
threat of crisis. Such a crisis, he added, would not be of foreign
making alone. It would embrace and involve Americans who had funds they
wished to protect. So he felt that with the passing months the Federal
Reserve must give added weight to international goals in the combination
it had been trying to achieve. If a confidence crisis should arise, he
supposed it could be better handled if long-term rates were higher rather
than lower.
In view of factors such as the imminence of the Fund and Bank meet
ings and the continual talk of irresponsible people concerning the dollar,
Mr. Balderston said he found himself in rather complete agreement with
what Mr. Treiber had said and what Mr. Wayne had added later. He would

8/21/62 -36
feel comfortable with continuation of a goal of about $350 million of
free reserves, because in this uncertain period he felt that the System
ought to be in a position from which it could swerve in either direction.
As to the directive, he found himself in accord with the suggestion made
by Mr. Hayes at the July 31 meeting and repeated by Mr. Treiber at this
meeting.
Chairman Martin commented that the majority of the Committee
appeared to favor maintenance of the status quo, to which he added that
personally he saw no reason to change the status quo at the moment.
As to the current policy directive, the Chairman indicated that
he was rather inclined to agree with the view expressed by Mr. Irons.
He was not sure that the unsettlement in financial markets had been com
pletely eliminated. However, he had no particular feeling about dropping
that reference if the Committee so desired.
Chairman Martin then repeated that he understood the majority
view this morning was for maintenance of the status quo as far as policy
was concerned.
The only dissents were indicated by Messrs. Mitchell and Bopp,
both of whom stated that they wished to be recorded, for reasons they
had given earlier, as not favoring maintenance of the status quo.
The Chairman then called for a poll of the nine members of the
Committee who had expressed agreement with maintenance of the status quo,
for the purpose of obtaining their views on the suggestion to eliminate
from the directive the clause in the first paragraph relating to the

8/21/62 -37
unsettlement of financial markets and the clause in the second paragraph
that called for open market operations to be consistent with the behavior
of financial markets.
All of those nine members expressed themselves in the affirmative
with respect to the suggested changes.
During the poll several comments were made. Mr. Mills, although
indicating that he would be willing to go along with the deletion from
the second paragraph, if that was the consensus, commented that the term
financial markets had a much broader connotation than just the stock
market. This term also touched on international exchanges and commodity
markets--the whole range of areas in which the dollar was depressed.
Mr. Balderston stated that he felt Mr. Mills had raised a valid point,
while Chairman Martin stated that he went along with the deletions from
the directive without too much enthusiasm.
Mr. Mitchell said he would like the record to show that in his
opinion the directive was so loosely worded as to accommodate a great deal
more latitude and flexibility than was reflected currently in the execution
of open market policy. The directive was not inconsistent with the main
tenance of the status quo nor was it inconsistent with the change in policy
he advocated.
Mr. Mills made the comment that he was becoming more and more con
cerned about the Committee getting bogged down in words. It was his view
that the Committee had gotten along better under the type of directive used
prior to December 1961, which did not require attempting to express at each

8/21/62 -38-
meeting some minor differentiation. Persons studying the policy record
might read into such changes a meaning going beyond the actual intent of
the Committee.
Chairman Martin replied that he saw considerable merit in that
point of view. He recalled the amount of study that had been given to
the formulation of the directive over the past several years and noted
that the thinking with regard to the problem sometimes seemed to lead
almost in a circle. He did not pretend to know the ultimate answer.
The Chairman then inquired whether there were other comments, and
none were heard.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York was authorized and directed, until
otherwise directed by the Committee, to
effect transactions for the System Open
Market Account in accordance with the fol
lowing current economic policy directive:
It is the current policy of the Federal Open Market
Committee to permit the supply of bank credit and money to
increase further, but at the same time to avoid redundant
bank reserves that would encourage capital outflows inter
nationally. This policy takes into account, on the one
hand, the gradualness of recent advance in economic activity
and the availability of resources to permit further advance
in activity. On the other hand, it gives recognition to the
bank credit expansion over the past year and to the role
of capital flows in the country's adverse balance of pay
ments.
To implement this policy, operations for the System
Open Market Account during the next three weeks shall be
conducted with a view to providing moderate reserve expan
sion in the banking system and to fostering a moderately
firm tone in money markets.

8/21/62 -39
Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,
Balderston, Bryan, Deming, Fulton, King,
Mills, Shepardson, and Treiber. Votes against
this action: Messrs. Mitchell and Bopp.
During Chairman Martin's appearance before the Joint Economic
Committee on Thursday, August 16, Congressman Reuss made the following
comment:
"I now ask my question: At your upcoming meeting
next week of the Open Market Committee, will you please
pass on to them my ardent request that they reconsider
what they did on December 19, 1961, and hopefully go back
to the sensible directive which they had in effect then and
restore the free reserves of the banking system to at least
the $500 million level and do the part which I think the
monetary authorities have to play in getting this economy
moving forward again."
Chairman Martin had indicated in his reply that Congressman Reuss' comment
would certainly be borne in mind. He wanted, therefore, to insert this
into the Open Market Committee record.
Mr. Broida withdrew from the meeting at this point.
There had been distributed to the Committee a report from the
Special Manager of the System Open Market Account on foreign exchange
market conditions and on Open Market Account and Treasury operations in
foreign currencies for the period July 31 - August 15, 1962, together
with a supplementary report for the period August 16 - 20, 1962. Copies
of these reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.
Commenting in supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Coombs
noted that foreign exchange markets had remained reasonably quiet since
the date of the previous Committee meeting, with some improvement in the

8/21/62 -40
dollar rate against the Swiss franc and the Dutch guilder. Several factors
had contributed to a noticeable, although possibly temporary, improvement
in foreign confidence in the U. S. dollar. These included President
Kennedy's Telestar statement, the announcement of improved balance of pay
ments figures for the second quarter of the year, and the forestalling of
potential gold losses through Treasury and System foreign exchange opera
tions. The London gold market had been quieter recently.
Following a discussion of Treasury Stabilization Fund operations
during the past three-week period, Mr. Coombs noted that the Federal Re
serve System also had been active during that period. On August 2 the
System liquidated its $50 million swap with the Bank of France and re
placed it with a standby swap in the same amount. On the same day the
System entered into a $50 million standby swap arrangement with the German
Federal Bank. On August 7 the System used $10.5 million equivalent of
Belgian francs to purchase the equivalent amount of dollars from the Bel
gain National Bank in order to forestall a potential Belgian demand for gold.
Also, on August 7 the System drew an additional $10 million equivalent of
Swiss francs from the Bank for International Settlements under its $100
million standby agreement and used the francs to mop up "excess" dollar
holdings of the Swiss National Bank and thus avoid a potential gold loss.
Further, a strengthening of the dollar rate against the Dutch
guilder and a decline in the gold holdings of the Netherlands Bank had
given the System an opportunity to accumulate Dutch guilders for the
purpose of paying off System drawings under the $50 million swap arrange
ment with the Netherlands Bank. Arrangements had been made with the

8/21/62 -41
Netherlands Bank to purchase guilders for System Account at market rates
whenever such operations would not place downward pressure on the
dollar spot rate vis-a-vis the guilder. Orders executed by the Nether
lands Bank under this agreement had totaled more than $10 million through
yesterday. The Account Management would expect to utilize the guilders
to pay off $10 million of the $50 million drawn under the swap, leaving
$40 million outstanding. It was hoped that the situation had now turned
in favor of the dollar and that in the next month or so enough guilders
could be bought back to liquidate the swap completely. If this worked out,
it would provide another illustration of how official swap operations
could be useful in offsetting or cushioning reversible flows of funds.
Mr. Coombs then commented that the Netherlands Bank had shown
resistance to making direct deals with the Federal Reserve on a wholesale
basis at market rates. As an alternative, it had offered to give the
System a special and more or less arbitrary rate under the market. While
the System would still make money on the deal if it accepted such an offer
this would represent a deviation from the rules set forth in the Committee
Authorization and Guidelines pertaining to System foreign currency opera
tions, which called for operating at market rates in the absence of some
special circumstances that would cause the Committee to decide to do other
wise. Mr. Coombs had indicated to the Netherlands Bank that he thought
the Committee would have serious doubts about deals at a rate other than
the market rate. He thought that the System could manage, in any event,
to accumulate enough Dutch guilders to pay off the swap before maturity.

8/21/62 -42
It was his suggestion, therefore, that the System adhere to its position
of operating only at the market rate and he would appreciate the Committee's
views.
In reply to questions by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Coombs said that the
exchange rate was a true market rate at the moment. Although all central
banks exerted an important effect on the rate by their decisions to acquire
or release dollars, they tried not to frustrate basic tendencies in the
market.
Mr. Mitchell then said that if one could be sure market forces
were permitted to work and the exchange rate therefore reflected them,
he would think there was a great deal to be said for hewing to the posi
tion of dealing only at market rates. On the other hand, if a central bank
could and did regulate the market, there would seem to be little use in
going along with a pretense.
Mr. Coombs reiterated that although central banks do intervene
more or less continuously, they do not regulate the market. They attempt
to smooth out seasonal and temporary factors so that the market rate will
reflect basic forces rather than temporary disturbances.
Mr. Treiber pointed out that when the Open Market Account enters
into purchases and sales of U. S. Government securities direct with
foreign central banks, those transactions are executed at current market
rates.
After further discussion it was the view of the Committee, with
which no disagreement was indicated, that operations in foreign currencies

8/21/62 -43
for System Open Market Account should continue to be at market
rates.
Mr. Coombs next pointed out that the dollar-sterling swap arrange
ment between the Federal Reserve System and the Bank of England would
mature on August 30, 1962. He recommended liquidating the contract at
maturity and placing the swap on a stand-by basis, which would be fully
as useful as the present arrangement.
He also requested authorization from the Open Market Committee
to reopen negotiations with the Bank of England with a view to increasing
the amount of the sterling-dollar swap to as much as $250 million. In
earlier negotiations the Bank of England and the British Treasury were
hesitant about going beyond $50 million, but at that time the British
still owned over one-half billion dollars on their drawing from the Mone
tary Fund. That drawing having now been repaid, the British might wish to
reconsider a substantial enlargement of the swap facility, and Mr. Coombs
felt that $200 or $250 million would be more appropriately in line with
the size of potential payments swings between the United States and the
United Kingdom. An arrangement of such size, he noted, would also make
a significant contribution to solving the longer range problem of inter
national liquidity.
In reply to a question regarding the rationale underlying the
apparent preference for standby arrangements, Mr. Coombs said a foreign
central bank might feel that it was of little use, in terms of a possible
future emergency, to have a swap executed in advance. If there was a

8/21/62 -44
standby swap arrangement, and if it were drawn upon, the drawing would
represent an addition to reserves at a time when needed. Mr. Coombs felt
that this was a valid argument. Originally, he said, all of the swaps
could have been put on a standby basis. However, the Account Management
thought it would be well to test the machinery for investment. A lot had
been learned, and the testing period had been completed without disadvantage
to the Federal Reserve. Therefore, it seemed reasonable to move to a
standby basis.
Mr. Mitchell inquired whether, if standby arrangements were on a
three-month basis, this meant that actual implementation could not exceed
the period for which the standby swap was arranged. Mr. Young commented,
in reply, that this was a technical aspect of the standby arrangement that
he felt could be worked out. If a standby swap was drawn against in sub
stantial amount, it might be worked out that the arrangement could run
for three-months from the time of the drawing.
Discussion then reverted to the suggested amount of the sterling
dollar standby swap arrangement, and Mr. Coombs reiterated that the British
had not approached the Federal Reserve with regard to any possible increase
in the amount of the swap facility. He felt, however, that a standby swap
of the suggested magnitude would rebound to the benefit of both parties
by buttressing the international financial system as it now existed and
working toward improving the smoothness of its functioning. In all arrange
ments of this kind, there were both direct and indirect benefits. From
the standpoint of the relative magnitudes of payments swings, Mr. Coombs
suggested that a sterling-dollar swap of $250 million might be compared

8/21/62 -45
roughly to a $100 million guilder-dollar swap and a $75 million Belgian
franc-dollar swap. In the case of Swiss francs, the payments swings could
be so large that he thought there might be a question whether $200 million
was really adequate. In short, the magnitude of potential payments swings
was the vital point.
At the conclusion of the discussion, authorization was given by the
Committee, without indication of disagreement, for negotiations with the
Bank of England looking toward replacement of the existing $50 million
sterling-dollar swap with a standby swap, with the possibility of increas
ing the swap facility to an amount in the order of $250 million.
In further discussion, Mr. Bryan referred to earlier comments by
Mr. Coombs regarding the apparent success of Treasury and System foreign
exchange operations in offsetting or cushioning several reversible flows
of funds. He asked Mr. Coombs whether the latter thought this uniformly
favorable experience could be expected to continue indefinitely unless the
U. S. balance of payments problem was brought under control, and Mr.
Coombs replied to the effect that if the balance of payments situation
should deteriorate his judgment would tend to be in the negative.
Mr. Bryan noted that certain foreign witnesses who testified
recently before the Joint Economic Committee had recommended giving gold
guarantees, and he asked whether the swap arrangements entered into by
the Federal Reserve could be said to give foreign central banks such a
guarantee. Mr. Coombs responded that when President Hayes of the New York
Bank appeared at the Joint Committee hearings and was asked such a ques
tion, Mr. Hayes replied that the System swap arrangements were selective

8/21/62 -46
short-term operations of a commercial type using an instrument, the forward
contract, that is frequently used in exchange markets.
Mr. Furth noted that our swap agreements do not provide a gold or
gold value guarantee--only a guarantee of the value of the dollar in
relation to the currency of the other party, and vice versa. If the
dollar were devalued against the guilder, for example, we should have to
use more dollars to repay the Netherlands Bank; but if both currencies
were uniformly devalued in terms of gold, that would not be the case. Thus,
under the swap arrangements our liabilities would not be increased in the
case of a uniform change in the price of gold in accordance with Article TV,
Section 7, of the International Monetary Fund Agreement.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the open
market transactions in foreign currencies
during the period July 31 through August
20, 1962, were approved, ratified, and con
firmed.
Chairman Martin noted the receipt of a letter addressed to him
under date of August 14, 1962, by Congressman Wright Patman, Chairman of
the Joint Economic Committee, with which Mr. Patman had transmitted a
copy, in galley form, of an unpublished Joint Committee Print. As set
forth in the letter, this document had been prepared by Dr. John G.
Gurley, Professor of Economics at Stanford University, and Dr. Asher
Achinstein, Senior Specialist in the Legislative Reference Service of the
Library of Congress, at Congressman Patman's request. As received, it
comprised a four-chapter, 74-page digest based on the minutes of the

8/21/62 -47
Federal Open Market Committee for 1960, which minutes had been transmitted
to the Joint Economic Committee under date of July 21, 1961, at the re
quest of Congressman Patman, with a letter from Chairman Martin which
indicated that the Open Market Committee was making these minutes avail
able to the Joint Economic Committee on the understanding that they would
be treated as confidential.
Congressman Patman's letter stated that he had intended to take
up with the Joint Economic Committee, after the Committee's present series
of hearings was completed, the question of making this report public. The
letter went on to say, however, that "it is apparent that a copy of the
Gurley-Achinstein report has fallen into the hands of a newspaperman, as
extracts from the report appeared in news items in the New York Times
yesterday and again today, and possibly others will appear in the days to
come." The letter added that this premature disclosure of the contents of
the report in the press had raised the question of immediate release of the
report to the press generally, and that the Joint Economic Committee had met
and adopted by majority vote the following resolution:
"That the presently-confidential Joint Committee print,
entitled 'How Policies of the Federal Reserve System Are
Determined' be submitted in a letter by the Chairman to the
Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys
tem with the request that he allow us to make it public
because, in our view, the material in it is in the public
interest and in the public interest it ought to be made public;
that this be done promptly; and that until a resolution of the
matter is had, the Joint Economic Committee print be held con
fidential."

8/21/62 -48
The letter stated that an early answer to the Committee's question would
be appreciated.
Copies of Congressman Patman's letter and of the galley proof of
the Joint Committee Print had been reproduced, and they were sent to the
members of the Open Market Committee at Chairman Martin's request on
August 16, 1962.
In introducing a discussion of the type of reply that the Open
Market Committee might make to Congressman Patman, Chairman Martin noted
that the question presented in the letter gave rise to a number of related
issues that warranted serious consideration. Among other things, Chairman
Martin referred to questions that had been raised over a period of time
concerning the adequacy of the policy record of the Federal Open Market
Committee as published in the Board's Annual Report each year, in which
connection he noted that the adequacy of such record for the year 1960 had
been challenged at the hearings held by the Joint Economic Committee in
June 1961, following which Congressman Patman requested that the Open
Market Committee's full minutes for the year 1960 be made available to the
Joint Economic Committee. Chairman Martin also pointed out that the ques
tion of adequacy of the policy record was closely related to the continuing
efforts of the Open Market Committee to devise the most suitable form of
policy directive to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Turning to another phase of the matter, Chairman Martin recalled
that on various occasions, once only recently, the Open Market Committee
had given consideration to the possibility of publication in full of the

8/21/62 -49
Committee's minutes for some past period. Thus far, he noted, that
question had not been resolved. He did not propose that it be reopened
at today's Committee meeting, but it should have further consideration.
In the discussion that followed, comments were made to the effect
that the short time available since distribution to the Committee members
of the Joint Committee Print had not permitted careful study of the
document by the Committee members. It was noted, also, that the galley
proof referred at one point to a final chapter of the report that was not
contained in the copy received by Chairman Martin from Congressman Patman.
The suggestion was made, therefore, that it would seem desirable to
ascertain whether such a final chapter was proposed to be included in the
Joint Committee Print; and that, if so, it would seem appropriate for such
chapter to be made available to the Open Market Committee for review before
a substantive reply was made to Congressman Patman's letter.
In view of the foregoing and other considerations, it was
suggested that Chairman Martin make an interim reply to Congressman
Patman, in which it would be pointed out that more time was required
to consider carefully the question presented in Mr. Patman's letter
and that, in the circumstances, the Open Market Committee had con
cluded that it would be desirable to carry over that question until
its next meeting, to be held on September 11, 1962, following which the
Open Market Committee would advise the Joint Committee of its views. The
letter would also inquire concerning the Joint Committee's plan to include
an additional chapter in the Print, with the statement that it would be

8/21/62 -50
helpful to the members of the Open Market Committee, if the Joint Com
mittee planned to include such a chapter, to have an opportunity to review
the galley proof thereof.
At the conclusion of the discussion, it was the consensus that
Chairman Martin should make an interim reply to Congressman Patman along
the lines that had been suggested. It was understood that between this
date and the date of the next Open Market Comittee meeting, scheduled
for Tuesday, September 11, the members of the Open Market Committee would
give further study to the question presented in Congressman Patman's
letter and to the related questions of Open Market Committee practice and
procedure raised thereby, with a view to deciding at the September 11
meeting what type of further reply should be made to Mr. Patman. In this
connection, Chairman Martin noted that in the interim members of the
Committee could, if they wished, submit comments with regard to various
phases of the matter.
Secretary's Note: Pursuant to the fore
going understanding, the following letter
was sent by Chairman Martin to Congressman
Patman under date of August 21, 1962:
"This refers to your letter of August 14, 1962, trans
mitting a copy of a proposed Joint Committee Print entitled
'How Policies of the Federal Reserve System are Determined'
and quoting a resolution adopted by your Committee to the
effect that this Print be submitted to the Chairman of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System with the
request that your Committee be allowed 'to make it public.'
"In my letter of July 21, 1961, transmitting to your Com
mittee the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee for 1960,
there were set forth in some detail the reasons for which the
Open Market Committee is convinced that the public interest
would not be served by publication in whole or in part of

8/21/62 -51
"detailed minutes of meetings of the Committee. The question
whether it would be in the public interest to publish the Joint
Committee Print which purports to contain an analysis and con
densation of those minutes obviously involves considerations
that require careful study by the members of the Open Market
Committee.
"Upon receipt of your letter, I immediately had the copy of
the document transmitted by you reproduced and distributed by
air mail to each member of the Open Market Committee. However,
the members of the Committee did not receive copies of the
Report in time for more than cursory reading before the regular
meeting of the Open Market Committee today (August 21, 1962).
"Moreover, the last paragraph of Chapter I of the Report
appears to indicate that a last chapter of the Report has the
purpose of highlighting 'the main points brought out by the
minutes with respect to the actions of the Committee in 1960,'
and of briefly discussing 'them from the point of view of the
achievement of a more effective monetary policy.' Yet, the Joint
Committee Print in the form enclosed with your letter does not
include such a final chapter. If it is your Committee's plan to
include such a chapter in the proposed Print, it would be helpful
to the members of the Open Market Committee also to have an
opportunity to review the galley proof of that chapter.
"For the reasons here indicated, the Open Market Committee
at its meeting today concluded that it would be desirable to
carry over until its next meeting, to be held on September 11,
the question raised in your letter concerning general publication
of the proposed Joint Economic Committee Print. Promptly follow
ing that meeting, you will be advised of the Committee's views."
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, September 11, 1962.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary