A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, May 8, 1962, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr.
Mr. Deming
Mr. Ellis
Mr. Fulton
Mr. King
Mr. Mills
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Bopp, Scanlon, Clay, and Irons, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Wayne and Swan, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Brandt, Furth, Garvy, Holland, Hostetler,
Koch, and Parsons, Associate Economists
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
Mr. Yager, Chief, Government Fiance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors

5/8/62
Mr. Francis, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Messrs. Sanford, Eastburn, Ratchford, Baughman,
Jones, Tow, and Coldwell, Vice Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York,
Philadelphia, Richmond, Chicago, St. Louis,
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively
Mr. Stone, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Eisenmenger, Acting Director of Research,
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Mr. Sternlight, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Runyon, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco
Upon motion duly made and seconded, the
minutes of the meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee held on March 27, 1962, were
approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report on open market operations in U. S. Government
securities covering the period April 17 through May 2, 1962, and a
supplementary report covering the period May 3 through May 7, 1962.
Copies of both reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone commented
as follows:
The money market remained generally steady during the past
three weeks. Federal funds traded for the most part between
2-1/2 and 3 per cent, with the bulk of trading on most days at
the 2-3/ per cent level.
The Treasury's refunding operation was a very successful
one, with attrition something less than 9 per cent of public
holdings of the issues eligible for the exchange. With the
completion of the refunding operation, and barring unforeseen
developments, the Treasury should be out of the market at least
until late June and possibly until early July. Moreover, we may,

for the time being, at least, have come to the end of the
weekly additions of $100 million to the regular bill issue,
since each regular issue is now up to $1.8 billion. When
one considers that last week's refunding operation was the
eighth Treasury financing operation thus far in 1962 apart
from the weekly bill auctions, and that in those auctions an
aggregate of $1.3 billion bills was added to the three-month
issue, the prospective absence of the Treasury from the
market over the weeks ahead should provide a welcome respite.
Whiled ealer positions in Government securities have been
reduced in the past few days, they nevertheless continue
relatively heavy, particularly in the case of short-term issues.
Early last week, when dealers were acquiring large amounts of
rights while the subscription books were open, their positions
reached what may well be an all-time high of about $4-1/4
billion. Dealers' use of credit also expanded considerably. The
New York banks, however, were readily able to accomodate this
bulge in credit demands, in part because individual income taxes
flowed into the Treasury's balance at the Reserve Banks at a
rate much faster than anticipated, and in order to prevent that
balance from rising too far a succession of large redeposits,
aggregating more than $1 billion, was made in the "C" depositary
banks at about the same time that dealer credit demands were
rising so sharply. Beginning yesterday, some of these redeposits
were recalled, and more may be recalled over the next few days.
At the same time, as I indicated earlier, dealers' positions,
and their use of credit, have receded from the peak reached
during the refunding. I might mention that despite the sub
stantial redeposits that were made, the Treasury's balance at
the Reserve Banks ran higher than had been anticipated, and
this higer balance was a major factor in producing the lower
than-expected free reserve figure of last week. Largely because
of the heavy redeposits into the "C" depositary banks, however,
the money market tended to be somewhat easier, even with the
lower free reserve figure, than it had been during the preceding
two weeks when free reserves were about $100 million higher.
I should call the Committee's attention to the fact that in
yesterday's Treasury bill auction a major New York bank submitted
a tender for $400 million three-month bills at what seemed at
the time to be a relatively high price. The strength of that
and other bidding was such that that price turned out to be the
lowest at which tenders were accepted, and the bank concerned was
allotted $356 million on its tender. With such a large amount
going to one institution, several other large banks and dealers
received no awards of three-month bills at all, and others won
only small amounts. The efforts of these banks and dealers to
cover their commitments to customers and to establish trading
positions in the new three-month bills is in all likelihood
putting considerable downward pressure on bill rates at this
moment.

Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the open market transactions in
Government securities during the period
April 17 through May 7, 1962, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Noyes presented the following statement with respect to
economic developments:
At the outset it can be said that there has been no marked
change in the over-all economic situation since the last meeting.
On balance, economic conditions may be characterized as having
continued to improve moderately. March housing starts, which I
singled out as an important missing link in the data available
last time, turned out to be high--back up in a single month to
almost the level that prevailed before they turned down last fall.
The McGraw-Hill survey of proposed plant and equipment expendi
tures for the current year has also become available since the
last meeting. The prospective increase over last year of 11 per
cent was up substantially from the 8 per cent reported in the
Commerce-S.E.C. survey earlier in the year.
But there has also been some less favorable news. While
first quarter corporate profits show large gains from the
depressed levels of a year ago, they were probably down from the
fourth quarter, even after allowance for normal seasonal differ
ence. The stock market has experienced a considerable downward
adjustment, perhaps greater than the profits figures alone would
justify. We have also learned that new orders for durable goods
in March declined further, by 3 per cent.
However, most of the information that has become available
reflects no change or further moderate improvement. Neither the
production index nor total retail sales for April have been
released, but both are likely to be up a little. The unemploy
ment rate in April was substantially unchanged, the actual
reduction being just about the normal seasonal improvement.
The economy has clearly emerged from the winter lull on the
up side--as almost everyone expected that it would--but it still
has not shown enough strength to suggest a quarter-to-quarter
change in the present quarter equal to that anticipated before
the turn of the year, much less enough to make up the short-fall
in the first quarter. To be more specific, the most optimistic
appraisal of the current quarter would be for an increase in
GNP of about $10 billion, while a rise of $13 billion was
assumed in the $570 billion annual average projected in the
Budget and the Economic Report.

5/8/62 -5-
It is always a temptation to try to find something new to
say about the economic situation, either in words or in sub
stance; but at this Juncture, the facts seem to demand a
repetition of the colorless phrase--continued moderate improve
ment.
I believe the implications of this situation for monetary
policy are evident and equally colorless. Credit markets have
eased further in recent weeks, as Mr. Koch will report in more
detail. With Treasury operations confined largely to refunding
and a large flow of savings through financial intermediaries,
this easing has been the result of the normal operation of
market forces, modified by the efforts of the System and the
Treasury to maintain the level of short rates. Whether the
endeavor to avoid downward pressure on short-term rates should
be continued--or perhaps even intensified--is a question that
must be answered on the basis of judgments that extend well
beyond the limits of the domestic economic situation. On the
other hand, domestic economic conditions certainly suggest, and
might almost be said to dictate, that the easier conditions
which have developed in the intermediate and long-term markets
should not be frustrated by overt action at this time.
Mr. Furth presented the following statement with respect to the
U. S. balance of payments and related matters:
Our international deficit dropped sharply in April, accord
ing to tentative and partial data, perhaps back to the annual
rate of $1-1/2 billion that prevailed in January and February.
Satisfaction with this improvement should be tempered,
however, by the suspicion that some of it may have reflected
movements of capital from Canada. For reasons of economic
analysis or because of some leakage of official secrets, the
market had apparently expected that Canada would establish a
value for its dollar at a rate lower than the current quotation.
Market offers of Canadian dollars began greatly to exceed market
demand, and the Bank of Canada lost more than $100 million during
April in its attempts to maintain the quotation at a figure
2-3/4 per cent higher than the par value declared on May 2.
Under these circumstances, the reflux of funds to Canada, which
should promptly occur if the market is satisfied with the
viability of the new par value, might soon increase our deficit.
Further data will be needed, however, before our balance of
payments for April can be firmly analyzed.
The interaational situation still shows continuing or even
accelerating expansion in Western Europe and little change

5/8/62
elsewhere. But four recent financial decisions of foreign
monetary authorities are likely to exert some influence on our
international accounts.
The first and most important of them was the reduction in
British Bank Rate. Initially, at least, this reduction seems to
have put an end to the accumulation of dollars by the Bank of
England. This change has lessened the threat of further gold
drains. Since most of the funds that had flown to London came
from Continental Europe, however, the cessation of the flow does
not directly improve the U. S. balance of payments.
Furthermore, the reduction in British interest rates has not
widened the covered interest-rate differential on Treasury bills
in favor of New York, but on the contrary has led to its dis
appearance. Renewed market confidence in the future of sterling,
bolstered by the repeated reductions in Bank Rate, has caused
the forward discount of sterling against the dollar to drop from
nearly 2 per cent to little more than 1-1/4 per cent. This drop
was greater than the decline in British Treasury bill rates
following the Bank Rate change.
The second action was the decision of the Netherlands Bank
to increase its discount rate and to permit this year only
nominal foreign bond issues in the Amsterdam market. While these
moves are likely to have only negligible direct effects on the
dollar, they illustrate the tendency of European authorities to
restrict international capital movements without giving much con
sideration to the principles of inter-central-bank cooperation.
Netherlands officials have repeatedly urged the United States to
raise interest rate levels in order to force foreigners to shift
their borrowing to Continental Europe. Interest rates in New
York are higher than in Amsterdam, but the differential cannot
benefit our capital accounts as long as foreign borrowers are
prevented from taking advantage of the lower Netherlands rates.
In a similar vein, the German authorities have followed up
their expressions of concern about inflationary pressures by not
only raising Treasury bill rates but also permitting German banks
again to pay interest to foreign depositors. These actions were
taken despite the jump in the German trade surplus in March to
an annual rate of $2 billion, twice the January-February rate.
European surplus countries hardly make it easier for the United
States to eliminate its external deficit when they take
immediate corrective action as soon as their surplus shows the
first signs of declining.
The fourth action was the establishment of the new par
value of the Canadian dollar. The abandoment of the flexible
exchange rate experiment has been acclaimed in Washington, but

5/8/62 -7
there has been some uneasiness about the magnitude of the
depreciation of the Canadian dollar. The new low rate may well
adversely affect our trade as well as our capital accounts.
The position of the dollar has not changed much in gold and
foreign exchange markets. The gold price in the London market
has remained in the neighborhood of $35.08; at least part of the
time, the Bank of England has probably been able to act as net
purchaser rather than as net seller of gold. The dollar has
slightly improved against sterling and against the German mark.
But it has declined against the Swiss franc and, probably as a
consequence of the actions of the Netherlands Bank, against the
Netherlands guilder; it is now virtually at the floor in the
Netherlands, as it has been for some time in the two major surplus
countries, France and Italy.
None of these exchange rate movements, however, seems to have
been caused by anything resembling a flight from the dollar. The
market may agree with those economists who believe that the fate
of the dollar will mainly be decided by economic and financial
developments in the United States, and that these developments
have so far not justified apprehension regarding our ability to
maintain stability in our cost and price system.
Mr. Koch presented the following statement with respect to financial
developments:
In commenting on recent financial happenings this morning,
I should like to focus on those developments that we have on
occasion in the past referred to as the intermediate objectives
of Federal Reserve policy. First, let us look at various concepts
and forms of liquidity. Money supply, narrowly defined, has
picked up smartly in recent weeks. After increasing $300 million
in March, it rose a billion dollars in April. It is now 2-1/2
per cent above the level a year ago.
The sharp growth in time and savings deposits at commercial
banks continued during the first half of April, but apparently
tapered off somewhat thereafter. Nevertheless, growth in total
deposits at commercial banks, expressed as a seasonally adjusted
annual rate, has been at about 10 per cent since the first of the
year. There is also some evidence that the hectic activity in
time accounts is slowing down. The data collected by the Chicago
Federal Reserve Bank on gross new deposits in and withdrawals from
these accounts at banks in the Seventh District show both declin
ing quite sharply in recent weeks. Forms of liquidity other than
deposits at commercial banks have also apparently increased
significantly further, although no data are available subsequent
to March.

5/8/62 -8
Such over-all liquidity ratios as that of total liquid assets
to the gross national product and that of corporate liquid assets
to current liabilities, however, are still not high by historical
standards. With reference to the state of the economy's liquidity
and its relevance to activity, a new concept that came to my
attention the other day was that of net private financial assets
to GNP. This concept subtracts private financial liabilities
from liquid assets. When one makes this adjustment, he finds
that liquidity has declined much more sharply relative to the
size of the economy since World War II than is shown by the more
usual liquidity ratios, and also that it is currently at a lower
level.
Turning from liquidity to credit availability as another
indicator of the effects of recent Federal Reserve policies on
economic activity, total bank loans and investments were
up 8 per cent in the first four months of 1962 on a seasonally
adjusted annual rate basis. The sharpest increase has been
in bank holdings of securities other than U. S. Governments,
presumably mainly municipals, which have increased at over a
25 per cent annual rate. The rate of increase in business
lending has slackened somewhat, whereas the rates of increase
in real estate and consumer lending have picked up thus far
this year.
The volume of capital market financing has also accelerated
in recent weeks. New corporate security issues totaled $1.2
billion in April, up from an $800 million monthly average in
the first quarter and less than the heavy April 1961 calendar
only because of the large AT&T financing a year ago. Municipal
financing totaled about $850 million in April, approximately
equal to the first quarter average, but somewhat above the
year-ago level. The volume of both corporate and municipal
financing, however, is expected to decline this month.
As a final indicator of Federal Reserve effects, working
of course along with all of the various market forces, the
cost of credit has continued to decline, particularly in
the case of long-term financing. The Government bond rate
and that on outstanding Aaa corporate issues, at 3.87 and
4.31 per cent, respectively, are now at around their lowest
levels since last summer. New corporate issues are coming
to market at about their lowest rates since 1958.
The rate on outstanding new Aaa municipal issues, at
2.93 per cent, is also at the lowest level since 1958. Other
signs of the recent easing tendencies in long-term financing
are the facts (1) that interest rates on new corporate issues
are below those on outstanding issues, a rare occurrence, and

5/8/62 -9
(2) that the rate on lower grade municipal issues has declined
considerably more sharply than that on higher grade issues.
I should like to conclude this morning with a few com
ments on recent projections of economic and financial
developments for the rest of 1962 made by several of my
colleagues here at the Board. A more detailed presentation
of their findings will be given this afternoon to those of
you who are interested.
The authors conclude that a reasonable case can be made
for either (1) a continuation of recent experience, thus
meaning further expansion in GNP at, let us say, a 5 per cent
annual rate, or (2) a pickup of the rate of expansion to the
path projected in the last Budget message, which would imply
GNP increasing at a 7-1/2 per cent rate. The lower model
would likely leave us with unemployment and capacity utiliza
tion rates at about the same levels as at the beginning of the
year. The more optimistic model would mean that some progress
would likely be made in our resource utilization problem, but
at still a surprisingly slow rate. In neither model does the
rate of resource utilization suggest upward price pressures in
commodity markets this year.
For our more immediate purposes, the main relevance of the
projections is that neither of the models suggests that any
sustained upward pressure on interest rates is likely in the
months ahead. In the case of both projections, credit demands
would be only moderate relative to the size of the economy,
although in dollar amount the total funds raised in credit
and equity markets might approximate the level reached in
1959. The moderate nature of likely prospective credit demands
is also suggested by the recent McGraw-Hill survey of
business plans for capital spending, which found that com
panies expect their demands for external funds for all purposes
to increase only 1 per cent over last year, whereas internal
funds are expected to rise 14 per cent.
Savings flows, on the other hand, are likely to remain
relatively large throughout the rest of 1962 and, assuming
the continuance of monetary ease, the vast bulk of these flows
would likely be channeled through financial intermediaries
rather than directly into financial markets. Moderate credit
expansion, large savings flows to institutions, and continued
monetary ease are the basis for the projection of relatively
stable interest rates under the optimistic model and possibly
even further declining rates in the lower model.
Neither model suggests the need or desirability of any
near-term lessening of ease in monetary policy--not, at least,

5/8/62 -10-
until or unless the effects of policy become more obviously
adverse, either with respect to capital outflows or with
respect to a marked deterioration in bank lending and invest
ing activities. On the other hand, April developments in
liquidity, credit availability, and interest rates suggest
to me that the degree of ease being achieved by existing
policy is for the present providing an adequate monetary stim
ulant to economic activity.
Mr. Treiber presented the following statement of his views on the
business outlook and monetary policy:
It is now clear that the slowdown in economic expansion
at the beginning of 1962 was only a pause. The expansion has
resumed at a moderate pace.
Consumer spending, especially on automobiles and resi
dential construction, has risen.
The McGraw-Hill spring survey of businessmen's spending
plans for 1962, made before the steel price episode, indicates,
as expected, a somewhat faster growth in expenditures for
plant and equipment for the balance of the year than was
indicated in a survey taken two months earlier. While the
prospect of a cost-price push in the steel industry has been
avoided, a substantial part of the business community disliked
the Administration's role in getting the steel price increase
reversed. With many businessmen questioning the Administra
tion's attitude toward business, will these questions and
doubts have a dampening effect on the spending decisions of
businessmen? Corporate profits have been rising, and greater
profits encourage greater capital expenditures. I would con
clude that, despite the fears and hesitations of some business
mean, we may expect to see increased spending for capital purposes
as indicated in the survey.
The problem of unemployment persists. The rate of
unemployment is still significantly higher than in the comparable
stage of the two previous business expansions. Despite the drop
in total unemployment, the number of persons out of work more
than half a year (the so-called "hard core" unemployment) is
well above the trough of the recession in early 1961.
The expansion in business activity continues to be accom
panied by price stability,
Bank loans have shown moderate strength in recent weeks.
Consumer loans and loans connected with real estate and con
struction have shown substantial strength. The money supply

5/8/62 -11-
had grown in April by a larger amount than in recent months,
while there are some indications that the growth of time
deposits is slowing down.
The banks still have adequate liquidity. This is also
true of other segments of the economy.
The Treasury will be completing its current refunding
operation on May 15. Thereafter, there will be a period of
several weeks during which the Treasury will not be coming to
the market except to roll over the weekly Treasury bill issues.
It is not expected to need cash until July, although the
Treasury may meet some of its July needs through an operation
in late June.
The balance-of-payments problem continues with little or
no improvement. Indeed, the statistics for the first quarter of
1962 are worse than those for the first quarter of 1961, and even
more so if a technical adjustment in German balances is disre
Assuming a continued expansion of business activity in the
United States, imports are likely to move up further, thereby
worsening our payments position. We must also be alert to the risk
that at some point continuing deficits and the absence of what
foreigners would regard as a coordinated and determined effort
to cope with the problem may so disturb foreign confidence as
to lead to large-scale shifts from dollars into gold. Our gold
loss this year has exceeded that of the comparable period in
1961: and further losses are to be expected.
In considering relative interest rates in international
markets, we have been accustomed to concentrating on the short
term rates and their influence on short-term capital movements.
Long-term rates, of course, also have an influence. The
relatively low long-term interest rates in the United States
certainly have been an increasing encouragement to long-term
borrowing by foreigners in this market.
In considering monetary policy, it is apparent that the
domestic economic situation is improving while the inter
national financial situation is bad and is likely to continue
to be so. Under the circumstances, it seems to me that, with
increased economic activity over the coming months, cyclical
forces, as they develop, should be allowed to put some upward
pressure on market rates--both short-term and long-term--and to
reduce free reserve positions. This should help to check undue
acquisition of long-term issues by commercial banks and to
counteract any speculative expectations that might be develop
ing with regard to long-term Government securities; it may also

5/8/62 -12
dampen speculative real estate developments which are under
taken here and there. I would not expect that some tightening
would sap the mortgage market and curtail construction activity,
nor would it significantly curtail capital spending. On the
other hand, it might dampen to some degree the outflow of
long-term capital.
Settlement for the new issues in connection with the cur
rent Treasury finacing operation will take place next Tuesday,
May1 5. In the meantime, I think the Desk should resist any
significant downward movement in Treasury bill rates, even if
this should involve some shrinkage in free reserves. After the
refunding is out of the way, I would favor probing toward a
somewhat higher level of short-term rates. I would not stand
in the way of any moderate upward movement in rates that might
come about through the action of market forces.
I think it would be desirable to make some changes in the
current economic policy directive, which for some time has
referred to "the modest nature of recent advances in the pace
of economic activity." It would seem desirable to revise the
first paragraph of the directive so as to reflect the current
economic situation. I think it would also be desirable to
revise the second paragraph so as to indicate that the System
would not resist some moderate upward pressures brought about
by continued business expansion.
I would not favor overt action by raising the discount
rate at this time unless, of course, it were part of a
"package" or a coordinated group of actions to be taken by our
Government on several fronts to focus attention on and to help
solve our balance-of-payments problem.
Mr. Ellis reported that New England had been enjoying good spring
weather. However, the strength of the economy seemed to have a deeper
base than good weather. The economy was being assisted by consumer
spending, and the willingness to borrow had improved. Easter season
retail sales, seasonally adjusted, were some 10 per cent ahead of 1960,
the previous high year. The ski resort business exceeded the previous
record year of 1960, and automobile sales continued strong. Major re
porting banks indicated that purchases of new cars were some 18 per cent

5/8/62 -13
above a year ago, as measured by their extensions of installment credit.
Construction in the greater Boston area was getting a strong boost from
several exceptionally large projects that were all in progress at the
same time. The New England production index moved up slightly from Febru
ary to March, with the important strength in the durable goods industries.
In summary, economic expansion was proceeding at a modest pace, although
the picture was somewhat mixed.
First District reporting banks continued to experience a business
loan demand that was a little stronger than seasonal expectations. During
the most recent three-week period, time deposit growth slackened. Yet
savings banks had a deposit growth running some 8 per cent ahead of a year
ago, while withdrawals were down about 2 per cent.
Turning to policy considerations, Mr. Ellis referred to comments
in Mr. Noyes' statement to the effect that there had been no material
change in the business picture, which was basically one of continuing
modest improvement. This improvement was more evident, Mr. Ellis suggested,
in data on final takings at consumer, business, and Government levels than
in production and employment series. Looking back, he felt that monetary
policy had quite properly been stimulating. If he understood Mr. Koch's
figures correctly, there had been fairly sharp increases recently in the
measures of money supply and credit availability. These developments
would appear to reflect the effect of monetary policy, which comes with
some lag in a period when demand is strengthening. If there continued to

5/8/62 -14
be a strengthening in demand, he would expect the expansion in the
credit series to be more rapid than one would want to accept on a
continuing basis. With reference to the two models of economic and
financial developments for the rest of 1962, to which Mr. Koch had
referred, he had some feeling that if the economic advance should gain
momentum a monetary policy designed to preserve free reserves of
around $400 million would support a credit build-up more rapid than
the Committee would like to see continue.
Mr. Ellis expressed the view that no abrupt shift in policy
was warranted at this particular time. He agreed with Mr. Koch that
the present degree of ease was providing an adequate monetary stimulant
to economic activity. At the same time, he would be prepared to revert
to the position taken by some in January, before the pause in business
expansion, that the System should think in terms of allowing a strengthen
ing of credit demands, if and when they developed, to create conditions
of less market ease. The expansion of the domestic economy seemed to
provide greater leeway for monetary policy to make whatever contribution
was possible so far as the international situation was concerned. This
suggested to him that the projections of required reserves should be
formulated on the basis of an annual growth rate of 3 per cent, or
somewhat less, rather than 4 per cent. He would be inclined to accept
a target for free reserves in the area of $350-$400 million and to allow
short-term rates to push toward 3 per cent, with the Federal funds rate

5/8/62 -15
more frequently at 3 per cent. He would anticipate some member bank
borrowing, which should be taken as evidence that the initiative in
credit tightening was coming from the market place as the result of
demand forces. While his prescription was presented within the general
framework of no substantial change of policy over the next three weeks,
he would suggest that doubts be resolved on the side of a little less
ease.
Mr. Ellis expressed the view that it might be appropriate to
change the first paragraph of the current economic policy directive,
but he would be inclined to leave the second paragraph as it stood. He
would not recommend changing the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Irons reported that in the Eleventh District the over-all
picture was one of moderate, generally satisfactory improvement. The
employment situation was strong, department store sales during the
Easter period were up about 8.5 per cent from the previous year, and
construction was running about 35 per cent above a year ago. Unemploy
ment, on an unadjusted basis, stood at about 4.9 per cent of the labor
force. There was no appreciable change in the petroleum situation. The
industrial production index, heavily weighted for petroleum, was down in
March but appeared likely to show some improvement in April. Agricultural
conditions were generally good, but with some spottiness, as is often
the case at this season of the year.

5/8/62 -16
Loans and investments of District banks were up moderately.
The banks had been tending to reduce their holdings of short-term
Governments and to buy longer-term Government and other securities.
Total deposits were up, the rise in time deposits being appreciably
greater than the decline in demand deposits. During the past three
weeks District banks were net buyers of Federal funds, while borrowing
from the Reserve Bank was nominal.
With respect to monetary policy, Mr. Irons said it seemed to
him, upon evaluating the economic situation, that it would be appropriate
to continue about the same policy that had been followed. during the
past three-week period, in fact the past several periods. There was
an absence of inflationary pressures. Also, there appeared to be
considerable uncertainty among businessmen in the Eleventh District
since the steel price episode in terms of the outlook for business.
There was some concern about the profit-wage-price situation, and how
this would work out. As to economic activity, there seemed to be
steady improvement, but at only a moderate rate. Accordingly, as he
had said, he would continue about the same degree of ease that had
prevailed recently. The System should continue to provide reserves,
but it should not force them on the banking system. There had been
stability in the Federal funds market during the past three weeks, and
also relative stability in the bill market. It appeared that reserves
had been adequately available because bill rates did not move up; it

5/8/62 -17
also appeared that the degree of ease was not particularly excessive
because short rates did not move down appreciably. He would suggest
continuing to watch the tone and feel of the market closely, with a
view to maintaining a comfortable but not an excessive degree of
ease. If the drift should be toward a little more firmness as the
result of market forces, he would not be too concerned. As rough
targets, he would suggest a Federal funds rate from 2-1/2 to 2-3/4
per cent, free reserves in the area of $350-$400 million, and a bill
rate around 2-3/4 per cent or on the up side. The kind of policy that
he had been suggesting in general terms should come out to about that
sort of picture.
Mr. Irons said he had not thought in terms of changing the
current economic policy directive at this time, partly because he felt
that present policy should be continued and partly because he did not
see enough change in the domestic or international situation to establish
any compelling need for altering the descriptive phrases in the directive.
On the other hand, he would not oppose making some modest changes in
the directive if they were felt desirable by the Committee. He would
not recommend changing the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Swan said that very little in the way of new Twelfth
District statistics had become available since the April 17 meeting.
As he mentioned at that time, preliminary data had indicated that the
seasonally adjusted unemloyment rate in the Pacific Coast States in

5/8/62 -18
March was not as favorable as the national rate. That had now been
confirmed. In fact, the rate rose a little from February to March.
However, consumer spending continued strong and major construction
contract awards were up sharply in March from the low February level.
For the first quarter, construction contract awards were up 4 per
cent from the corresponding period of the previous year. Gains
larger than 4 per cent in residential and private nonresidential
awards more than offset a sharp decline in utilities and public works
contracts. However, a rather widespread labor dispute in northern
California tended to cloud the near-term outlook.
For the first three weeks of April, District reporting banks
continued to show a considerable increase in real estate loans, as they
had for several weeks previously, and a smaller increase in commercial
and industrial loans. The large banks were still net sellers of
Federal funds. Savings deposits at weekly reporting banks were down
during the three weeks ended April 25, the first time that a decline
had occurred this year. Presumably the decline was related to income
tax payments. During that three-week period, incidentally, there was
a small decline in savings deposits at all weekly reporting banks
throughout the country; however, due to the rather substantial decline
in the Twelfth District, there was actually an increase in the remainder
of the country. Five out of seven major Los Angeles and San Francisco
banks indicated that they experienced a fairly significant decline in
earnings during the first quarter of this year. The only two that did
not had already gone on a daily interest basis in the first quarter of
1961.

5/8/62 -19
Turning to the national outlook, Mr. Swan noted that economic
expansion, though continuing, was not vigorous. The economy still had
a considerable way to go before reaching a satisfactory relationship
to capacity in terms of equipment or manpower, and apparently quite a
way to go before price pressures were created. There was an excessive
level of unemployment, and this problem might become even more difficult
if there should be a resumption of growth of the labor force. Thus,
it seemed to him that as of today, there was no basis for even a
slight tightening of policy. Nor did he believe that the recent de
cline in long-term rates--which reflected market factors rather than
System policy--or the international situation provided sufficient
reason for tightening. The best inducement for funds to remain in
this country rather than move abroad was a higher level of business
activity in the United States.
Consequently, Mr. Swan said, he would recommend no particular
change in policy at this time, and if anything a leaning on the side
of slightly more ease rather than less. This would mean retaining
the 4 per cent growth target in terms of total reserves, or moving
the target a little higher. As to free reserves, he would move up
a little from the $400 million average of the three weeks ended May 2.
He would not be particularly concerned if the bill rate fell somewhat
below 2-3/4 per cent.

5/8/62 -20
As to the current economic policy directive, Mr. Swan said
he was rather surprised at the suggestion to change the first
paragraph, because he thought the language of the existing directive
was still an apt description of the current economic situation. He
would not recommend any change in the discount rate at this time.
In a further comment, Mr. Swan inquired whether there was not
an increasing tendency to use repurchase agreements, in lieu of out
right purchases, when providing additional reserves, presumably to
minimize direct downward pressure on the bill rate. While he could
appreciate that this might be a useful device, it seemed to him this
was a departure from the original purpose of the use of repurchase
agreements. Since the option of withdrawal before maturity was with
the borrower, this tended to take the initiative away from the Open
Market Account to some extent. Of course, if repurchase agreements
were withdrawn, presumably they could always be replaced by outright
purchases of securities. Nevertheless, he wondered if the use of
repurchase agreements did not encourage falling short of the estimates
at the end of a week when this happened. To repeat, he felt that
there had been some shift from the original purpose of repurchase
agreements, which he interpreted as contemplating a device to provide
additional reserves in the event of temporary tightness or knots in
the market, to a more significant and more frequent role in open
market operations. It seemed to him that the choice was present, when

5/8/62 -21
there were advance withdrawals, of whether to make a substantial
entry into the market by purchasing a greater amount of securities
than might be desirable, in terms of a given day, or of falling short
of the target for the reserve position of the banking system. The
foregoing was more in the nature of an inquiry than a critical comment,
but he had wanted to raise the question.
Mr. Deming stated that there was little new to report from the
Ninth District, which appeared to be moving along about the same as
the nation. The only item that showed any real difference from the
nation was loan demand, which was somewhat stronger in the District.
This had been the case at city banks of the District during most of
the current year. Bankers were talking about the demand being brisk,
or quite good, and these comments did not seem characteristic of those
being made by bankers throughout the country generally.
As to the national situation, Mr. Deming noted that the rate of
economic gain was characterized as modest. That was probably correct.
However, the rate of expansion did not seem to be too bad; current
estimates of gross national product for the second quarter did not
appear to be substantially below the rate that had been projected at
the beginning of the year. At the same time, from his observations and
contacts, he did not sense any feeling of exuberance. According to
the projection models to which Mr. Koch had referred, it would seem
doubtful whether natural forces were going to produce any substantial

5/8/62 -22
market tightening; if he understood correctly, even the more optimistic
model did not contemplate a strength of demand for funds such as to
have such effect on interest rates. If that was true, the only way
that a tightening could be achieved would be through overt action,
and he would not be prepared to suggest such action at this time.
Summarizing, Mr. Deming said he did not believe that any
particular change in the course of policy was called for in the next
three weeks. He would try to keep free reserves around their recent
levels. While he did not like to see the bill rate fall unduly,
neither would he be particularly concerned if it fell to a somewhat
lower level for a day or two, or even for a week. He saw no particular
reason to change the policy directive at this time, and he would not
change the discount rate.
Mr. Scanlon reported that business continued to improve slowly
in the Seventh District. Department store sales and sales of new
automobiles indicated that the rather strong consumer demand in March
had continued in April. Production was rising gradually, but remained
below prerecession levels. The decline in steel production following
the wage settlement had been somewhat less in the Chicago area than in
the nation. Nevertheless, although order cancellations had ended,
production was expected to decline further. A recent survey indicated
that farm real estate prices had risen from year-ago levels.

5/8/62 -23-
Mr. Scanlon commented that interest in foreign trade continued
to grow in the Midwest. The relatively slow economic growth in important
areas in the District seemed to have stimulated interest in the possibility
of increasing exports. In view of comments heard frequently with regard
to wage rates and commodity prices, it was interesting to note that
there were some situations where United States manufacturers were
competing on favorable terms with foreign plants. After citing certain
cases in point, Mr. Scanlon commented that according to one manufacturer
with plants here and abroad, the advantages of domestic production
included the economies of large volume, the availability and quality of
suppliers, and the availability of skilled labor. Also, Government
sponsored insurance programs appeared to be playing a larger role in
private plans to finance exports.
Seventh District banks, in order to offset the increased cost
of interest payments on savings deposits, were lengthening the average
maturities of their portfolios by purchasing longer-term Government
bonds and other securities and by acquiring mortgages from the Federal
National Mortgage Association.
In summary, Mr. Scanlon said, the rise in business activity at
a pace below general expectations, together with the uncertainties
created by the recent steel price episode and the possible effects of
the Administration's proposed new international trade program, had caused
some business executives to adopt a cautious attitude. With considerable

5/8/62 -24
margins of unused labor and unused plant capacity, he felt that no
signal should be given to the market at present that would suggest a
shift of Federal Reserve policy toward less ease. In his opinion there
was no need for any material change in the policy directive, and he
would not make any change in the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Clay expressed the opinion that the Committee should
continue essentially the same policy of monetary ease that it had been
pursuing in recent weeks. While there had been further expansion in
economic activity, notably in the automobile industry, a satisfactory
performance of the national economy in terms of employment and output
would require substantial and widespread improvement in various sectors
of the economy. Expansion in bank credit on a seasonally adjusted
basis and the accompanying developments that had been taking place in
the money and capital markets had been appropriate to these circumstances.
A combination of various factors, including the growth of bank
credit, expectations as to both demand and supply of credit, and the
interest of banks in acquiring assets with higher yields to cover costs
on time deposits, had produced more attractive interest rates for
prospective borrowers in the important areas of business capital
outlays, residential building, and State and local construction. State
ments by bankers in the Kansas City District suggested that the expansion
of the credit base also may have had some impact on effective consumer
credit rates. These easier credit conditions should help to encourage
further expansion in demand for goods and services, and monetary
policy should foster their continuation.

5/8/62 -25
The international balance-of-payments problem appeared to
Mr. Clay to call for an extension of recent policy with respect to
the Treasury bill rate--within the same general range previously
determined. In line with the monetary policy he suggested, no
change was recommended in the Reserve Bank discount rate.
Mr. Wayne said he saw nothing in recent Fifth District
developments that differed significantly from the situation reported
three weeks ago. The economy continued to plod slightly upward
without unusual strength in any area. Manufacturing employment
increased slightly in March, and nonmanufacturing fell a little.
Furniture was still the brightest spot, but the gains were growing
smaller each month. Textiles showed little change, and bituminous
coal production--while improving somewhat--was still far from
satisfactory. In short, the District situation closely resembled
that of the nation.
Turning to policy considerations, Mr. Wayne said that as
this second year of the current upswing advanced, it seemed to him
there were two trends or tendencies in the economy that had real
significance for monetary policy. The first was an increasing
possibility that business activity would flatten out and later turn
down without ever having attained a momentum which would justify or
permit any significant degree of credit restraint. The second was a
tendency for long-term capital outflows to continue and perhaps increase
as a result of the decline in long-term interest rates. This decline
had been caused to a considerable extent by the higher interest rates

5/8/62 -26
on time deposits permitted by the change in Regulation Q as banks
reached for investments with longer maturities. The outflow of long
term funds might be more troublesome than the movement of short-term
funds since it was more permanent and not so likely to be reversed
by changes in the relative levels of interest rates here and abroad.
Even so, it would certainly be unwise, in view of the faltering
upswing, to attempt to raise long-term rates to prevent such flows.
The dilemma was a most complex one, Mr. Wayne continued, and
monetary policy could make no more than a limited contribution toward
its solution. Nothing in the domestic situation indicated any need
for tightening credit, and he believed that the System was doing all
that was feasible on the international front. Therefore, he would
suggest a continuation of present policy, by which he meant a policy
of "maintaining a supply of reserves adequate for further credit and
monetary expansion," and avoiding any general pressure on banks'
reserve positions. This would probably require a level of free
reserves substantially higher than the level inadvertently reached
last week, and perhaps in the range mentioned in the discussion three
weeks ago.
Mr. Wayne believed it would be appropriate to renew the present
current economic policy directive, and he saw no reason to change the
discount rate.
Mr. Mills said his reasoning paralleled that expressed by Mr.
Treiber. It argued for coming to grips with what he believed to be an

5/8/62 -27-
unsatisfactory financial situation, and a shift in the course of
Federal Reserve policy toward reducing the supply of reserves.
Adoption of that kind of recommendation would require a modification
of the current economic policy directive to reflect the shift of
policy. In further explanation of his position, Mr. Mills presented
the following statement:
Monetary and fiscal policy actions going back over more
than one year are responsible for critical problems that are
daily coming into clearer perspective. A start toward their
solution has become urgent and further delay will only
complicate an already difficult situation.
Massive deficit financing for the Federal Government is
the crux of the problem. Official encouragement from both
monetary and fiscal authorities has sponsored the commercial
banking system's absorption of the past year's increase in the
Federal debt. This encouragement has taken the tangible form
in the area of debt management of tailoring new issues of
U. S. Treasury securities so as to attract commercial bank
investment as against investment by the private sector of the
financial market, and in the area of monetary policy by con
tinuously supplying reserves to the commercial banks in
quantities that, in the absence of a strong loan demand, have
fostered their massive acquisition of U. S. Government securi
ties. It is significant that in dollar amount a substantial
proportion of the increase in the Federal debt is now held in
the swollen positions of the U. S. Government securities
dealers, and has been financed on commercial bank advances. In
terms of "classical" theory, the present fiscal and monetary
background is suspect and its implications have been rendered
more dangerous because of official support, which has instilled
confidence into the minds of investors that the present financial
market climate can be maintained indefinitely even though it is
the artificial product of a needlessly easy credit policy that
has been abetted by officially pegging an interest yield floor
for U. S. Treasury bills.
Foreknowledge that the U. S. Treasury will have to borrow
heavily in the second half of calendar year 1962 emphasizes the
urgent need for a change in the tone of Federal Reserve System
monetary and credit policy that will shift its influence to the
side of free market principles and thereby encourage private,

5/8/62 -28
rather than commercial bank, investment in U. S. Treasury
obligations. Unless such action is taken, the risk will be
run that the U. S. Government securities market will break down
under its own weight, particularly because of the unwieldy
positions of the U. S. Government securities dealers. Consider
ing the degree of liquidity already injected into the economy
by virtue of monetary policy actions, a moderate move toward
lessening the supply of reserves at the commercial banking
system's disposal would in no wise reduce general credit avail
ability in the economy to a point that could stifle the
constructive use of credit in fostering a high level of economic
activity. The kind of policy shift contemplated could be expected
to influence some strengthening of interest rates, which would of
itself be beneficial in compelling same reduction in the posi
tions of U. S. Government securities dealers, thereby improving
their capacity to participate more broadly in financing the U. S.
Treasury's prospective offerings of new securities. By the same
token, commercial bank portfolios of U. S. Government securities
would be jogged loose, leaving the banks in better positions to
flexibly underwrite and participate in the U. S. Treasury's new
securities offerings while, at the same time, the long neglected
free market for U. S. Government securities would have been
cultivated by the attraction of a modest increase in investment
returns. The policy proposed, of course, contemplates terminat
ing the present pegging operation with respect to U. S. Treasury
bills and, needless to say, foreign observers would welcome the
Federal Reserve System's action as being in accordance with
accepted central banking theory and as token recognition of its
part in countering the nation's balance-of-payments problem.
Mr. Robertson said he agreed completely with the views expressed
by Mr. Swan. Recently, he had reviewed the policy followed by the Open
Market Comittee during the past five three-week periods, and he felt that
this policy provided a good record. It had been successful in stimulating
moderate economic growth, but there were still unutilized resources and
excessive unemployment. He could see no evidence of sloppiness in the
credit markets or of speculative trends. Consequently, he would have no
brief for any tightening of credit at this time. Instead, he felt that

5/8/62 -29
the Committee should hold close to present policy and, if anything, move
slightly on the side of additional ease.
Turning to the current economic policy directive, Mr. Robertson
suggested certain changes. He would make no change of substance in the
first paragraph, because in his opinion the language of that paragraph
described the current situation well. His only recommmendation would be
to eliminate the clause that called for recognizing the need to main
tain a viable international payments system. That was because he did
not understand its meaning. As to the second paragraph, he would re
vise it as follows:
To implement the policy of the Committee, operations of
the System Open Market Account shall be conducted with a
view to maintaining an average level of free reserves in the
neighborhood of $400-$450 million, with allowance for any
uncertainties or distortions that may develop regarding
current or projected reserve figures. Deviations from this
specified free reserve range shall be permitted as appropri
ate in order to moderate abrupt or sustained changes in
short-term rates or other untoward market pressures or
persistent departure of adjusted required reserves against
private demand deposits from the average upward trend of the
past five months.
Such a directive, Mr. Robertson noted, would call for a growth of
required reserves against private demand deposits at a little below
an annual rate of 5 per cent. It would allow for temporary deviations
that might occur accidentally while continuing to aim generally toward the
prescribed target. In his opinion, such language would be more under

5/8/62 -30
standable and provide a better basis for the operation of the Open
Market Account.
Mr. Shepardson noted that there seemed to be rather general
agreement that a modest continuing growth of the economy was taking
place, In his opinion, the rate of growth was affected more by
other factors than by monetary policy. There was, for example, the
uncertainty of the business community resulting from the steel price
situation, along with the uncertainty about wage pressures. The
Government spending program also was a factor. Certainly, there was
needed a fuller utilization of resources, both human and physical, but
he did not feel that monetary policy could exert a significant effect.
Reports on the availability of credit, the money supply, and liquidity
seemed to indicate that monetary policy had done its job adequately,
if not more than adequately.
Mr. Shepardson expressed concern about a continued growth of
total reserves at. the rate of 5 per cent. It would be preferable, he
thought, if the rate of growth was more like 3 per cent, or possibly
less than that. He would not interpret that as a tightening of credit,
but rather as a slowing down of the rate of credit expansion.
As to the current policy directive, Mr. Shepardson suggested
the possibility of a change in the first paragraph to call for
"permitting" rather than "promoting" further expansion of bank credit
and the money supply. As he saw it, the present wording indicated that

5/8/62 -31
the Committee was trying to do too much . Its function should be to
permit such expasion as might be brought about by other forces.
This could come only through a revival of business confidence, which could
be aided by removal of the uncertainty growing out of the steel price
situatopm and by some different approach to Government expenditures.
Mr. King commented, with respect to the recent rise in bond
prices and the weakness in the stock market, that such movements
usually were associated with conditions that would suggest a shift of
policy in the direction of ease instead of tightening. He did not
fell that the System should provide more ease than it had provided.
Ont he other hand, he did not think that economic conditions at the
present time required any tightening. The fact that the Treasury,
after another week, reportedly intended to refrain from adding an
addtional $100 million to the weekly bill offering wasa a factor
with which the Account Management would have to contend. He would
not want the bill rate to decline unduly, and developments would
have to be watched closely. In any event, however, he doubted
whether the bill rate was likely to move higher; efforts probably
would have to be focused on the other side. In fact, he did not
believe it would be appropriate to ask the Manager to assume
responsibility for holding the bill rate at the present level. If
the bill rate should fall somewhat, that might reflect forces that

5/8/62 -32
were beyond the reasonable control of monetary policy. In conclusion,
Mr. King said that his general views on policy were similar to those
expressed by Messrs. Wayne and Deming.
Mr. Mitchell expressed agreement with the position of Mr.
Swan, both in reasoning and recommendations. He would add only the
comment that in his opinion the debate on policy that had been going
on within the Committee for several meetings was an important one,
although at first it might appear to involve degrees of difference
that were very small. The question centered in the view presented
repeatedly by the representatives of the New York Bank in favor of
a change of policy, a change which it was indicated would be slight.
In Mr. Mitchell' s opinion, that point of view should be resisted
vigorously until the country had approached closer to full utilization
of plant capacity and labor force, and until it could be shown that the
stability of the price level was threatened in some way. At this
juncture, he saw no justification for a change in monetary policy.
Mr. Fulton said that the Fourth District was feeling the
backlash of the steel inventory build-up. Furthermore, this situation
might be prolonged for a while, as steel ingot production had not
as yet adjusted to slower deliveries as customers sought to reduce
inventories. As a matter of fact, the Fourth District had been
lagging somewhat before the current downslide began. As to steel
production, the first quarter of 1962 was quite high and satisfactory,

5/8/62 -33
the second quarter would be lower than the first, and the third
probably would be lower than the second by about 10 per cent. It
was hoped that production would start back up in the fourth quarter.
The cancellation of orders and deferment of deliveries had been
general throughout most of the steel product lines, although pipe
was showing a somewhat better performance than other lines. The
steel companies felt, however, that the atmosphere in which their
customers were working was rather good. The customers seemed to
feel that business had reached a plateau from which an expansion
could occur at a reasonably satisfactory pace.
Automobile sales in the major centers of the District continued
to show considerable strength, although they did not measure up to the
outstanding performance nationally. Including imports, sales in the
nation were at an annual rate of about 7.5 million in April, causing
some sources in the auto industry to raise their estimates for the
year to about 6.75 million, or possibly 7 million. Inventories had
been substantially reduced, and at the end of April totaled about
953,000--a 38-day supply--which was quite low for this time of year.
If sales continued high, this would of course have a beneficial effect
on the steel industry.
Construction activity in the District during March, as during
the entire first quarter of the year, was mediocre, only 3 per cent
above the year-ago level compared with an increase of 19 per cent
nationally. Insured unemployment had declined considerably more than

5/8/62 -34
seasonally, but the improvement seemed to have tapered off, especially
in the steel centers. Nonfarm employment was still below pre-recession
levels. Department store sales were estimated to have declined
slightly in April after seasonal adjustment.
Bank credit had expanded somewhat, with the increase divided
about equally between loans and investments. Investments reflected
a lengthening of maturities, and business loans had declined.
All in all, Mr. Fulton said, no ebullience was seen. He
believed that the degree of ease provided by the Committee had been
appropriate, and he would continue it. He would not change the
current policy directive, feeling that any revisions would necessarily
be minor and would amount only to changing words. He would not favor
a change in the discount rate.
Mr. Bopp reported that business indicators in the Third
District showed mixed trends. Unemployment claims continued to
decline gradually, and both new and continued claims were at the
lowest levels in several years. However, seven of the 13 major
labor market areas were still classified as having a substantial
labor surplus. The classification of Atlantic City had been changed
from "F" to "E", clearly reflecting seasonal factors; usually the
change was from "E" to "D".
In view of the considerable amount of unused plant capacity
and of unemployment, Mr. Bopp felt that the Committee should continue

5/8/62 -35
the degree of ease that had existed thus far, with no change in the
current policy directive or the discount rate.
Mr. Bryan said that the latest Sixth District figures were
mostly for March, with little preliminary data for April available.
These figures seemed to indicate that economic activity had edged
up, although with no boom-like surge occurring. The most notable
increases involved a sharp expansion of construction contract awards
and a sharp rise in member bank loans. A survey of a few member
banks showed that the demand for loans was increasing, with the
quality of applications good.
As to the national picture, Mr. Bryan commented that the
pace of expansion still appeared modest. Inflationary forces were
restrained by ample plant capacity and unemployment, as well as by a
mixed earnings picture and favorable investment opportunities abroad.
The moderate pace of the upturn and other factors argued against a
policy that would lessen the supply of bank reserves. Accordingly,
there seemed no reason for an overt change in policy such as a change
in the discount rate, and he would continue to supply reserves in
approximately seasonal proportions, plus a modest growth factor.
In April the daily average of total reserves was about $19,700 million.
On the basis of a three per cent annual growth rate the daily average
for May would be around $19,750 million, which would be satisfactory
to him as a rough target. If this were converted to free reserves,

5/8/62 -36
the target would appear to be about $5 million. In his view
a 3 per cent growth rate was ample at the present time. If banks
needed reserves in greater volume, those reserves could be sought
through the discount window.
Mr. Francis noted that most of this year Eighth District
activity seemed to have lagged behind the nation. However, recent
data indicated that District figures more nearly approximated
national trends. Recent conversations with a number of businessmen
and others in the District seemed to support that conclusion. Almost
without exception, business was said to be better than last year,
and that the outlook for the immediate future was regarded as good.
No concern was expressed about the possibility of a runaway type of
expansion.
Mr. Balderston commented that a couple of weeks ago, on the
basis of figures then available, he thought perhaps the time had come
to press on the brakes. Liquid assets for March were up to an extent
that produced an annual rate of increase for the first quarter of about
10 per cent. Also, the money supply, if time deposits were included,
rose during the first four months of the year by about 10 per cent.
However, in studying what had happened it seemed to him that funds
had moved from the hands of the Treasury into private deposits in
the latter part of March, and that the picture shown on the chart
that the Committee had been using was in large part explained by that

5/8/62 -37
movement. For the past four or five weeks required reserves against
private deposits had been growing not at a 6 per cent annual rate but
at only about a 4 per cent rate.
The principal question in his mind in recent weeks, Mr. Balderston
said, had been whether the economy was at last moving in such fashion as
to require some curbing of the rate of credit expansion. His conclusion
at the moment, however, was that this was not the case. In terms of the
projections referred to by Mr. Koch, it appeared that the economy might
be following the low road rather than the high road. Despite such
factors as near-record sales of automobiles and a sharp increase in
housing starts, the economy did not yet show the same characteristics
of ebullience as in 1958-59 and 1955-56. The rate of inventory accumu
lation was moderate, along with the rate of fixed investment. Moreover,
it appeared that the stock and bond markets might be reflecting some
change in inflationary expectations; something was happening in the
minds of investors that made the stock market look less attractive at
the moment, and foreign pastures seemed to look greener from the
standpoint of investment opportunities. On the other hand, the
balance-of-payments situation seemed not to have worsened in the
past month, although the progress toward a basic balance might not
be too encouraging. The best answer to the question of how much
bank credit fed in by the Federal Reserve was seeping out to other
countries might be that last year about $2 billion of bank funds were
loaned to Japan and other countries, or one out of every seven dollars
of bank credit provided.

5/8/62 -38
Mr. Balderston said that, in coming to the conclusion that
the Committee should continue its current policy without change for
a while longer, he was influenced by these considerations: (1) the
steel price episode had unsettled the minds of businessmen as to fixed
investments, and businessmen would be watching for any action by the
Federal Reserve System that would confirm their suspicions that the
Government was trying to restrain profit making; (2) he was not sure
that an increase in interest rates would restrain the kind of borrowing
that the Japanese seemed to be doing in this country. With interest
rates as high as they were in Japan, those firms would not be inhibited
from borrowing in this country even if rates were much higher than at
the moment. In suggesting a continuation of present monetary policy,
he realized there was the risk of some day running into a real crisis
due to the outflow of gold. At present, however, he saw a continued
need to foster domestic expansion. On balance, therefore, he would
continue present policy, with no change in the existing policy directive.
Chairman Martin expressed the view that this was a period when
monetary policy could do very little more than was now being done.
He agreed with Mr. Wayne's comments about the limitations of monetary
policy under current circumstances. If that was correct, it seemed
to him that maintenance of the status quo was about the best contri
bution that could be made. In his opinion, "no change, more ease" and
"no change, less ease" defied definition from the standpoint of the

5/8/62 -39
conduct of open market operations. While he might question some
words in the current policy directive and while, if the directive
were being written afresh, Mr. Shepardson's suggestion for "permitting"
rather than "promoting" further credit and monetary expansion might be
good phrasing, it was his feeling on the basis of the discussion at this
meeting that the best course would be to retain the existing directive,
thus reasserting for the next three weeks the policy that the Committee
had been following. There would be another meeting of the Committee in
three weeks, and the Treasury would be out of market for a while.
The Committee might have at that time a better perspective of what
the economy was doing. At the moment, any improvement in the economy
was offset--perhaps more than offset--by uncertainties affecting business
confidence. One could hardly say that there was a definite improvement
in the business picture until the confidence factor had been resolved
more effectively. It might be that the picture would be clearer by the
time of the next meeting than it was today.
Chairman Martin then proposed that the current economic policy
directive be retained and that the Committee continue its present policy
for the next three weeks.
Mr. Mills stated that he would like to be recorded as voting
against renewal of the existing directive for reasons that he had pre
viously expressed.
Mr. Treiber indicated that the differences between his position

5/8/62 -40
and a continuation of the policy embodied in the existing directive
were not sufficient to cause him to record a dissenting vote.
There were no other comments by members of the Committee and,
in response to a question, Mr. Stone indicated that he had no comment.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York was authorized and directed until other
wise directed by the Committee to effect
transactions for the System Open Market
Account in accordance with the following
current economic policy directive:
In view of the modest nature of recent advances in the pace
of economic activity and the continued underutilization of
resources, it remains the current policy of the Federal Open
Market Committee to promote further expansion of bank credit and
the money supply, while giving recognition to the country's
adverse balance of payments and the need to maintain a viable
international payments system.
To implement this policy, operations for the System Open
Market Account during the next three weeks shall be conducted
with a view to maintaining a supply of reserves adequate for
further credit and monetary expansion, taking account of the
desirability of avoiding sustained downward pressures on short
term interest rates.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,
Balderston, Bryan, Deming, Ellis, Fulton,
King, Mitchell, Robertson, Shepardson, and
Treiber. Vote against this action: Mr. Mills.
Mr. Williams then withdrew from the meeting.
There had been distributed to the Committee a report from the
Special Manager of the System Open Market Account on System and Treasury
operations in foreign currencies and on foreign exchange market conditions
for the period April 17 through May 2, 1962, along with a supplementary
report for the period May 3 through May 7, 1962. Copies of these reports
have been placed in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.

5/8/62 -41
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Sanford commented
substantially as follows:
Since the last meeting of the Committee, on April 17, the
most important development in the foreign exchange market has
been the re-establishment by Canada of a par value. The new
par declared to the International Monetary Fund of U. S.
$0.92-1/2 = $1.00 Canadian was established well after the close
of business May 2. So far as the Canadian exchange rate is
concerned, the devaluation of about 3 per cent from the previous
level passed off quite easily but it did have some repercussion
in the Swiss franc market and in the London gold market.
In Switzerland an atmosphere of uneasiness developed.
People pointed to the devaluation of the Canadian dollar and
linked that with the possibility of changes occurring in one or
more other currencies. The closing spot rate for the Swiss franc
rose somewhat (from $.2302-1/4 on May 2 to $.2305-3/8 on May 3
and $.2307 on May 4), and in order to avoid the uneasiness from
feeding on itself and perhaps spreading to other currencies, i.e.,
the United States dollar, the U. S. Stabilization Fund sold a
total of 6-1/2 million Swiss francs on those two days. As time
progressed, it became more evident that a fairly strong flow of
funds to Switzerland (sources unknown) had developed and the
Stabilization Fund ceased, at least temporarily, operating in
the market.
The market uncertainties resulting from the Canadian rate
change were reflected in an increased demand for gold in London.
The dollar equivalent of the fixing price rose one cent from
Wednesday's level to $35.0808 by Monday, with half this increase
coming on Monday when demand was reported to be quite heavy, and
today the price is up further to $35.0824.
Since the last meeting of the Committee there have been no
operations in foreign exchange for System Account. On the other
hand, the Stabilization Fund has had transactions in several
currencies--Deutschemarks, Netherlands guilders, and Swiss francs.
The range of fluctuation of the Deutschemark has been only
between $0.2499-5/8 and $0.2501. On May 1 the Bundesbank,
believing that the danger of hot money flows to Germany has now
lessened and that the German balance of payments is closer to
equilibrium, authorized German banks to resume interest payments
on nonresident time deposits. In the circumstances the Deutschemark
may in the near future be more often below par than above and in
fact today declined to slightly below par. Thus, an opportunity
may be afforded to build up System holdings of Deutschemarks for

5/8/62 -42-
possible use in the future. If we should arrive at a judgment
that System acquisition of Deutschemarks is desirable at the
time, in consultation with Bundesbank, it would be discussed
with the Committee's staff and reported to the Committee as a
matter of course, as acquisitions contemplated at this time would
only be made within the guidelines, which state that acquisitions
should be made at or below par, in so far as practicable.
On April 24 the Nederlandsche Bank announced an increase in
its discount rate to 4 per cent from 3-1/2 per cent, a step which
was taken to restrain domestic inflationary pressures. This
increase was not generally anticipated by the exchange market
because Dutch international reserves had been rising. As
traders attempted to cover commitments entered into prior to
the announcement of the increase, some upward pressure was
exerted on the guilder rate, and to restrain any sharp rise
in the exchange rate which might have had an adverse effect on
the international position of the dollar, we, acting for the
Stabilization Fund, and in consultation with the Nederlandsche
Bank, sold a total of 7 million guilders on April , 27, and
24
30. Our action in countering the fairly sharp slump of the
dollar against the guilder exercised a braking action on the
movement. It also resulted in a clearer understanding between
the Nederlandsche Bank and ourselves as to cooperation, i.e.,
it established a clearer understanding that we can sell in the
New York market. We are, of course, still appraising the effect
of too rapid changes in exchange rates on public attitudes and
psychology. Meanwhile, the three-month forward guilder rate
has declined from a premium of 0.10 per cent per annum to a
discount of 0.65 per cent.
Mr. Coombs is presently in Europe. In Basle he has, at
the request of the Treasury Department, been meeting with the
central bank foreign department experts on the completion of
arrangements relating to the London gold market. In London he
has been discussing with the British the question of a proposed
dollar-pound swap between the Federal Reserve and the Bank of
England. Any such swap would, of course, be submitted to the
Committee for approval. There are also discussions scheduled
with the Swiss concerning a reciprocal standby credit as a
supplement to the arrangements entered into by other countries
with the International Monetary Fund for standby credits. I
understand that good progress has been made with the Dutch on
the establishment of a line of credit for the U. S. Treasury to
backstop forward guilder operations. (This would be carried out
through the Bank for International Settlements.) Finally, I
understand conversations are also scheduled with the Belgians,
who may be interested in a swap arrangement.

5/8/62 -43
As you know, there has been a spate of new issues of foreign
securities in the United States either already consummated or in
near contemplation. The New York market for foreign security
issues is both broad and completely open to borrowers, unlike
the situation in the European markets, which have very limited
capacity and considerable official control. In the case of the
Danish Government $20 million issue, we had discussed with
Mr. Hartogsohn, Deputy Governor of the Danmarks Nationalbank,
during his visit with us, the disposition of the proceeds of
this issue and had been informed that he believed they would
be transferred into sterling, which he likened to a borrowing
from the Chase Bank, which is immediately checked out and
deposited in the National City Bank. He, therefore, contacted
his Governor and we have now been informed that the funds will
remain in the United States until such time as the Danes need to
disburse the funds here and in other countries. Similar discus
sions have occurred in the case of the New Zealand $25 million
issue, which, if the past pattern is followed, would result in
transfer of the proceeds to the United Kingdom dollar pool; at
this moment there has been no definitive reply from the New
Zealand authorities as to their decision in the case of the
present issue. The significance of such borrowing and immediate
conversion into sterling is that the gain of dollars to the
United Kingdom results in an immediate equivalent conversion
into gold obtained from the U. S. Treasury. Hence, the Treasury
and we consider it desirable to arrange, if possible, for con
version into other currencies only as and when the need for such
currencies may arise.
Following a brief discussion based on Mr. Sanford's comments, it
was noted that inasmuch as there had been no System foreign currency
transactions during the period since the Open Market Committee meeting on
April 17, 1962, no action to approve, ratify, and confirm any such trans
actions was necessary.
All of those present except the members and alternate members of
the Committee, the other Reserve Bank Presidents, Messrs. Francis, Young,
Sherman, and Kenyon then withdrew from the meeting.

5/8/62
Pursuant to an understanding during an executive session
of the meeting of the Open Market Committee on January 23, 1962,
Messrs. Martin, Hayes, and Balderston had been holding informal
exploratory discussions looking toward the selection of a successor
to Mr. Rouse as Manager of the System Open Market Account. At the
meeting on April 17, 1962, it was agreed that this group would submit
a report to the Committee for consideration at a later meeting.
Such a report, dated May 1, 1962, was distributed to the Committee
under date of May 3, 1962. In this report the group recommended
that Robert W. Stone, Assistant Vice President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, be selected to succeed Mr. Rouse as Manager of the
Open Market Account and suggested that the appointment be made effective
on a date to be agreed upon by the Committee and the New York Bank,
perhaps May 15, 1962. In a letter dated May 1, 1962, to Chairman
Martin, Mr. Rouse submitted his resignation as Manager of the Open Market
Account.
In discussion, Chairman Martin commented that the recommendation
with respect to Mr. Stone reflected both the views expressed by a
number of persons outside the Federal Reserve System regarding Mr.
Stone's qualifications and observation by members of the three-man
group concerning Mr. Stone's work on the Desk.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, Mr. Rouse's
resignation as Manager of the System Open
Market Account was accepted as of the close

5/8/62 -45
of business May 14, 1962, and Mr. Stone was
selected as Manager of the System Open Market
Account to succeed Mr. Rouse, effective at the
beginning of business May 15, 1962, it being
understood that Mr. Stone's selection was sub
ject to his being satisfactory to the Board of
Directors of the New York Reserve Bank.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, the
Secretary of the Committee was requested to
prepare appropriate expressions of apprecia
tion for presentation to Mr. Rouse and to
Mr. Woodlief Thomas on suitable occasions in
recognition of their signal services to the
Committee over many years as Manager of the
System Open Market Account and as Economist
of the Federal Open Market Comittee, respec
tively.
In further discussion, Mr. Treiber said he anticipated that the
directors of the New York Reserve Bank at their meeting on Thursday,
May 10, would appoint Mr. Rouse as Vice President and Senior Adviser
of the Bank, appoint Mr. Stone as Vice President of the Bank, and
approve Mr. Stone's selection as Manager of the System Open Market
Account.
As to the manner of public announcement with respect to Mr.
Stone's selection as Account Manager, it was understood that this
announcement would be released by the Open Market Committee along
with advice of the resignation of Mr. Rouse as Account Manager. It
was agreed that the timing of the announcement, and of the announcement
by the New York Reserve Bank of the new officer posts at the Bank for
Messrs. Rouse and Stone, would be worked out between the Bank and Mr.
Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors.

5/8/62 -46
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, May 29, 1962.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary