A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, December 4, 1962, at 10:15 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Deming
Mr. Ellis
Mr. Fulton
Mr. King
Mr. Mills
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Messrs. Bopp, Scanlon, Clay, and Irons, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Wayne, Shuford, and Swan, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St.
Louis, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. ackley, General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Brandt, Brill, Furth, Garvy, Hickman,
Holland, Koch, Parsons, and Willis,
Associate Economists
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market
Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of
Governors
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors

12/4/62
Messrs. Eastburn, Ratchford, Baughman, Jones,
Tow, and Green, Vice Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Richmond, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City,
and Dallas, respectively
Mr. Lynn, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Mr. Sternlight, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report on open market operations in United States Govern
ment securities covering the period November 13 through November 28, 1962,
and a supplementary report covering the period November 29 through
December 3, 1962. Copies of both reports have been placed in the files
of the Committee.
Mr. Stone commented as follows in supplementation of the written
reports:
The money market has continued to be quite steady in the
period since the last meeting of the Committee, with most
trading in Federal funds again in the 2-3/4 - 3 per cent
range. In the latter part of the recent period the tone was
slightly easier than in the early part, apparently reflecting
a tendency for reserves to be redistributed in favor of banks
in New York and other money centers. There also seemed to be
some tendency for country banks to part more willingly with
excess reserves than was the case earlier in the month.
However, after-the-fact revisions in reserve statistics have
been so substantial recently that we will not know for certain
whether this is so until the revised data for the past week
are available several days from now.
While the money market has remained generally steady,
Treasury bill rates have edged a little higher in the past
three weeks. This seems to be mainly a result of seasonal
forces that are if anything a little later and milder than
usual. Partly as a result of these forces and of further
Treasury offerings of bills, dealer positions in these ob
ligations have been around the highest point since last June.
In the past few days the absence of System purchases of bills-
at a time when dealers, with their heavy positions, were look
ing forward hopefully to such purchases--has also contributed

12/4/62
to the higher level of bill rates. However, there is also a
feeling in the market that the respite from downward pressures
on bill rates may be rather brief, for once we have passed
the mid-month dividend and tax dates net corporate buying may
return to the market.
At the same time that the absence of System bill purchases
contributed to the modest rise in bill rates, the System's
purchases of coupon-bearing securities has helped the note and
bond market to adjust to a recent improvement in business senti
ment which probably would otherwise have put prices somewhat
lower and yields somewhat higher than they are now. In the
course of this adjustment, while absorbing only a relatively
small part of total dealer sales, the System's purchases have
helped to lighten dealer inventories and thus left the market
in a much better technical position to cope with what may be a
continuing adjustment, for underlying bond market psychology
remains cautious and hesitant in the current period of re
assessment of the business outlook.
I should also mention to the Committee that the Treasury
plans to build up its balances at the Federal Reserve Banks,
gradually and as opportunities arise, to the neighborhood of
$1 billion from the present level of about $500 million. The
Treasury, for balance of payments reasons, has raised more
cash than called for by immediate cash needs, and hence has
been carrying unusually high tax and loan account balances in
its commercial bank depositories. For the first ten months of
1962, for example, the Treasury's balances averaged about $1
billion above the average for the same period in 1961; and
for extended periods within that ten months its balances have
been $2 billion or $3 billion above year-earlier levels. Its
balances now are still above normal, although less so than
earlier in the year, and the Treasury apparently stands as
ready now as it was earlier to issue more short debt and to
build up its balances if this should seem necessary to shore
up the short rate. Under ordinary conditions, the Treasury's
balances both at the Reserve Banks and at the commercial banks
are generally maintained at minimum working levels. But under
the unusual circumstances that have prevailed for the past
year or more and that may well continue to prevail as long as
the short rate remains a problem, the Treasury believes it
reasonable and appropriate that at least a part of its excess
balances be lodged with the Reserve Banks, rather than have
all of the excess held by the commercial banks.

12/4/62
If $500 million of the balances in the commercial banks
are to be transferred to the Reserve Banks, that amount of
reserves will of course be absorbed. In order to replace
these reserves, we would purchase an equivalent amount of
securities, or, more likely, refrain from making sales that
we would otherwise undertake. The net of the matter thus is
that after the Treasury balance in the Reserve Banks is built
up to around $1 billion, we will hold in the System's port
folio about $500 million of Government securities that we
otherwise would not have held. Virtually all of the interest
on these securities will be paid by the System to the Treasury,
while if the securities were held by the public the Treasury
would recapture, via taxes, a much lesser percentage of the
interest. Thus the planned build-up of the Treasury balance
at the Reserve Banks can be viewed as a means of reducing the
net interest cost of the unusually high balances that the
Treasury has been carrying for balance of payments reasons.
The Treasury is of course aware that the System will end
up holding more securities than it otherwise would have held,
in order to offset the reserve effect of its higher balance,
and the Treasury is also aware that this could partly offset
the initial rate effects for which its increased borrowing was
undertaken. But the offset would probably be minimal and it
is a price that the Treasury is willing to pay.
As I indicated earlier, the balance at the Reserve Banks
will be built up gradually, and because of the reserve im
plications of the plan, it has been agreed that the timing
of the build-up will be left in our hands. We plan to make a
start on this build-up, as an alternative to some sales, in
mid-December, when current projections suggest that we shall
have to absorb reserves; and we plan to build the balance up
further in January.
It is also understood that the System is to have the major
voice in the determination of short-term variations around
the $1 billion level--since otherwise there might be a situa
tion in which "open market operations" could be conducted to a
significant degree by variations in the Treasury balance.
The discussion that followed related mostly to Mr. Stone's report
about the plan of the Treasury gradually to build up its balances at the
Federal Reserve Banks to amounts in the neighborhood of $1 billion. In
reply to a question, Mr. Stone said the intent would be to build up the

12/4/62 -5
balances at times when market factors were supplying reserves. There
fore, the build-up would serve as an alternative to System sales of
securities. He noted that if the System sold securities it would be
difficult to specify where the reserve impact would ultimately fall.
It would also be difficult to specify where the impact would fall as
the result of a building up of Treasury balances. In the latter case,
the reserves were more likely to be drawn from the country at large
through calls on commercial bank depositories throughout the country.
If the System sold securities, the initial impact would fall on the
central money market. The effects tended to be distributed quickly
through the market, however, and it was his impression that after a few
days the two reserve-absorbing procedures would have an almost in
distinguishable impact.
Mr. Mills observed that the Treasury plan would not do anything
to solve a problem that had been discussed at some length, namely, what
he believed to be the deflationary influence of the Treasury's drawing
more funds out of the financial community than it otherwise would draw,
in order to support the short-term rate. Now it appeared that there
was to be a backing and filling, with no foreseeable resolution of the
problem.
Question was raised as to the reason for the Treasury decision
being made at this particular time, and Mr. Stone commented in terms of
the Treasury being able to say that in this manner the interest cost of

12/4/62 -6
the extra amount of outstanding debt was reduced. Chairman Martin noted
that the Treasury had been considering the matter off and on for some
time, since its balances had begun to run substantially above the usual
levels.
Asked for comment on the implications of his remark that the
Federal Reserve was to have a major part in determining variations of
the Treasury balance around the $1 billion figure, Mr. Stone observed
that a Treasury balance of about $500 million, spread among the Federal
Reserve offices, was a practical minimum. The balance could be reduced
temporarily to $400 million, or even $350 million, without serious risk
that a large check would be presented at any office when insufficient
funds were on hand, but the balance could not go much below $350 million
without incurring that risk. Therefore, $100-$150 million was the maxi
mum amount by which the Treasury balance could safely be drawn down.
However, if the balance was $1 billion, the amount by which it could be
drawn down would be far in excess of $100 million. If it could be drawn
down $500 million or $600 million at the Treasury's initiative, that
would amount to supplying and absorbing major quantities of reserves
through fluctuations in the Treasury balance. The Treasury recognized,
therefore, that action to vary the balance around the $1 billion level
was a matter in which the Federal Reserve should have a major voice.
The whole approach was that variations around the new higher level
should be no greater than the variations around the lower level.

12/4/62
Question was raised about the effect of the Treasury plan on
the short-term rate, and Mr. Hayes commented that he thought an up
ward rate effect was accomplished by the Treasury when it increased
its balances by selling more bills, for reasons related to the balance
of payments, than it otherwise would have sold. The new plan represented
to some extent a dilution of the original effect, but it was a price
that the Treasury--and Mr. Hayes himself--felt was legitimate. The
Treasury had given the Federal Reserve a major assist in terms of
maintaining the short-term rate by its original action. Chairman Martin
agreed that the execution of the present plan would not appear to
envisage affecting the short-term rate. It simply represented a
Treasury judgment on the most appropriate method of handling its en
larged balances.
Turning to a different subject, Mr. Mitchell noted that System
purchases of coupon issues in November apparently amounted to a record
high for the past two years. He asked Mr. Stone if the latter felt
that under the present Committee directives he would be in a position
to switch from short-term securities to coupon issues in order to
achieve the rate effect to which the Committee had subscribed. In
replying, Mr. Stone indicated that purchases of coupon issues during
the past few weeks had been made primarily as a means of minimizing
or avoiding purchases in the bill area. The relative amounts of
purchases of coupon issues of various maturities had depended on the

12/4/62 -8
availability of particular issues in the market. Mr. Mitchell asked
whether this had disturbed the market in November, and Mr. Stone
replied in the negative. Mr. Mitchell then elaborated on his original
question by saying that he was seeking to ascertain whether it was
the Manager's understanding that if the Committee continued to
subscribe to its present policy with respect to maintaining the
short-term rate he was free to switch out of bills to coupon issues
at his discretion in order to help meet the Committee's objective.
Chairman Martin said he thought the Committee's authorization made
it clear that the Manager could do so, and Mr. Stone agreed.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the
open market transactions in Government
securities during the period November 13
through December 3, 1962, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the Committee
a report from the Special Manager of the System Open Market Account on
foreign exchange market conditions and on Open Market Account and
Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the period November 13
through November 28, 1962, together with a supplementary report cover
ing the period November 29 through December 3, 1962. Copies of these
reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.
In comments supplementing his written reports, Mr. Coombs
discussed recent and prospective changes in the U. S. gold stock,

12/4/62 -9
along with developments in the London gold market. He noted that
foreign exchange markets had been fairly quiet during the past three
weeks, but added that within the past few days the German mark had
begun to strengthen rather sharply against the dollar, this being
particularly noticeable yesterday afternoon in New York. Accordingly,
the System, after consultation with the German Federal Bank, had
moved in to moderate the rising tendency of the mark by selling
$4-1/4 million of marks in the New York market. There would be
further consultation today with the German Federal Bank to make plans
for dealing with the situation, which might reflect year-end window
dressing by German banks.
Mr. Coombs also referred to the degree of firmness of the
pound sterling, which might portend a substantial dollar accumulation
by the Bank of England after the turn of the year, when sterling would
be in seasonal strength. In the circumstances, he foresaw that the
System might want to draw upon its swap arrangement with the Bank of
England, and conceivably it might want to seek some enlargement of
the swap facility. The System might be presented with a question as
to how deeply it would want to become involved in drawing under its
swap arrangements, and on how broad a front.
Mr. Coombs noted that year-end window dressing was keeping
the Swiss franc close to its ceiling. This had prevented the System
from accumulating Swiss franc balances against its swap liabilities,

12/4/62 -10
which amounted to $105 million. If foreign confidence in the dollar
was maintained--if the reaction to U. S. balance of payments figures
was not too adverse--he felt there was a reasonable chance that the
Swiss franc would weaken after the turn of the year and the System
would be able to clean up fairly quickly its outstanding drawings of
that currency under the swap arrangements with the Swiss National
Bank and the Bank for International Settlements. Mr. Coombs pointed
out that the Treasury's action in converting certain short-term Swiss
franc liabilities into bonds would be helpful to the Federal Reserve,
giving it a first call on whatever Swiss francs might become available.
Of course, if there should be a deterioration of confidence in the
dollar, the System might experience difficulty in unwinding its swap
contracts. If so, the System would have to face the question whether
to renew the arrangements, perhaps several times, or liquidate them
and let the Treasury attempt to handle the problem through the issuance
of Swiss franc obligations.
Turning to the Canadian situation, Mr. Coombs noted that last
Friday the Bank of Canada prepaid an additional $50 million under its
swap with the Federal Reserve, leaving $75 million outstanding. He
then discussed circumstances bearing on whether the Bank of Canada
might offer to repay the remaining $75 million on or before the due
date, December 26, or request an extension.

12/4/62 -11-
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the
System Open Market Account transactions
in foreign currencies during the period
November 13 through December 3, 1962, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Coombs then stated that he had three recommendations to
present to the Committee at this meeting.
First, he recommended that the $50 million swap arrangement
with the Netherlands Bank, which would mature December 13, 1962, be
renewed on the same terms and conditions for three months.
Without objection, the three-month
renewal, as recommended by Mr. Coombs,
was authorized.
Second, Mr. Coombs referred to the Italian situation, saying
that Italian commercial banks had borrowed heavily in the Euro-dollar
market in November, resulting in an increase in reserves of more than
$140 million. In view of the low gold ratio, this was a serious
matter for the Italian authorities. The U. S. Treasury had utilized
the full amount (about $30 million) of its existing lira balances to
absorb part of the inflow and had issued another $50 million of lira
denominated bonds to the Italians. In this context, Mr. Coombs said,
he had discussed with Bank of Italy officials the possible desirability
of increasing the outstanding lira-dollar swap arrangement between the
Federal Reserve and the Bank of Italy from $50 million to $150 million,
which would be more in line with the pattern of payments swings. Over
the longer pull, he felt that aswap arrangement at this level would be

12/4/62 -12
desirable, and the Bank of Italy had indicated that it probably would
be agreeable. Mr. Coombs noted that there might be some occasion,
over the next two or three months, to effect a small or medium-size
drawing under the swap. He was hopeful that the Italian situation
might be drawing into closer balance, and he thought there might be
some benefit in the use of swap facilities in the Italian situation
in contrast to further use of U. S. Treasury certificates and bonds.
Without objection, the negotiation
of an increase in the standby swap ar
rangement with the Bank of Italy from
$50 to $150 million, as recommended by
Mr. Coombs, was authorized.
Turning to his third item, Mr. Coombs recommended that the
Committee authorize a $50 million three-month krona-dollar swap
arrangement with the Bank of Sweden on the usual terms and conditions.
He explained that at the most recent meeting of the Bank for Interna
tional Settlements he had had a conversation with the Governor of the
Bank of Sweden regarding the network of Federal Reserve swap arrange
ments, and that the Governor had subsequently indicated by cable that
the Bank would be interested in entering into a $50 million standby
swap. Mr. Coombs pointed out that the Swedish krona was a fully
convertible currency under the definitions of the International
Monetary Fund, and that the Bank of Sweden maintained a low gold
ratio in relation to dollar reserves.

12/4/62 -13
Without objection, the negotiation
of a $50 million three-month krona-dollar
standby swap arrangement with the Bank of
Sweden, as recommended by Mr. Coombs, was
authorized.
In connection with the foregoing item, Mr. Coombs noted that
the Governor of the Bank of Sweden in effect represents the Scandinavian
countries at meetings of the Bank for International Settlements. His
cable expressing interest, on behalf of the Bank of Sweden, in a swap
arrangement also had suggested that the central banks of Norway and
Denmark might likewise be interested. Mr. Coombs pointed out to the
Committee, however, that the currencies of Norway and Denmark were not
fully convertible under the definitions of the International Monetary
Fund. He suggested that negotiations not be entered into with those
central banks, at least for the moment.
There followed discussion concerning the content of the IMF
definition of a fully convertible currency and concerning the desir
ability of using that standard as a basis for determining whether to
enter into swap arrangements. It was noted that all swap arrangements
thus far had been with central banks of countries whose currencies were
fully convertible and that, of the European countries, Sweden was the
only one with a fully convertible currency that the Federal Reserve
had not covered in its network of swap arrangements. There were some
Latin American countries whose currencies were fully convertible under
the IMF definition, but those currencies were not important in
international transactions.

12/4/62 -14-
Mr. Hayes noted that Sweden was a larger country, and more
important industrially, than Norway or Denmark. He had felt, in
general terms, that swap arrangements should be confined to currencies
that were to some extent important international money market cur
rencies. The Swedish krona, he felt, was more important than the
Norwegian and Danish currencies from this standpoint.
Mr. Hayes added that he felt the Federal Reserve had two
possible courses. It could be rather restrictive and confine swaps
to the central banks of those countries that were of some importance
from the standpoint of this country's international payments position.
Or it could take a more liberal view and extend the network of swap
arrangements to all countries that managed their affairs fairly well.
If the second course were followed and swap arrangements were entered
into with Norway and Denmark, for example, he was not sure but that
logically the System would have to go further and consider swap
arrangements with various other countries.
Mr. King indicated that he had some question as to the
criteria that should most appropriately be used. It might be, he
suggested, that in the long run the System's interests would be
served best by considering swap arrangements with individual countries
on a case-by-case basis as the occasion arose, rather than by estab
lishing general criteria, whether according to the standard of full
currency convertibility or on the basis of size of country, importance

12/4/62 -15
of currency internationally, or other arbitrary definitions. He
would have some uneasiness about not looking further into the
possibility of swap arrangements with the central banks of Norway
and Denmark. Therefore, he would suggest that any further question
in this regard from the Governor of the Bank of Sweden might be handled
along the lines of indicating, without commitment, that the situation
in respect to Norway and Denmark was receiving further study.
The matter was left on that basis, and Mr. Furth was requested
by the Chairman to have a memorandum on the subject prepared for the
Committee.
It was suggested that the aforementioned memorandum contain
information on the conditions that satisfied the IMF requirements of full
convertibility so that the Committee might consider whether this would
constitute an appropriate criterion for determining whether to enter
into swap arrangements.
Mr. Mills referred to the several staff memoranda that had
recently been distributed on the economic and financial position of
various countries, in connection with the consideration of swap arrange
ments. He suggested that it might be helpful in the future to include
information on the external public debt of the particular country,
including the servicing of such debt.
Mr. Mills inquired about developments in respect to the European
Monetary Agreement, and Messrs. Coombs and Young replied in some detail,

12/4/62
the latter indicating that the Agreement was being extended for a
year under an arrangement that he described. He added that the staff
would follow developments in this regard and that informational mem
oranda would be distributed from time to time.
The Chairman then inquired whether there were further questions
or comments in the area of System foreign currency operations. None
being heard, he called for staff reports on economic and financial
developments, to be followed by the usual presentation of comments
and views around the table.
Mr. Noyes presented the following statement on economic
conditions:
A wide range of discomforts lies in wait for anyone
who is required to make an appraisal of the economic
situation at regular intervals. One becomes acutely
sensitive to all sorts of environmental changes. My own
appraisal of the basic situation has not changed sub
stantially from the one I presented six weeks ago,
except that now I have to try to determine the effect on its
validity, if any, of the widespread acceptance of this point
of view, or an even more optimistic one.
If one sets aside, for the moment, the important changes
in people's attitude toward the future, the actual develop
ments in recent weeks seem only very moderately balanced on
the favorable side--a condition that has prevailed for some
time. For example, after its somewhat disappointing per
formance in October, there is a chance that the industrial
production index may edge up a little in November. On the
other hand, while it did not move by an amount we regard as
statistically significant, unemployment was back up to 5.8
per cent in November. Another set of figures scheduled for
release shortly--the Commerce - SEC plant and equipment ex
penditure survey--presents the same sort of picture. At an
annual rate of $38.3 billion, such expenditures in the third
quarter were a little more than previously estimated. They

12/4/62 -17-
are expected to remain at the same level in the current
quarter and then decline a little in the first quarter of
next year. In other words, there was not enough change
from the pattern suggested by the earlier McGraw-Hill survey
to justify a modification of one's appraisal in either
direction.
Turning to retail sales, on the basis of the weekly
data we guess that the improvement in other lines more than
offset a decline in auto sales from the advanced October
rate, so that the seasonally adjusted rate will be up 1 per
cent or so. But, this doesn't represent an increase over the
level we have been looking at, because October is being re
vised downward by about the same amount.
Prices remain generally stable, most of the brief upward
flurry in commodities following the Cuban crisis having been
reversed except in the case of a few of Far Eastern origin.
While steel producers have been talking about selective
increases, the price of primary aluminum has been cut by two
large producers. The consumer price index dropped back one
tenth of a per cent in October, after a rather sizable rise
in September due primarily to the withholding of Mid-western
beef.
It is hard to see how stimulus for expansion to levels
substantially above those now prevailing could come from
indigenous factors. Automobile sales and production will do
well to maintain their present level. Even the most optimistic
forecasts for residential housing envisage some decline from
the October rate. The immediate prospects for plant and equip
ment spending are sustaining at best. Strength of demand for
nondurables seems to be barely maintained. Hence, we must
look primarily to Government, the slow steady growth of service
expenditures, and perhaps some improvement in sales of house
hold durables to provide even moderate expansion, unless there
is some major exogenous stimulus. The possibility that such
a stimulus can and will come from a large and early tax cut
is widely anticipated and, in fact, is already incorporated
in expectational patterns. In an age of calculated risks,
the greatest risk at the moment seems to me to be that no more
than normal delay in the handling of a proposed tax cut, coming
at a time of seasonal slack, may result in the collapse of a
modest expansion based importantly on the assumption of its
prompt enactment.
The economy is presently receiving some mild stimulation
from the generally more optimistic outlook of businessmen and
from the usual tendency not to allow fully for the seasonal
nature of the improvement that comes in the late fall and early

12/4/62 -18-
winter. These are highly transitory influences that can
vanish quickly with a heavy snowfall or a discouraging
political development. It is altogether possible that we
may get some strengthening of the underlying economic
situation, but there is no hard evidence that this has
occurred as yet.
Mr. Koch presented the following statement on financial devel
opments:
Probably the most relevant figures for current monetary
policy determination that have become available in the
financial area since this Committee's last meeting are the
ones on bank reserves and the money supply. These data all
suggest that the degree of ease that has prevailed in money
and banking markets in recent weeks has achieved for this
period what I take to have been one of the Committee's main
objectives, namely, a sizable expansion in the monetary base.
Looking first at bank reserves, you will recall that
since mid-June the staff has been using a three per cent
secular growth trend in our guideline figures for required
reserves behind private deposits. In the third quarter,
actual required reserve expansion was substantially below
this rate of increase, but in October actual growth came
up to the guideline and in recent weeks it has been some
what above the three per cent standard.
Turning to the narrowly defined money supply, it, too,
grew sharply in October and November from the plateau at
which it had settled for many months earlier. It is true
that part of this recent growth in the money supply, as well
as the growth in required reserves behind private deposits,
was due to a drawing down of Government balances to more
normal levels, but part also was due to a sharp increase in
bank credit, particularly in bank loans. Time and savings
deposits of commercial banks are also continuing to increase
sharply at a rate about midway between the very high first
quarter rate and the reduced rate that prevailed during the
summer and early fall.
The recent sharp expansion in bank loans is difficult to
explain. Bankers tell us that demands for financing are still
disappointing. Moreover, business financial statements show
a growing availability of internal funds. Yet in October and
November combined, total bank loans increased at a seasonally
adjusted annual rate of about 12 per cent and business loans
at an 8 per cent rate. Both of these rates of increase are

12/4/62 -19
considerably in excess of those in production and employment
and no doubt reflect, in part at least, a switch out of capital
market financing.
Indeed, the capital market is the only area of financing
that has appeared light in recent months. Security offerings
by corporations, for example, are likely to total only about
$2-1/4 billion in the fourth quarter, 25 per cent below the
amount in the comparable months a year ago. State and local
security financing is expected to equal about $1-3/4 billion
in the current quarter, 20 per cent below last year's total.
Mortgage financing, however, continues very large, and the
capital markets have absorbed, although not without some
interest rate effects, the substantial debt lengthening recently
accomplished by the Treasury through both its advance and reg
ular refundings.
Interest rates have been particularly sensitive for
some time now to changing expectations as to prospective
domestic economic developments, the status of international
political negotiations, and the budgetary position of the
Federal Government. Recently some firming of rates has taken
place, with more optimism existing concerning both the economic
situation and international affairs, and with more awareness
developing of the possibility of sizable tax reductions and a
larger Government deficit next year.
Thus far the interest rate firmness has been concentrated
largely in the short-term area. Whereas 3-month Treasury bills,
currently at a 2.86 per cent yield, are now 17 basis points above
their recent low, yields on 3 - 5 year Treasury bonds are now
5 basis points higher and yields on long-term Treasurys are
2 basis points higher. Yields on corporate and State and local
bonds have also risen slightly recently, reflecting in part
the major stock market rally that has occurred. The Standard
and Poor's index of common stock prices is now about 16 per cent
above its recent low in late October and half way back to its
all-time peak a year ago.
I suspect that the firming of intermediate and long-term
Treasury bond yields that has taken place in recent weeks has
been due mainly to changing market forces and expectations, but
our own activity, coupled with that of the Treasury, in seeking
to bolster short-term Treasury bill rates has no doubt had some
effect on the longer term sectors of the interest rate structure.
As long as the market feels that we will do all we can to main
tain short-term interest rates in their current yield range,
I doubt if long-term rates can fall much further. Yield spreads
are already quite narrow, particularly for a period of easy money.

12/4/62 -20-
In the very short run, our most recent purchases of coupon
issues rather than bills to provide a sizable portion of the
late November-early December reserve needs have tended to
keep longer term yields from rising. Substantial purchases
of coupon issues have been accomplished without major yield
impact, but at a time when some investors as well as dealers
wanted to shorten their portfolios of Government securities.
Looking ahead, from the middle of December seasonal
factors will be working for lower interest rates, as demands
for financing are normally low and the flow of investment
funds is normally large in the early months of the year.
Moreover, market expectations about improving economic devel
opments may be exaggerated. A tax cut is by no means a
certainty; nor can we be sure that the most feasible tax
cut politically would have the expected expansionary effect
on the private economy.
The seasonal factors have been on our side recently,
not only with regard to interest rates but also probably
with regard to the expansion in bank reserves and the money
supply. I cannot help but feel that our seasonal adjustment
factors do not completely allow for the market demand for
bank loans and consequent increase in deposits that normally
occur in the fall, particularly in an expansion phase of the
business cycle. It will be recalled that the money supply
also increased substantially late last year. When the loan
demand decreases in the seasonally slack months early in the
year, we will have to rely mainly on bank purchases of secu
rities to increase total bank credit and the money supply.
Then will come the real test as to whether the current level
of free reserves and the recently prevailing tone in money
markets, as influenced by one of our prime objectives, namely,
keeping up short-term interest rates, will be stimulative
enough to the banking system to encourage further expansion
in the monetary base.
Encouragement of further expansion in our monetary base
strikes me as particularly important at a time like this when
many economists agree that the main things wrong with both our
domestic economy and our balance of international payments are
essentially not monetary in nature. In such a situation, we
might well elevate to an even higher position than usual in
our range of monetary policy objectives, the expansion of bank
reserves and the money supply at a rate approximately equal to
a sustainable growth rate in production and employment.

12/4/62 -21-
Mr. Furth presented the following statement on the U. S. balance
of payments and related matters:
For November, our fragmentary and preliminary weekly
figures indicate a sharp drop in transfers to foreigners of
gold, foreign convertible currencies, and dollars. The
estimated total for the month is $200 million, less than one
fourth of the October figure and less than half of the average
for the third quarter.
In computing the officially announced payments deficit,
the figure will be reduced by various statistical adjustments,
and in fact will show no net transfers at all for November,
provided that the final unadjusted data agree with our tentative
estimate. But whatever the intrinsic merit of those statistical
adjustments, the adjusted official figures will not in any mean
ingful way be comparable with data for previous years.
The November results are a welcome confirmation of the
view expressed at the last Committee meeting that the large
increase in the October deficit was due to temporary factors.
Those results apparently reflect mainly two developments:
First, the extraordinary movement of short-term funds to
Canada seems finally to have come to an end, although the flow
of investment capital has continued. Second, Japan has begun
to repay the large sums it borrowed in New York last year.
There are still no indications that the more basic
accounts of our payments balance have decisively improved.
In fact, our imports apparently have continued their upward
trend, in spite of the lack of a similar trend in our domestic
economy. The delay in reporting export figures makes it im
possible at this time to state whether our exports have re
covered from their mid-summer slump.
Developments abroad show further improvement in business
sentiment in Continental Europe, and further expansionary
measures in Britain and Japan. Both developments should
brighten our export prospects. But there is also a growing
conviction that the Europeanswill be able to keep wage and
price increases under control. This is good news from the
point of view of international financial stability. But
it is less encouraging to those of us who hope that a con
tinuing slight deterioration in the competitive position of
European export industries may in due time help to reduce
Europe's chronic payments surplus and thereby also help to
solve our own payments problem.

12/4/62 -22-
Confirming the forecast made by Mr. Coombs at the last
meeting, the gold situation has remained better than our
payments position would seem to warrant. In November, total
U.S. gold holdings declined on balance only $10 million, in
spite of continued gold sales, especially to France and
Austria. But the decline would have been many times as
large if the U.S. Treasury had not used borrowed foreign
exchange funds to buy $30 million of gold from Switzerland
and to relieve the Swiss and the Italian banking systems of
$80 million of "excess" dollar holdings. The System used
$10 million of its Belgian franc assets acquired under our
swap with the National Bank of Belgium for a similar purpose.
As Mr. Coombs has reported, Canada has unwound a further
$75 million of its swaps with the System and the Bank of
England. This leaves Canada with $100 million in outstand
ing swaps and $300 million in Fund drawings. Repurchase of
the Fund drawings will have to be made mainly in Continental
European currencies. Canada will presumably acquire the bulk
of these currencies in the New York market, and this may in
directly lead to a further drain on our gold stock.
Mr. Hayes presented the following statement of his views on the
economic situation and monetary policy:
Perhaps the most significant development on the domestic
scene in the last few weeks has been the distinct improvement
in business atmosphere. Swings in sentiment are often more
pronounced than those in the underlying statistics, and the
latest business data merely seem to confirm the opinion many
of us have held right along that the economy is moving very
gradually upward, with no real evidence to date pointing either
toward a recession or toward a strong upsurge. Of course, the
better business sentiment now clearly evident is a good sign
not only because the businessmen's judgment as to their prospects
may turn out to be more accurate than the more cautious views
that have been voiced by many economists, but also because
better sentiment may have some solid effects on spending
decisions and hence on future activity. The stock market's
performance has probably both reflected and encouraged the
improvement in atmosphere, which has also been cheered by the
apparent increasing likelihood of a tax reduction in 1963.
Already retail trade data, including those for automobiles,
suggest that the improved sentiment extends to consumers.
Other favorable straws in the wind have included a substantial
rise in personal income in October, the prospect of sizable

12/4/62 -23-
Government insurance dividend payments in January, the
failure of recent data to support earlier signs of weakness
in residential construction, and a better trend in new
orders for durable goods.
It is very hard to make an adequate analysis of the
latest balance of payments indications because of the very
wide week-to-week fluctuations and the absence of up-to
date information on the principal components. While the
November deficit will undoubtedly be much smaller than the
spectacular October figure, partly because of the unwinding
of window-dressing operations by Canadian banks, the out
standing development, and a very sobering one, is that the
over-all deficit for the year to date is only a little short
of the total deficit for the year 1961. In view of the
earlier conviction, prevalent both here and abroad, that 1962
would show significant progress over 1961, there is bound to
be considerable disappointment with the actual results, even
if special official payments to the U.S. and other special
arrangements before the year-end make possible some net
improvement over last year. It is significant that if such
special transactions as debt prepayments are excluded, the
over-all result this year will probably show appreciable
deterioration from last year. Of course we can find much
satisfaction in the calm performance of the exchange and gold
markets in recent weeks. Various special financial arrange
ments and the excellent spirit of cooperation among the
leading central banks have contributed greatly to this state
of affairs; but I fear we may be approaching the time when
these central banks will simply be unwilling to add sub
stantially to their uncovered dollar balances, when our swap
facilities will be approaching exhaustion, and when our con
tinuing substantial balance of payments deficit will therefore
impinge directly on our gold stock.
As we view the latest data on credit we find that the
behavior of both total bank credit and business loans has been
stronger in the last couple of months than might have been
expected seasonally. The money supply has risen sharply,
partly because of a substantial drop in Government deposits,
and time deposits continue their steep advance. Despite some
slight decline in bank liquidity in New York during November,
which might be due in part to the November refunding, the
over-all liquidity of the country both in and outside of the
banks continues ample. Seasonal pressures have been helping
to maintain a firm short-term rate structure, and for the time
being the problem of covered rate spreads between New York and
London has become much less acute. We should have in mind,

12/4/62 -24-
however, the probability that after mid-December seasonal
factors in the money market will be working against us, and
it may be considerably harder to sustain the current market
rate structure.
At the last meeting I urged the Committee to make a
moderate move toward lesser ease, feeling as I do that although
a solution to our very serious international problem calls for
continued vigorous action on many fronts, this in no sense
excuses monetary policy from doing what it can to help. I
still believe that this is the direction in which we should
be moving, that the improved business sentiment and outlook
provide us with a better opportunity than we had a few weeks
ago, and that it would be decidedly prudent to try to make
some further progress toward a firmer rate structure before
seasonal factors turn against us. I would emphasize, however,
that what I am talking about is a modest change in policy,
involving an effort to hold the Federal funds rate more
steadily at 3 per cent and to encourage short-term bill rates
closer to that level, which would probably mean letting free
reserves decline appreciably below the average level of $400
million or higher that has prevailed now for many months. The
Manager should, I believe, continue to be guided principally
by the tone of the market; and it might be helpful to continue
to make as active use as possible of operations in the inter
mediate and long-term areas. I would not advocate at this time
an increase in the discount rate, preferring to wait until we
have observed the results of a modest firming in open market
policy and until we have a clearer idea both of the probable
size of the year's over-all deficit and of the probable impact
of this figure both here and abroad. The Committee might be
interested to know that some of our Directors have recently
expressed serious concern over the failure of the System to
do more in recognition of the very serious international
situation and have suggested that a prompt increase in the
discount rate might be appropriate. I have persuaded them,
however, that such action would be premature, that they should
defer it, and that, in my judgment, open market policy would
be a more appropriate area for an initial move in the direction
of less ease.
The directive should, I believe, be modified somewhat if
the Committee is willing to make a modest policy change of the
kind I am proposing. I also believe that we might remove the
reference to the emergency situation since its force would
merely be weakened by routine repetition after the situation
which evoked it has changed. I would suggest that the following
wording be considered:

12/4/62 -25
It is the current policy of the Federal
Open Market Committee to encourage moderate
further increases in bank credit and the money
supply, while aiming at money market conditions
that would minimize capital outflows internationally.
This policy, while recognizing the recent improve
ment in business sentiment and the continuing serious
deficit of the United States balance of payments,
takes into account the unsatisfactory level of
domestic activity, the continuing underutilization
of resources, and the absence of inflationary
pressures.
To implement this policy, operations for the
System Open Market Account during the next two
weeks shall be conducted with a view to providing
a moderate expansion of bank reserves and to main
taining a firmer tone in money markets.
Mr. Ellis reported that in New England there was a rather general
expectation of modest further growth in economic activity during the
first part of 1963. Businessmen reported a trend toward an increasing
volume of new orders, and the Reserve Bank's survey of 1963 capital
spending plans of New England manufacturers suggested a 10 per cent
increase over the current year's level. Retail sales were strong,
with expectations for a good Christmas buying season. However, October
and November statistics provided somewhat less basis for optimism.
For example, although nonfarm employment was up slightly in October,
manufacturing employment was off, with manufacturers of durables show
ing a year-to-year loss. Seasonally adjusted estimates of unemployment
in October were being marked up slightly from the 5.5 per cent September
level. As of mid-November, commercial and industrial loans were con
tinuing the sharp expansion that had been evident since mid-summer.

12/4/62 -26
With demand deposits remaining about level during the past year,
First District banks had moved from consistent sellers of Federal
funds to the position of substantial net buyers. Representatives
of certain large insurance companies operating on a national scale
expressed the view that there was no crisis immediately ahead in the
construction field. However, they expressed some concern about the
effects of "ease compounded by ease."
As to policy, Mr. Ellis indicated that he found himself in
substantial agreement with the views of Mr. Hayes. In his opinion,
a gradual move should be started toward a position of continued but
lessened ease. The domestic economy was strong and was expected to
become stronger; and this situation would not seem to require a
continuation of the same degree of ease that had been considered
necessary over a period of many months for the purpose of stimulating
the economy. Evidence of domestic economic strength was seen in new
orders, retail sales, and related series. At the same time, as pointed
out by Messrs. Hayes and Furth, the balance of payments picture was
such that monetary policy should be doing what it could in a supporting
capacity. The degree of monetary ease in recent months had achieved
a sizable expansion of reserves and a substantial expansion of loans
and investments. There had been a 7.5 per cent rate of increase since
August in required reserves against private deposits, with the result
that required reserves were now above the so-called growth guideline.

12/4/62 -27
The effect of the policy that had been in effect was a run-up in
reserves substantially more rapid than would be warranted on a
continuing basis, and a somewhat lower level of free reserves should
be adequate to support a sustainable rate of growth.
Mr. Ellis commented that a shift of emphasis such as he had
described might suggest a change in the policy directive. Yet it was
such a modest shift that no substantial change in the directive
probably was required. However, he would eliminate the reference to
the emergency situation presented by the Cuban crisis and reserve
the use of such language for later occasions if necessary. Also, he
would like the directive to recognize that there had been a more
rapid growth of reserves recently than he believed was warranted on
a continuing basis. With this in mind, perhaps the word "moderate"
(reserve expansion) in the last paragraph of the directive could be
changed.
Mr. Ellis expressed the view that the free reserve target
should be lowered to approximately $300 million. The target for the
Federal funds rate should be close to 3 per cent, and bill rates
should continue within the range that had prevailed recently. He
would reserve any change in the discount rate for future consideration.
Mr. Irons reported that there had been no significant changes
in the Eleventh District, which continued to experience a good level
of business activity. While there were some mixed trends within the

12/4/62 -28
over-all picture, in general the District economy was operating at
a high and stable level. Most indicators of business activity showed
gains thus far this year running from 4 to 7 per cent above last year.
Department store trade was relatively weak in October but strengthened
in November, and there was considerable optimism among retail trade
people. In general, business sentiment was a little stronger than a
few weeks ago. In agriculture, cash receipts from farm marketings
should be about 7 or 8 per cent above last year, with increased receipts
from both livestock and crops. The industrial production index fell
off a bit in October, nonagricultural employment was up, and unemploy
ment continued within the narrow range that had prevailed for some time.
Construction activity continued to rise, being some 20 per cent over
a year ago. There was no change in the oil situation.
Mortgage money was said to be readily available in the District,
with some downward pressure on rates. Bankers considered their posi
tion adequately liquid and there had been no significant borrowing
from the Reserve Bank. Deposits were up, and investments up a little.
Net activity in Federal funds showed an increase in purchases, this
being attributable largely to the operations of two or three banks.
Mr. Irons said he had been satisfied with the results of
recent policy. Looking ahead, he felt that a drift in the direction
of a little less ease might be appropriate, with any deviations on
that side. There seemed to be adequate liquidity in the banking system,

12/4/62 -29
and the free reserve levels that had prevailed could hardly be
associated with a restrictive policy. He would look for a bill
rate somewhere in the range of 2.80-2.85 per cent, and felt that
the Desk might operate in longer coupon issues wherever that was
advantageous. He would look for Federal funds in the area of 2-3/4
to 3 per cent, mostly at 3 per cent. While he did not attach too
much weight to the free reserve figures, he would say that a level
somewhat around $350-$400 million would be adequate. In summary, he
would not suggest any marked change in policy, just a drift toward a
little less ease. He would not change the discount rate at this time.
As to the directive, Mr. Irons suggested only eliminating the
reference to the emergency situation relating to the Cuban crisis.
The Committee could do what he would like to see done within the
framework of the existing directive, and he would hesitate to change
just a few words in an endeavor to provide some fine shading, for he
did not think the directive should attempt to be that precise.
Mr. Swan said that the general situation in the Twelfth District
continued much the same as reported at recent meetings. On balance, the
District was experiencing a continuation of a very gradual rise in over
all activity. Nonagricultural employment made another small gain in all
District states in October, with improvement in all industry divisions
except mining, although the increase in manufacturing employment was
below the August and September gains. In terms of year-ago comparisons,

12/4/62 -30
employment in durable goods industries was up in October in all but
two categories, those being primary metals and lumber and wood products.
Department store sales continued strong in November, and a good Christ
mas buying season was anticipated by the major stores.
The larger District banks had not had quite enough growth in
deposits to keep pace with seasonal loan expansion, so they were under
some reserve pressure. During the first three weeks of November, they
were net buyers of Federal funds, and some of them borrowed--although
quite moderately--from the Reserve Bank. Total time deposits showed a
decline in this period because of the payout of Christmas Club accounts,
even though total savings deposits continued to rise.
As to policy, Mr. Swan said he saw little reason in light of
recent developments to change the opinion he had expressed at recent
Committee meetings. He would agree with the observations about an
improvement in business sentiment, but he did not think this provided
a real basis for assuming any kind of a break-through to rapid upswing.
The optimism seemed to carry the inflection that a recession was much
less likely rather than that the upswing would necessarily become much
more vigorous. Also, it seemed to him that the general outline of the
balance of payments problem had not changed significantly. If anything,
the current situation seemed slightly more encouraging, at least more
encouraging than a month ago. Accordingly, his feeling would be that
the Committee should continue much the same policy that it had been

12/4/62 -31
following, moving--if at all--very slightly in the direction of a
little more ease rather than in the direction of slightly less ease.
Summarizing, Mr. Swan said he would like to see the Committee
continue to supply reserves freely, and if anything move on the side
of ease rather than the reverse. It seemed to him that this would not
require a change in the directive, although he would go along with the
suggestion for elimination of the reference to international devel
opments of a crisis nature. Obviously, he would not favor a change
in the discount rate.
Mr. Deming reported that relatively little new statistical data
on general economic conditions in the Ninth District had become avail
able since the last meeting of the Committee, and that the available
data were mixed. Nonagricultural employment in the District had
inched up all year to its seasonal peak in September, but since then
had declined. The drop had been mainly seasonal, but had been a bit
more pronounced than last year in both October and November. This re
flected partly the earlier close of the ore shipping season this year,
but partly a rather sharp decline in construction employment despite
favorable weather. Employment was still running higher than a year
ago, however, by about 2 per cent.
District iron ore shipments totaled approximately 54 million
tons this year, about the same as last year but 10 million tons less
than estimated earlier this year. For comparison, ore shipments in

12/4/62 -32
1953 were 94 million tons; in 1957 they were 81 million tons; and even
in 1960 they totaled 65 million tons. Ore concentrates and taconite
constituted a fairly heavy percentage of current shipments. Thus the
decline in iron content was smaller than the tonnage figures would
imply, but it still had been quite sharp.
On the other hand, Mr. Deming said, industrial output as indi
cated by power consumption figures was running 10 per cent ahead of a
year ago. And while department store sales had been erratic, bank
debit figures had been sharply expansive in recent weeks, indicating
a high level of transactions. District income gains continued to show
up favorably relative to national increases, with the high farm income
from this year's excellent agricultural situation contributing strongly
to the better than average performance.
If there was such a thing as a confidence index for the District,
Mr. Deming felt that it would be fairly high and rising as the year
drew to a close.
The District banking picture continued to show strength in loan
and deposit growth. So far this year, loan expansion and deposit growth
at city banks in the District had been much stronger relatively than
that for all city banks in the United States. Loans and deposits at
country banks had grown just about the same relative amount as in all
country banks in the United States. Loan-deposit ratios of District
banks continued to run well below their peak levels of mid-1960. They

12/4/62 -33
had shown relatively little growth since their lows of a year ago,
due--as the record implied--to a very strong deposit expansion off
setting the sharp loan growth. Borrowing from the Reserve Bank con
tinued to be nominal, and the banks seemed to have ample liquidity,
although the level of real liquidity might not be as high as the raw
figures on loan-deposit ratios would indicate since a significant part
of the recent loan expansion had been in less liquid loan categories.
Turning to policy considerations, Mr. Deming said that although
the domestic economy perhaps needed no more stimulation on the monetary
side, as yet he saw no persuasive reason to cut back, in any appreciable
degree, on such stimulus as monetary policy was now providing. The
balance of payments picture was anything but encouraging. Monetary
policy should be careful to do nothing that might worsen the picture
and, of course, should do what it could to help better it. He did not
see, however, that monetary policy could do significantly more than it
had been doing. Therefore, he would not place additional emphasis on
the short rate as a policy guide and would not attempt, at any signif
icant cost in the sense of lessened reserve availability, to force the
short rate higher, or even to hold it at present levels. He would
seek to minimize downward pressure on the short rate by operating,
when it could be done, outside the short-term market area.
Thus, Mr. Deming said, he favored no real change in policy
for the next two weeks. He would have no objection to short rates

12/4/62 -34
holding where they were, or even rising slightly, but he would not
push them at the cost of significantly lower free reserve levels.
While he would have no objection to somewhat lower levels of free
reserves, he would not seek such levels as a matter of policy, nor
would he accept much lower levels as a cost of holding up short rates.
This brought him to about the position expressed by Mr. Irons:
possibly a "drift" down from current free reserve levels, but a very
gradual drift and not a "shift" to a position of less ease, however
modest such a shift might be. In conclusion, Mr. Deming said he would
not favor changing the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Scanlon reported that there had been a further improvement
in business sentiment in the Seventh District. Strengthening of retail
sales, supported by the continued high level of automobile sales, was
a key factor in this trend. Steel orders from fabricating industries
increased during November and price increases, announced by a variety
of firms, reflected a firmer tone in wholesale markets. Nevertheless,
many business firms in the area continued to complain of sluggish
orders and declining backlogs.
Employment was following the usual seasonal pattern in the
District. There had been few reports of either contra-seasonal lay
offs or hirings. However, new claims for unemployment compensation
during October and November were below the levels of the past four years.

12/4/62 -35
Appliance manufacturers reported that they were increasing
production to supply larger dealer orders. Orders for capital goods
in the third quarter probably were inadequate to support a further rise
in production of machinery and equipment in the current quarter.
However, there had been some indications recently of an acceleration
of orders for prompt delivery of some types of equipment so that the
tax credit could be used as an offset to this year's income.
Net farm income in the Seventh District in 1962 very likely
would exceed last year's level, but this picture might be reversed
next year. It now appeared that Federal payments to farmers would be
reduced in 1963 because fewer farmers would be participating in the
new feed grain programs, and returns on cattle feeding were expected
to decline from the current favorable level. New agricultural loans
reported by District banks this fall had been substantially above last
year, mainly because of larger purchases of feeder cattle at higher
prices.
The strengthening of business loan demand that began in late
summer had continued, Mr. Scanlon noted. Weekly reporting banks in
the District increased their business loans in November, in contrast
to declines in the comparable period of each of the three previous
years. Durable goods manufacturers and public utilities accounted
for a large part of the rise in business loans, but gains had been
reported for most industry categories.

12/4/62 -36-
As to policy, Mr. Scanlon said that he tended to associate
himself in general with the views expressed by Messrs. Irons and
Deming. However, the Committee would be meeting again in two weeks,
and he felt that its essential objectives could be realized by con
tinuing current policy during that period. On that basis he would
propose no change in the directive other than deletion of the sentence
referring to the international emergency arising out of the Cuban
situation. He would not favor any change in the discount rate at this
time.
Mr. Clay commented that the performance of the nonfarm sector
of the Tenth District economy in recent months bore a strong resemblance
to that of the nation as a whole. Although dissimilarities were ap
parent, the fact that changes generally had been of small magnitude
served to reinforce the view that the District and the nation had
performed quite similarly. For instance, this appeared to be true of
nonfarm employment, which had shown little change in recent months.
Even when industrial sectors of employment were considered separately,
the performance of the District and the nation were found to be pre
dominantly alike. Moreover, the flow of personal income in District
States had risen much in line with national experience.
One nonfarm indicator in which the Tenth District showed a
contrasting pattern from the nation as a whole in recent months was
business loans. Whereas business loans nationally had shown above
seasonal expansion in recent months, business loan growth had been

12/4/62 -37
limited to seasonal proportions in the District. On the other hand,
during the first seven months of the year business loan expansion in
the District was unusually strong, in contrast to the nation.
Agricultural conditions had been favorable in the Tenth District
this year, and agricultural output had responded accordingly. While
crop acreage had been reduced sharply by Government programs, this was
largely offset by excellent yields. Range and feed conditions had
been unusually good in most part of the District, and livestock produc
tion had expanded to record high levels.
A large volume of marketings and somewhat higher prices had
caused cash receipts from farm marketings to be well maintained.
Government payments under the wheat and feed grain programs also had
been large in Tenth District States. Thus, realized gross farm income
would establish a new record. Production expenses also were at a peak,
however, so realized net farm income would approximate that of 1961
rather than exceed it. Prospects were favorable for continued high
levels of farm output and aggregate gross income, although many marginal
operators continued to be confronted with financial difficulties.
Turning to policy considerations,; Mr. Clay expressed the view
that domestic developments in the national economy continued to need
the support of an expansive monetary policy. While some indications of
recent economic improvement could be cited, notably automobile sales,
evidence of a basic change leading to a fuller utilization of manpower

12/4/62 -38
and other resources was not yet available. On the other hand, the
international balance of payments problem remained a hindrance to
the appropriate execution of an expansive monetary policy, particularly
as to the level and pattern of interest rates. As long as the Treasury
bill rate remained as high as its recent level, the Committee was
limited as to what it could do. Nevertheless, he felt it should con
tinue to supply reserves to the banking system in sufficient quantity
to enable bank credit to expand in excess of seasonal proportions.
Furthermore, it should make offsetting purchases and sales of Govern
ment securities to whatever extent necessary in order to provide those
reserves. The Reserve Bank discount rate should remain unchanged.
Mr. Wayne reported that Fifth District business conditions
conformed in broad outline to those sketched on a national basis by
Mr. Noyes. District weekly reporting banks experienced their strongest
November rise in gross loans since 1958, the largest part of which
occurred in business loans, with real estate and "all other" (chiefly
consumer) loans assisting. District businessmen viewed the immediate
future with more optimism than three weeks ago and considerably more
than six weeks ago.
As to the situation nationally, Mr. Wayne noted an absence of
hard facts to indicate a significant rise or decline in activity. In
the circumstances, it seemed to him only logical to assume a continua
tion of the present sideways movement along a high plateau.

12/4/62 -39
It appeared to Mr. Wayne that the Desk had been most success
ful in fostering a steady tone in the money market during the past
three weeks. Aided substantially by the Treasury's increases in the
supply of bills, the three-month bill rate had risen by 15 basis
points or more and thereby had alleviated to some extent the pressure
tending to drive funds abroad. The action of the Bank of England in
eliminating special deposits last week should provide further assist
ance in this direction. The rise in the Treasury bill rate had
occurred without causing any stringency in the market despite some
very heavy churning as large payments were made for Treasury securities.
Other short-term rates moved only moderately and yields on long-term
Governments remained quite stable at comparatively low levels. All in
all, he considered it a good demonstration of open market operations
at their best, including skillful and discriminating purchases of
longer term securities. It seemed to him that the Committee had
accomplished all that it could reasonably have expected to accomplish
three weeks ago. Also, over a somewhat longer period of time there
had been moderate but fairly steady increases in bank credit and the
money supply, trends that were listed as policy objectives in the
first part of the directive. Since basic conditions in the economy
had not changed and since operations over the past three weeks had
been quite successful, he saw no reason for a change of policy.
Therefore, he would favor renewing the current policy directive and
making no change in the discount rate.

12/4/62 -40
Mr. Mills said that in his opinion this was definitely a time
when Federal Reserve policy should be used to encourage the improvement
of public and private attitudes toward the economic situation that had
been reflected in somewhat stronger business activity. Monetary policy
therefore should provide a broad base of reserves as an incentive for
further bank credit expansion. The record of the past three statement
weeks was an object lesson, Mr. Mills said, concerning the inherent
benefits of placing an adequate supply of reserves in the hands of the
commercial banks. Putting the recent experience in statistical perspec
tive, there had been a higher level of free reserves and a lower level
of Treasury balances. These two statistical changes, which were re
flected in a broader and more extensive expansion of bank credit, had
been accomplished without any observable downward pressure on the level
of interest rates. This might have been due largely to the fact that
credit expansion creates some upward pressure on interest rates. Thus,
a counter pressure results from a higher level of free reserves.
As to the record of the past three weeks, with the benefits
that he saw in the statistical experience, Mr. Mills suggested that
this had been more the result of fortunate accident than design. That
was brought out by the changes in the reserve figures; when the revised
statistics were published, they had shown an upward lift. In his
opinion, monetary policy should continue to move as it had, adventi
tiously, in the direction of greater ease. This would imply no change
in the discount rate and no alteration of the policy directive.

12/4/62 -41-
Mr. Robertson presented the following statement:
I am somewhat encouraged by the developments that have
taken place since our last meeting. It seems that interna
tional financial markets have calmed down slightly, the
domestic business situation is a shade brighter, and reserve
ease has been sufficient to promote further gradual monetary
growth.
I must say that I am particularly gratified by what
appears to have happened--and what did not happen--in the
international financial arena. These latest weeks have
demonstrated that international interest rate differentials
can move down as well as move up, and that capital can move
in as well as move out, with temporary fluctuations being
equilibrated by the workings of forces other than short-term
adjustments in our own general monetary policy. Moreover, I
judge our problems will be rendered somewhat easier over the
longer run by the official downward adjustment of the Canadian
discount rate, as well as official easing actions in Japan and
the United Kingdom.
All of these developments confirm the wisdom of our hold
ing to a steady monetary policy, rather than steering to the
tighter side, through flurries that arose a month or so ago.
I do not mean in any sense to sound complacent regarding
our situation. I still think that, while our international
competitive position fundamentally is favorable, our domestic
situation is fundamentally unfavorable. Business activity
continues to lack the vigorous upthrust that our under
utilized resources, human and material, could support. There
are some signs of improvement in individual industries, but
we have as yet no conclusive evidence of the spread of
expansionary influences more generally through the economy.
This is precisely the kind of economic environment in which
I think continued monetary growth is badly needed, in the
interest of encouraging more robust spending inclinations
wherever they may be appearing. I think it is quite feasible
to provide sufficient reserve ease to gain some further
additions to the money supply, without overwhelming financial
markets or generating sloppy money conditions. Indeed, the
period between now and the end of the year, with its strong
seasonal pressures, may represent one of our better
opportunities for doing just this.
Looking back over this past year, it is apparent that
monetary policy has been such as to add substantially to
public liquidity, and it may well be that history will accord
that policy some credit for warding off a more deflationary

12/4/62 -42
turn in business. I could wish our policy had been more
smoothly and more evenly expansive in its influence, but
it is easier to see that with the benefit of hindsight than
it was at the time, However, I believe we should learn from
this experience and not subtract from the salutary influence
of our current policy by wavering in its application.
Particularly at this juncture, steady pursuit of a moderately
stimulative policy is to be desired. It could assist in re
invigorating domestic economic growth while our gold stock
and our improving competitive position internationally are
still more than sufficient to sustain the dollar as a world
currency.
In my judgment, these considerations mean that we should
maintain free reserves in the weeks ahead as high as the
average for the past three weeks. Furthermore, the Desk should
endeavor to offset any persisting tightness in the money market
that might develop as a result of the heavy seasonal pressures
likely between now and the next meeting of this Committee.
Mr. Shepardson said he had no comments to add to those that had
already been made with respect to the domestic economic situation. He
was not as optimistic as some others appeared to be with regard to the
international balance of payments situation. As he saw it, the avail
able information did not provide a basis for encouragement, and certain
recent developments gave him particular cause for concern. The trade
bill that had been enacted was designed to facilitate foreign trade,
but certain reports and comments he had seen in the press recently did
not appear conducive to satisfactory negotiations, or to working in the
direction of improving the foreign trade picture. While he realized
that this was an area beyond the purview of Federal Reserve policy,
the developments to which he had referred did not portend significant
improvement in the balance of payments.

12/4/62 -43
As to policy, Mr. Shepardson indicated that he agreed with
the proposal made by Mr. Hayes. He also said that he would favor
modifying the policy directive.
Mr. King expressed himself as being slightly more optimistic
than three weeks ago. However, this optimism was tempered by the
feeling that part of the current increase in domestic activity probably
reflected Holiday spending, and he guessed that this spending might in
turn be undergirded by the psychology resulting from the Cuban episode.
Accordingly, it might be largely of a transitional nature. About the
end of January it might be possible to make a more realistic reading
of the fundamental strength of the economy.
Mr. Mitchell expressed agreement with the view that there were
some disquieting aspects in the present situation. The Cuban crisis
was an exogenous factor that had introduced something completely new
in the area of expectations with regard to the domestic situation, and
perhaps also the foreign trade picture. It was a force that might be
described as roughly equivalent to a small tax cut as far as the domestic
situation was concerned. Perhaps the effect had already largely worn
off, but it might have more endurance than one would suppose. As to
the balance of payments, the basic problem was still present. Many
people seemed to be coming to a realization that the problem was a great
deal more intractable than they had at first thought. The obvious
remedies having already been applied, there now seemed to be a tendency
toward relying on foreigners to do something or to hope that the natural

12/4/62 -44
course of events would in some way be helpful. This basic problem
was one that the Open Market Committee could not do a great deal about,
except to take such actions as would lend encouragement to its solution.
Mr. Mitchell went on to say that the Cuban situation and the
anticipation of a tax cut seemed to have been instrumental in producing
a booming stock market, which in turn had given rise to more rosy ex
pectations than he believed sober consideration would justify. While
the situation was better on the face of things, he was not sure that
was the case if one looked deeply enough.
Mr. Mitchell commented that he was puzzled about the recent
performance of the money supply. To date he had not heard a satisfactory
explanation of its behavior. The Committee's directive specified as an
objective the encouragement of a further increase in the money supply,
and the Committee had been working at it. While it was not clear what
had happened, it was a fact that a significant rise in the money supply
had occurred. The answer might involve the matter of seasonal adjustment.
In any event, however, it seemed clear that it was not easy to bring
about a continuing rise in the money supply in the present kind of
environment. If the Committee wanted to accomplish this objective,
apparently it would have to follow a more aggressive policy of monetary
ease. In his view, one contribution that monetary policy could make
in the current environment would be to keep long-term rates from
rising until there was a period of seasonal weakness, at which time
such rates should move down a bit.

12/4/62 -45
Mr. Mitchell suggested that the stock market had perhaps over
discounted the possibility of a tax cut. This was a hazard, for such
a cut was not assured. Even less could one foresee the nature of a
tax cut, its size, or the economic impact. The Committee should not
fall into a similar trap by trying to offset the psychology that had
been engendered by an expectation that might not be realized.
In conclusion, Mr. Mitchell said that in terms of policy his
views were close to those expressed by Mr. Mills and Mr. Robertson.
Mr. Fulton reported that in the main the rate of business
activity in the Fourth District appeared to be stepping up, although
some instances of intermittent backsliding also were seen. In a sense,
the current movement represented a recovery from previous setbacks.
In any event, however, business sentiment appeared to be more optimistic.
Although the available statistics as yet did not measure up to the
improved sentiment, construction activity appeared to have increased more in
the District than nationally. Department store sales had picked up, and
retailers were looking forward to an excellent Christmas season, with
appliances going well. The unemployment picture had improved somewhat.
The rate of steel production had been improving, largely as a
result of buying by the automobile companies, which were now having to
buy for current production because their inventories were fairly well
drawn down. The auto industry was quite optimistic about a continuation
of good sales through the rest of this model year. In light of some

12/4/62 -46
indication that the steel labor contract might be reopened next summer,
some of the users of steel might begin to stockpile in the first quarter.
There is usually a decline of about 6 per cent in the first quarter,
but the steel industry expected production to continue at about the
present level, with part of the production going into stockpiling.
The machine tool industry had been heartened by the volume of
new orders. Some businessmen and bankers now felt that the tax credit
was becoming more of a factor in buying plans and projections for the
coming year than had at first been thought. It was now believed that
manufacturers would be encouraged to replace machinery and improve
their processes. There seemed to be a sound basis for thinking that
this would develop into actual orders later in the year.
Turning to policy, Mr. Fulton said he came out at approximately
the same point as Messrs. Hayes and Ellis. The good degree of liquidity
of both corporations and individuals afforded evidence that monetary
policy had made available purchasing power that, when activated, could
provide strong economic growth. In view of the degree of ease that had
been maintained over a protracted period, it seemed appropriate to him
to shift now to a somewhat lesser degree of ease. He felt that free
reserves of around $300-$350 million would be more appropriate than
$450 million. He would not favor changing the discount rate at this
time, but a slight change in the directive to eliminate the reference
to the emergency situation seemed appropriate.

12/4/62 -47
Mr. Bopp said there was nothing of significance to report from
the Third District. Just as he was not particularly excited about the
turn of events nationally, he found nothing particularly exciting in
business and banking at the local level.
Mr. Bopp went on to say that he would continue policy essentially
unchanged for the next two weeks. He continued to believe that greater
ease could be helpful in further stimulating the domestic economy. He
was not convinced that recent more favorable statistics and more optimistic
sentiment really changed the important fact that the economy was operating
at less than optimum levels and was likely to continue in this unsatis
factory state. Given the recent changes in public psychology, however,
it was questionable whether overt moves toward more ease could be
explained convincingly to the public.
In recommending a continuation of present policy, Mr. Bopp said,
he would like to see a continuation of those efforts to provide ease
that had a minimum balance of payments and psychological impacts. He
would avoid downward pressure on short-term rates and would make no
change in the discount rate. He would favor continued open market
operations in longer term issues. As to the directive, he would renew
it, with deletion of the sentence referring to the international emer
gency situation. The directive, on this occasion, also should refer to
operations during the next two, rather than three weeks.

12/4/62 -48
Mr. Bryan reported a marked change of sentiment in the Sixth
District, which seemed to be supported to some extent by available
statistics. While there had been small offsetting changes in nonfarm
and manufacturing employment, there had also been a considerable in
crease in average hours worked. There had been a sharp rise in per
sonal income, and a good behavior in the District in terms of bank
loans and other financial aspects.
Mr. Bryan said that he would favor no change in policy at this
time because he did not see that the current slight upward movement in
the economy was assured of growing into boom proportions. He thought
that System policy had been good, and in the absence of factors clearly
suggesting a boom he saw no reason for a change in policy at the moment.
In fact, if he were compelled to make a choice, it would be for a move
along the lines indicated by Mr. Mills rather than a drift toward a
lesser degree of ease. As he saw it, the economy had the natural re
sources at the present time to grow at a considerably faster rate than
it was now growing. While he did not know what rate of growth would be
supportable without inflation, he believed that a 3 per cent growth
rate would be tolerable without pressing on available resources of men
and material. Accordingly, he would advocate that the Committee con
tinue to provide reserves for seasonal purposes and in addition provide
for a small growth factor. He would not want to burden the Account
Manager with an instruction in terms of either total or free reserves
at this particular time.

12/4/62 -49-
Mr. Shuford reported that during October and the first part
of November activity in the Eighth District continued at about the
level of summer and early fall. It could be said that the District
economy was operating at a high level without appreciable or signif
icant changes. Total employment in the major labor markets remained
at about the level that had prevailed since May. Business loans at
weekly reporting banks could be said on balance to have been unchanged
since midsummer. Actually they had increased somewhat for the District
as a whole, but business loans in Memphis declined in November as the
result of commodity dealers reducing inventories in anticipation of a
price-support decline. Total deposits had risen at an annual rate of
7 per cent since May, and bank debits had continued to rise moderately.
Looking at the economy as a whole, it would be difficult to say with
any degree of certainty that there had been any significant improve
ment from the high-level plateau that had prevailed through the summer
and early fall.
As to policy, Mr. Shuford noted that since August bank reserves
and the money supply had increased rather significantly. He was not
able to put his finger on exactly why this had happened. Despite
monetary expansion, however, the three-month bill rate had remained
above 2-3/4 per cent, and more recently was above 2.8 per cent. He
recognized, of course, that this reflected largely seasonal credit
demands and the increased supply of bills by the Treasury. In view of

12/4/62 -50
the continuing large unused capacity and the lack of upward pressure
on prices, it was his view that the Committee should continue the
policy that had been followed during the past three weeks, particularly
since the Committee would be meeting again in two weeks. He was pleased
with what had happened during the past period and would like to see
these conditions continue. In terms of free reserves, he would suggest
something in the neighborhood of $400-$450 million.
Mr. Balderston said he started in his thinking with the premise
that an international balance of payments crisis might be getting closer.
That premise seemed to him to provide the focal point for the thinking
of the Committee now and in the near future. It was based on the fact
that the effort to move toward a basic balance of payments had not been
successful during the current year. In fact, if adjustment was made
for advance debt repayments to the United States, the figures appeared
slightly worse this year than a year ago. This would be a shock when
it was understood by the financial world. Moreover, this unhappy re
sult had occurred despite the fact that this country's largest customers
abroad had been enjoying good business. Also, as a result of the
failure to make progress toward international equilibrium, the willing
ness of foreign central banks to hold dollars might diminish. The
Federal Reserve System could not, of course, control foreign spending
and lending or keep costs from rising. However, the problem of keep
ing costs from rising as fast as those in other industrialized nations

12/4/62 -51
was one with which the System could assist, even if monetary policy
was only one of the forces at work. And the System would be at fault
if excessive liquidity were to cause funds to flow abroad more heavily.
Mr. Balderston then turned to a more immediate problem that
he thought would cause the Committee concern after the December 18
meeting. That problem involved how to hold short-term rates as high
as they had been. According to the results of certain calculations
made for the Treasury a year ago, bill rates might be expected to fall
under some seasonal pressure for several months following Christmas.
The pattern suggested that if market forces were left to their own
devices, bill rates might fall as much as two-thirds of a point due to
seasonal influences.
Mr. Balderston noted that the $450 million average of free
reserves for November was the highest in many months. Also, from the
low point reached in August the money supply had been rising at an
annual rate of 5.8 per cent, and reserves behind private deposits at
a rate of 7.5 per cent. This led to the question whether the Committee
should delay reducing the level of free reserves until the next meet
ing or whether some reduction should occur at once. In his belief,
the Committee should maintain about the present state of affairs during
the seasonal peak of the next two weeks. His principal concern was
that before the December 18 meeting the members of the Committee should
contemplate how to offset subsequent bill rate pressures that might

12/4/62 -52
develop. Specifically, he felt that he would favor at that time a de
cisive reduction in the level of free reserves. A supplemental weapon
would be a change in Regulation Q to raise the permissible interest
rate ceiling on time deposits with maturities from 90 days to six
months, in order that such rates might be more competitive with bill
rates. If pressure on bill rates should come chiefly from nonbank
demand, such a move might help to offset slightly the forces tending
to push bill rates down.
In conclusion, Mr. Balderston said he would leave the policy
directive unchanged except for the omission of the last sentence of the
first paragraph, which had reference to thee mergency situation incident
to the Cuban crisis.
Chairman Martin began his comments by discussing the problem
involved in deriving a consensus on the appropriate course of monetary
policy from the varying shades of opinion expressed by members of the
Committee. He indicated that he had serious doubt concerning the value
of a series of close votes on the precise degree of ease that should be
sought.
Turning for a moment to an expression of his own views, the
Chairman commented that he continued to believe that the balance of
payments problem was not separable from the domestic economic problem.
In his opinion, if the Committee had erred, it had erred on the side
of trying to do too much to stimulate the domestic economy and not

12/4/62 -53
giving sufficient weight to the balance of payments, for he believed
that the latter problem was the largest shadow over the domestic
business situation at the present time.
Chairman Martin continued by saying that in essence all of
the members of the Committee were for easy money today. Although
varying shades of opinion had been expressed, no one was talking about
tight money. In his view, the danger of speculation was very real in
light of the current availability of funds. Therefore, if he were
formulating policy on his own, he would be moving in the direction of
slightly less ease. He had expressed this position at the November 13
meeting, and his view had not changed. As he saw it, there had been
no significant change of conditions in the intervening period except
for the change in business sentiment that had been mentioned so
frequently during today's meeting.
The Chairman repeated that the views expressed at this meet
ing were directed to easy money or slightly less easy money. A poll
apparently would result in a slight majority in favor of one or the
other of those positions. The majority of the views expressed were
close enough together, though, so that in his opinion the sensible
course would be to combine them into a position of no change in policy
for the next two weeks. Of course, if anyone felt his position was
far enough from that point, he could be recorded in the negative.

12/4/62 -54
As he had said, Chairman Martin noted, his personal preference
would be to move in the direction of slightly less ease, but he did not
think this was sufficiently important, in terms of the forthcoming two
week interval, to put such a relatively slight shading of opinion to a
vote. While it might be that his conviction was not well founded, he
failed to see how the Committee could make a judgment on the basis of
slight variations in the degree of ease when, for example, it was
talking about a level of free reserves that no one could really pin
point. To a considerable extent, the Committee must rely on the good
judgment of the Account Manager, who in his (the Chairman's) opinion
had been performing extremely well recently under difficult conditions.
The Chairman then suggested that a poll be taken on no change
in policy and no change in the directive except for the elimination of
the last sentence of the first paragraph, which stated that it was the
Committee's policy to cushion such unsettlement in money markets as
might stem from international developments of an emergency or near
emergency character.
Mr. Hayes questioned whether no change in policy was an appro
priate expression of the consensus. As he had followed the discussion
around the table, it appeared to him that the majority sentiment favored
at least a very slight drift in the direction of less ease or, to put
it another way, an erring on the side of less ease. He added that what
he was talking about here was something that would not go as far as he

12/4/62 -55
himself would like, but he did feel that a slight erring on the side
of less ease was probably the majority position.
Chairman Martin replied that the point he had been trying to
make earlier, and which he thought Mr. Hayes' comments highlighted,
related to the difficulty in drawing a line between, for example, a
slight drift in the direction of less ease and a shift to the extent
Mr. Hayes would prefer. He was not quite sure how best to approach
shadings of that kind.
Mr. Mitchell then suggested that a poll be taken on no change
in policy so that it could be seen what that produced.
In reply to a question as to what base should be used in de
ciding for or against no change in policy, Chairman Martin expressed
the view that it was not appropriate to use as a base the conditions
that currently prevailed as the result of operations since the pre
ceding meeting. For instance, the level of free reserves that had
developed might please one member and displease another member, but
the Manager may not necessarily have been trying to achieve any
particular level. Instead, the Manager may have been doing the best
he could to produce the general degree of ease that seemed appropriate
within the framework of the policy expressed by the Committee. When
mention was made of no change in policy, the Chairman felt that that
should mean no change in the policy that the Committee had previously
agreed upon.

12/4/62 -56-
Mr. Mills commented that he would be more inclined to look
at policy in terms of results. For instance, the decision at the
November 13 meeting had been to make no change in policy. However,
the results since that meeting represented a definite change, in his
opinion a change for the better.
Chairman Martin replied that Mr. Mills was certainly entitled
to that view with respect to the results of operations since the last
meeting. Others, of course, might have a different view. His only
point, the Chairman said, was that he did not think the Account Manager
ought to be criticized when he had proceeded in accord with what he
understood to be the policy judgment of the Committee.
Mr. Mills commented that it had not been the intent of his
previous remarks to criticize the Account Manager, who did his best
to carry out the intent of the Committee and work within the terms of
the directive. However, there were times when market circumstances
would alter the results that the Manager's actions had sought to
achieve.
The Chairman then remarked that he would not want to proceed
on an assumption that the Account Manager was being asked to make no
change in a policy that conformed to a concept of how satisfactory
the policy previously agreed upon by the Committee had worked out.
What he had had in mind earlier was to obtain the Committee's views
on whether to make no change in the policy that the Committee had

12/4/62 -57
agreed upon at the preceding meeting. He then proposed again that the
Committee members express themselves on making no change in the policy
that reflected the prevailing position of the Committee at the November
13 meeting. This would imply no change in the directive except for
the elimination of the last sentence of the first paragraph.
Mr. King inquired whether it was the understanding that the
last sentence of the first paragraph of the directive referred specif
ically to the crisis presented by the Cuban situation, as contrasted
with an international balance of payments crisis, and the comments in
reply brought out that this was the context within which the sentence
was originally included in the directive. It was noted that the last
clause of the preceding sentence called for avoiding money market
conditions unduly favorable to capital outflows internationally.
Chairman Martin then suggested that the members of the Committee
be polled as to whether they would favor any change from the policy
agreed upon at the meeting on November 13, 1962, and five members
(Messrs. Hayes, Ellis, Fulton, Mills, and Shepardson) indicated that
they would favor a change in position, while seven (Messrs. Martin,
Balderston, Bryan, Deming, King, Mitchell, and Robertson) indicated
that they would favor continuing the same policy as that approved on
November 13. Mr. Mills stated that his position favoring a change
represented his view that there should be a continuation of the policy
of the preceding meeting as reflected by the results of open market

12/4/62 -58-
operations since November 13. Messrs. Hayes, Ellis, Fulton, and
Shepardson stated that they favored a shift in the direction of less
ease than was contemplated by the policy adopted on November 13.
There followed further consideration of the directive to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York in light of the consensus that had
just been established, and it was agreed that the directive should be
presented for action by the Committee in a form which, aside from a
technical change to recognize that there would be only a two-week
(rather than a three-week) interval before the next meeting, would
involve no change from the directive approved at the November 13
meeting except for the elimination of the last sentence of the first
paragraph.
Accordingly, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York was authorized and directed,
until otherwise directed by the Committee,
to execute transactions in the System
Open Market Account in accordance with the
following current economic policy directive:
In view of the recent stability of economic activity, with
a margin of underutilized resources and an absence of infla
tionary pressures, it is the current policy of the Federal Open
Market Committee to encourage moderate further increase in bank
credit and the money supply, while avoiding money market con
ditions unduly favorable to capital outflows internationally.
To implement this policy, operations for the System Open
Market Account during the next two weeks shall be conducted
with a view to providing moderate reserve expansion in the
banking system and to fostering a steady tone in money markets.

12/4/62 -59
Votes for this action: Messrs.
Martin, Balderston, Bryan, Deming, Ellis,
Fulton, King, Mills, Mitchell, Robertson,
and Shepardson. Vote against this action:
Mr. Hayes.
Mr. Hayes stated that his vote against the wording of the direc
tive in the foregoing form was on the same grounds as his vote against
the directive approved at the meeting on November 13, 1962, namely, he
felt that the wording of the directive gave too little attention to the
difficult international balance of payments situation and that it placed
its main emphasis on the domestic situation.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Open Market Committee
would be held on Tuesday, December 18, 1962.
In this connection, Chairman Martin noted that it was contem
plated that an afternoon session would be held on December 18, at which
time there would be discussion of the formulation of the Committee's
current economic policy directives. He suggested that in the interim
the members of the Committee also give some thought to the problem
involved in reaching decisions on monetary policy when the opinions on
the objectives that should be sought differed in terms of degree.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary