A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, January 23, 1962, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Irons
Mr. King
Mr. Mills
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Swan
Mr. Wayne
Mr. Fulton, Alternate
Messrs. Ellis, Johns, and Deming, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bopp, Bryan, Scanlon, and Clay, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Atlanta, Chicago, and Kansas City, respectively 1/
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Baughman, Coldwell, Einzig, Garvy, Noyes,
and Ratchford, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Messrs. Holland and Koch, Advisers, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Furth, Adviser, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
Mr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
1/ Mr. Bryan joined the meeting, with Mr. Brandt, at the point indicated
in the minutes.

1/23/62 -2
Mr. Broida, Economist, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Eastburn, Hostetler, Jones, and Tow, Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Philadelphia, Cleveland, St. Louis, and Kansas
City, respectively
Messrs. Stone, Brandt, and Litterer, Assistant Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of New
York, Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
held on December 19, 1961, were approved.
Under date of January 5, 1962, there had been sent to each member
and alternate member of the Federal Open Market Committee, and to each
President not currently a member of the Committee, a copy of the report
of audit of the System Open Market Account made by the Division of
Examinations of the Board of Governors as at the close of business
August 25, 1961. The report, which has been placed in the Committee's
files, was submitted to the Secretary of the Committee under date of
October 3, 1961, in accordance with the action of the Federal Open Market
Committee at its meeting on June 21, 1939, as reaffirmed most recently
at the meeting on March 7, 1961.
Chairman Martin inquired whether any of the members of the
Committee wished to comment on the report, and there was no indication
to such effect.

1/23/62 -3.
Accordidngly, the audit report was
noted and accepted without objection.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report of open market operations covering the period
January 9 through January 22, 1962. A copy of this report has been
placed in the files of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written report, Mr. Rouse made the
following comments:
The results of open market operations since the last
meeting of the Committee have not been entirely satisfactory
because of the persistently greater ease in the money market
than I think the Committee wold have preferred. Free reserves
averaged $548m illionf or the week ended January 10 and $464
million for the week ended January 17. Federal funds have
traded below 3 per cent durimngo st of the period, especially
in the last two busiess days, when they declined to 1-1/2 per
cent and 1-1/4 per cent, reflecting in part the flow of country
bank excess reserves to the money centers. However, over a
longer period these developments have been largely due to a
continuing unusually high level of float and a substantial
decline in required reserves, both of which factors have been
hard to anticipate and deal with. Treasury bill rates have
declined from the 2-3/4 per cent level for 91-day bills as a
result of an increasing interest in bills from any sources,
including banks having surplus reserves. The average rate for
91-day bills in yesterday's auction was about 2.68 per cent as
compared with 2.77 per cent in the previous week's auction the
average for the long bills was 2.88 per cent yesterday, compared
with 2.97 per cent a week ago.
We have been reluctant to sell Treasury bills more heavily
in order to deal with the bill rate because of the possibility
that float would decline sharply overnight, in which case we
would most likely have to reverse our operations and supply
reserves in volume. While we cannot say even closely when float
will go down, projections for the next two weeks indicate that
we may have to supply as much as $500 million of reserves to
keep reserve availability about where it has been. Any sizeable
purchases of bills cannot help but push bill rates even lower

1/23/62
and it seems unlikely that any large amount of securities
other than bills would be available for outright purchase.
In any case, it would probably not be appropriate to buy
much in the intermediate area in the face of the forthcoming
February Treasury refinancing. We may, however, be able to
achieve something through repurchase agreements.
The Treasury's borrowing of new cash through the reopening
of the 4 per cent bonds of 1969 was a moderate success in that
the offering was adequately covered with most of the subscrip
tions being from smaller commercial banks, as the Treasury had
anticipated. Since the bonds were well placed in the subscrip
tion, the floating supply of the issue has been relatively small.
And to the extent that there is a floating supply it is probably
concentrated in the hands of large banks that went in on an
underwriting basis and that are experienced participants in the
market. As a result, the after market has been a good deal
better than many in the market thought it would be when the 60
per cent allotment was announced. That subscriptions were not
greater can be attributed to the fact that the larger commercial
banks were generally not interested in extending maturities as
far as 1969 in the face of a probable offering of a shorter
intermediate issue in the February refunding operation. The
Treasury took a calculated risk in offering the 4s of 1969,
believing that it was better to take advantage now of an oppor
tunity to extend to 1969 rather than wait until the February
refunding, even though this move might create a problem for the
refunding. The Treasury also took into consideration its
unwieldy debt structure and the opinion of foreigners with
respect to how the debt is managed.
It appears now that the February refunding might have to
be limited to a short "anchor" issue and something in the 4-5
year area, for which there still seems to be a good appetite.
The market generally is expecting the refunding to be carried
out on an exchange basis and is currently bidding modest pre
miums on the maturing issues. The maturing issues total about
$11 billion in three issues of notes, of which over $6 billion
are held by the public. An announcement of the terms is to be
made on February 1.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the open market transactions
during the period January 9 through January
22, 1962, were approved, ratified, and con
firmed.

1/23/62
The economic review at this meeting was in the form of an auditory
visual presentation, for which Messrs. Cardon, Garfield, Hersey, Axilrod,
and Trueblood of the Board's staff joined the meeting.
The introductory portion of the text of the economic presentation
was as follows:
In February last year the recession ended. The decline
had lasted about as long as earlier postwar declines but had
been much milder, and the turnaround came with production
still considerably above the preceding low point of April 1958.
The initial rise was sharp, as in 1958, but in contrast
to 1954. By July, before the defense program was expanded,
industrial output was up 10 per cent, to 112 per cent of the
1957 average. From then until October there was little
further rise, but later advances brought the index to 115 in
December--nearly 5 per cent above the mid-1960 level.
Gross national product figures, when adjusted for price
changes, tell about the same story for activity in the whole
economy. Last year, with prices rising little, GNP in current
dollars rose from an annual rate of $501 billion in the first
quarter to $542 billion in the fourth quarter. This quarter
the rate may well exceed $550 billion.
Meanwhile activity abroad, which rose further early in
1961, leveled off later. In Western Europe, industrial pro
duction has been advancing rapidly for a decade-and-a -half
with only minor pauses--apparently little influenced by
recurring recession in the United States.
So far, prices of industrial commodities generally have
not shown the advance usually evident by this stage of the
cycle, lending support to the view that this recovery may be
more sustainable than some others. Sensitive prices, which
did rise from January to August, have since fluctuated within
a narrow range. Since the oNfo vemberen d steel scrap prices
have risen, accompanying a strong advance in steel output,
which may reflect in part building of inventories in antici
pation of a possible strike this summer.
While the general shift from inventory liquidation to
inventory replenishment came unusually early this time and
was an important element in the initial recovery in demand
and production, the fourth quarter rise in aggregate demand

1/23/62 -6-
reflected almost entirely a sharp increase in final demands,
especially consumer demands. The fourth quarter rate of
inventory accumulation was not especially high.
While demand and production have increased considerably
since last winter, there still appears to be enough unused
capacity to permit some further rise in activity without
creating strong pressures on resources or prices. How much
is one of the tough uetions. Important shortages may
develop in particular areas while the economy at large or
even the manufacturing sector is still operating well below
capacity. The postwar high for manufacturing, reached in
mid-1953, was 94 per cent. Also, changing expectations as
well as changing rates of act ivity may affect demand. This
time, however, with a climate of opinion in which fewer people
regard inflationary developments as inevitable, it may be
possible to achieve higher levels of capacity utilization
than in other recent periods without developing strong infla
tionary pressures. The current situation thus holds out hope
for the future, but it also continues to present problems which
have become all too familiar. While nonagricultural employment
rose by a million after early 1961, the number unemployed in
December represented about 6 per cent of the civilian labor
force. This was slightly higher than the proportion unemployed
at the corresponding stage of the previous upswing in early
1959, and at no time during 1959-60 did unemployment fall
appreciably below 5 per cent.
The balance of payments also remains a major problem.
The high trade surplus early in 1961 reflected a low level of
imports due to recession in this country. Transfers of gold
and dollars were temporarily in our favor in the second quarter,
partly because foreign governments made special debt repayments
to the United States. At current levels of U. S. demand for
imports, the trade surplus is again too small to cover our
adverse balance in other payments and receipts. Private capital
outflows, both short-term and long-term, have been an important
element in this adverse balance.
Developments leading to speculative buying and a broad
rise in prices in this country would aggravate the balance of
payments situation and have disturbing repercussions on the
domestic economy Thus another problem, as the economy moves
toward higher utilization of available resources, will be to
avoid inflationary developments.
During the past year, an increased supply of bank reserves,
together with an increase flow of saving into financial assets,

1/23/62 -7-
helped borrowers to obtain a growing volume of funds in
credit markets without a sustained or substantial rise in
interest rates. Demands for credit, mainly Federal and
long-term private credit, expanded after the early months
of last year, and for the year as a whole 25 per cent more
funds were raised in credit and equity markets than in 1960.
Increases in bank loans and investments supplied a
larger portion of credit demands than in most other years.
The public's dollar holdings of liquid assets increased
substantially during the year, but not so rapidly as GNP.
Thus the ratio declined--as it has in other recovery periods.
Partly as a result of monetary and debt management
policies, directed toward fostering economic recovery and at
the same time not encouraging an outflow of funds abroad,
interest rates have moved within a narrow range since mid-1960.
They did not decline as low as in early 1958, nor did they
show the sharp rise that followed later in 1958.
The economic presentation also included sections on the U. S.
balance of payments, recent demand changes in the United States, recent
changes in employment and unemploment, prices, monetary and fiscal
developments, and the Federal budget. The concluding portion of the
presentation was as follows:
We may well ask what general observations emerge from
our rather detailed analysis. What is there significant
that can be said in a few words about the past developments,
future prospects, and current problems relating to the
balance of international payments, unemployment, and
inflationary potentials?
First of all, in discussing production, employmnt,
demands for capital goods, interest rates, and the like,
repeated reference has been made to the mild nature of the
1960-61 recession. While the U. S. economy did not show
the sort of stability evident in Western Europe, it did
show less decline this time than in any other postwar
recession.
Second, the turnaround in early 1961 started from a
trough much above that in April 1958. The rise in industrial
production from the 1958 low to the 1961 low was more than

1/23/62
twice as large as the advance from the 1957 high to the 1959-60
high. Moreover, although unemployment is still disturbingly
high, it did not reach as high a level in the recent trough as
it did in 1958.
A third point emerging is that the current recovery has
its own characteristics. Unlike 1954, when any real advance
was delayed for several months after the decline ended, recovery
this time began immediately after the low was reached. Unlike
1958, the 1961 increase in activity slowed down after only five
months of rapid advance, with industrial production in the
second five months rising only three per cent rather than seven.
Commodity prices meanwhile have been unusually steady in
this recovery. Consumer prices are still increasing somewhat,
it is true, but the advance lately has been chiefly in the
service area and there the rate of increase has been less rapid
than earlier. Belief in the inevitability of inflationary
developments appears to be less widespread than it was earlier,
although yields on common stocks are lower relative to those
on bonds than early in 1959.
Interest rates in this upswing have risen relatively little,
following only moderate declines during the recession. Fluctua
tions in business profits have been less sharp than in earlier
cycles, and this has been a principal factor making for less
drastic shifts in Federal revenue and the various net budget
positions.
The rather generally moderate nature of developments in
business and finance, moreover, has permitted continuation of
a policy of making bank reserves readily available longer during
this recovery than in earlier periods, even though operations
have endeavored to discourage the outflow of short-term funds
to markets abroad.
This brings us to the future, and here the observations
mainly take the form of questions. Will the generally moderate
nature of the recovery and the greater stability of prices so
far tend to make expansion more sustainable this time? It
should, but immediately questions come to mind about the
possibility of inventory accumulation in anticipation of a
steel strike, as in the first half of 1959. Will the develop
ments then be repeated? It is easier to say that history
seldom repeats itself than it is to see a clear path to an
early settlement of the strike.
A broader question is how much further the use of available
resources can be expanded without creating strong upward price

1/23/62
pressures? Surely some distance, and perhaps farther than
before, if it is generally felt that inflation is not inevitable.
What are the directions in which progress can be sought in
the balance-of-payments situation? Avoidance of cost and price
rises is one of the most basic essentials of any program in this
area and dampening of incentives to lend and invest abroad is
another.
These are all problems that cannot be solved by monetary
and fiscal policies alone. Efforts must be made by business
and labor to achieve and maintain a cost and price structure
that will stimulate demands from abroad and can sustain demands
at home. Thus, with an approach to a balanced Federal Government
budget in prospect, along with the existence of a substantial but
not excessive degree of financial liquidity in the economy, the
need for fiscal and monetary restraints, or stimulants, will
depend mainly upon demands as they develop in the private economy.
It was understood that copies of the text of the economic presenta
tion and the accompanying charts would be sent to the Committee and would
be placed in the files of the Committee.
Mr. Hayes then presented the following statement of his views with
respect to the business outlook and credit policy:
It seems to me that the over-all domestic business situation
has changed very little over the last two weeks. Although the
signs of a possible acceleration that were apparent two weeks
ago have faded, nevertheless the prospect is favorable for
continued healthy expansion. It was encouraging that the strong
advance in GNP in the fourth quarter was achieved without help
from inventory accumulation. Inflationary overtones are still
conspicuous by their absence, and there are no definite signs
yet of any unsound steel inventory buildup in anticipation of
a steel strike. In contrast with some softening in automobile
demand in December, consumption of other durables and of non
durables improved.
While the expansion in total bank loans in December was less
than might have been expected from the earlier data on weekly
reporting member banks alone, it would still appear that there
has been some modest improvement in bank loan demand, after making

1/23/62 -10-
allowances for special factors, including tax borrowing and
year-end window-dressing transactions. Business loans have
now risen just as much above the recession trough as they
did in the corresponding period following the 1958 cyclical
trough. Comments of New York City bank loan officers tend
to confirm the view that loan demand is rising a little better
than seasonally. The latest statistics on the money supply
and related data suggest that the economy's degree of liquidity
is generally appropriate.
In contrast with the domestic scene, the balance-of
payments position remains decidedly disturbing. It is true
that the preliminary estimate of the December deficit is a
trifle better than the estimate available at the last meeting.
But it still points to a deficit in the fourth quarter of $5
to $5-1/2 billion, seasonally adjusted annual rate, and a
deficit of $3 billion for 1961 (excluding special debt repay
ments). The merchandise trade surplus has behaved surprisingly
well, with some apparent increase from the third to the fourth
quarter--but some drop in the months to come might reasonably
be exected on the basis of cyclical phasing here and abroad.
Meanwhile the recent over-all deficit figures suggest that
short-term capital movements, including "unrecorded transactions,"
have been moving heavily against this country. While it is
doubtless better to have the deficit attributable mainly to these
short-term flows than to more basic long-term deficiencies, it
is the size of the over-all deficit that determines how many
additional dollars are being placed in the hands of foreigners
and therefore how large an additional drain on our gold stock is
being potentially created. Moreover, the trend of the over-all
deficit is undoubtedly causing a good deal of concern abroad.
We cannot afford a complacent attitude toward such developments.
Monetary policy cannot do the whole job of remedying the balance
of payments, nor should we give the public the impression that
we think it can do the job; but the Federal Reserve is as much
concerned with protecting the international standing of the
dollar as any other arm of the Government, and in some respects
more directly so.
I shall not try to go into detail on the relationship
between the heavily adverse short-term capital movement and
the relative position of interest rates and credit availability
here and abroad. The relationship has been well spelled out in
previous discussions at Committee meetings and in various memo
randat o which the Committee members have had access. In general,

1/23/62 -11-
however, it is hard to deny the importance of the fact that
this country is just too easy a place in which to borrow and
not a sufficiently attractive place in which to invest. As
the domstic economy continues to improve, we can well afford
to take steps to modify this set of conditions and try to
induce some return flow of capital, without incurring undue
risks domestically.
In terms of open market policy this means that we should
edge towards less ease, with close attention to short-term
market rates. I can see no reason whatever for maintaining
free reserves at approximately the same level as late last
summer, in view of all the economic changes that have occurred
since. I would think we should try to keep the ninty-day
bill rate above 2-3/4 per cent, and that we would prefer to
see it move towards the 3 per cent level, even though it be
at the expense of lower reserves, however measured. The
current economic policy directive could be couched in such
terms.
It would be well if a good start along these lines could
be made between now and the time of announcement of the
Treasury's February financing. Most signs now point to the
likelihood of our having to proceed further in this tightening
process after the refunding is completed. It would be fairer
to the market to make some start, at least, before the terms
of the offering are settled, to minimize later accusations that
we have "pulled the rug out" from under the subscribers to the
new issues. By the same token, this would suggest that we urge
the Treasury to use shorter-term issues, which are less vulner
able pricewise, and to price the generously.
In our Bank my fellow officers and I, as well as our
directors, have done a good deal of soul-searching lately on
the subject of a possible discount rate increase. The balance
of-payments problem is serious enough to raise the question
whether we should not act on the rate in advance of a market
rate rise, in order to emphasize the increase as a signal of
our determination to do our part in meeting the critical inter
national problem. On the other hand, I recognize that we have
very little time before an "even keel" policy is once more
required. I also recognize that discount rate action for which
the way has not been paved through market rate developments could
subject the System to accusations of premature tightening that
might endanager the domestic expansion, especially if it gave rise
to exaggerated expectations as to future monetary restraints.

1/23/62 12
At the same time, we cannot escape the fact that we shall be
subject to severe criticism if inaction on our part should
contribute to a new dollar crisis.
On balance, I would be inclined to pass up the idea of
a discount rate move in the immediate future, with the thought
that a move may very well be seriously considered following
the next meeting. In the meantime I would hope that spokesmen
for the System would stress to the Administration the serious
ness with which we regard the international outlook and would
urge a more prompt and vigorous concerted Government program
to meet the balance-of-payments outlook as we appraise it--in
which program a contribution in the field of monetary policy,
as set forth above, would play a part
Mr. Johns said he found himself in agreement with the view expressed
by Mr. Hayes that the System should be moving toward less ease. Although
he recognized the differences between this period of recovery and expansion
and similar periods since the Treasury-Federal Reserve Accord in 1951, it
seemed to him, nevertheless, that the time was either here or rapidly
approaching when the monetary policy that the System had been following
must be reconsidered. It appeared to him that in no similar period of
the business cycle since the Accord had monetary policy been so easy, even
taking into consideration the fact that velocity had not been increasing
as rapidly as in earlier periods. Whether monetary actions were measured
by the rate of change in bank reserves, the rate of change in the money
supply, the change in interest rates, or free reserves, the fact remained
that the System had been and was following an expaansionary policy.
Further, the degree of ease now being pursued was comparable to that of
a year ago, when the country was in recession, which raised the question
whether the same monetary policy was appropriate at such dissimilar points
in the business cycle.

1/23/62 -13-
Mr. Johns said he was inclined to believe that the rate of
increase of reserves and money ought to be permitted to decline, or
caused to decline; he would suggest a decline to about half the rate
of increase that had occurred during the past few months. He would
expect such a decline to be followed by increases in interest rates,
and the Treasury bill rate would probably rise to or above the present
discount rate. At that time, it not before, he would think that the
discount rate should be adjusted upward. Higher interest rates would
be beneficial from the standpoint of the balance of payments, both in
the shorter and the longer run. Further, he found it difficult to have
any great confidence in the view that the danger of inflationary price
rises was less now than it had been in previous periods of expansion
in the past decade. As he recalled, it was not until after this stage
of the business cycle that marked price rises occurred in previous
periods of expansion, and that might also be the case this time.
Mr. Bopp commented that the generally optimistic sentiments of
two weeks ago did not seem quite as strong today. The spurt that seemed
apparent two weeks ago had suggested that the pace of expansion might
have been quickening more than most people were anticipating, and that
it might not be long until evidence was seen of stresses and strains in
the economy. However, the pace of activity now seemed to have settled
down somewhat, and one could feel more secure in advocating a continuation
of the monetary conditions that had prevailed, abstracting the past two

1/23/62 -14.
weeks. There was no evidence of significant price changes, and until
such evidence did appear a presumption would exist on the side of
continuing the degree of monetary ease that had existed prior to the
past week or so. He would recommend such a policy.
Mr. Fulton reported that industrial production continued
generally strong in the Fourth District in the early part of the current
year. Nevertheless, there had been a fairly acute reduction in new car
sales, unemployment had risen a bit more than seasonally, and department
store sales had slipped.
Turning to the steel industry, Mr. Fulton said that orders were
still coming in and that the order books were full for the first quarter
for certain kinds of steel. It was estimated that inventories in the
hands of user were about 11 million tons, which was low in relation to
the present use of steel. However, inventories were expected to build
up to 21 million tons by midyear in anticipation of a strike, whereas a
normal level of inventories at the current rate of consumption would be
about 15 million tons. Therefore, it appeared that the latter part of
this year would be marked by a considerably lower output of steel.
Regardlss of how much talk there might be about not accumulating large
inventories, there were pressures for such accumulation. However,
borrowing to finance the building of inventories had not yet shown up
because the orders for steel were booked for delivery after the first
of the year, even though the steel mills began to accumlate some
inventories prior to that time for future shipment.

1/23/62 -15
In view of the present and prospective borrowing of activity
in the first part of this year from activity in the latter part of the
year, Mr. Fulton said that he would not like to see any drastic revision
of the availability of credit. Free reserves had been more than adequate
in the recent past, however, due to float and other unforeseen conditions.
He would like to see the bill rate maintained at around 2-3/4 per cent,
which probably meant that free reserves would have to be lower than at
present, perhaps between $400 and $450m illion. He would not favor
changing the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Mitchell said he would agree precisely with Mr. Bopp and
roughly with Mr. Fulton. He had only two other comments. First, he
thought there was an increasing tendency to employ what might be called
a count-down technique in monetary management. This involved beginning
with a certain month of trough or peak, counting months from that point,
and concluding that the time had come to make one move or another.
However, the peculiar value of monetary management was in not counting
out actions in advance. Instead, monetary policy should be formulated
according to the events of the moment. When people said that this was
the time to act because a certain number of months had elapsed since a
given point, he would be cautious about accepting that kind of advice.
The second point that he wished to make related to the comments of
Mr. Hayes about the international situation. It might be true that this
country was a good place to borrow for people in countries with higher

1/23/62
interest rates. Nevertheless, one must be cautious about adopting a
particular policy that was at odds with what the domestic economy
required. A move in the direction of higher interest rates would not,
in his opinion, renew the confidence of foreigners in this country.
Such a move would perhaps make it a little harder for American banks
to lend abroad, but this was about as much as the technique could hope
to accomplish. Therefore, while the Open Market Committee should give
thought to what Mr. Hayes was saying, he (Mr. Mitchell) would be
reluctant to move too far in the direction of encouraging higher interest
rates.
At this point Mr. Bryan joined the meeting, along with Mr. Brandt.
Mr. King indicated that he agreed with the point of view expressed
by Mr. Bopp. Developments in the market, as referred to earlier by
Mr. Rouse, should be kept in mind. The seasonal pressure had appeared
that one would normally expect to appear, and in his opinion it would have
been a mistake to try to counteract that pressure fully. In the prevailing
circumstances, he felt the System Account had been handled well during
the past two weeks. There should be no discount rate increase at the
present time.
Mr. Shepardson said that he was inclined to agree with the views
expressed by Messrs. Hayes and Johns. The supply of reserves and money
had been building up at a faster rate than was anticipated. At its two
preceding meetings, the Comittee had talked in terms of leveling off
the rate of growth somewhat, and it seemed to him that the growth rate

1/23/62 -17
should be leveled off. The System should be cognizant of the inter
national situation and make such contribution as it could in light of
that situation. This would call for a trend toward less ease, and he
would concur completely with the appraisal of Mr. Hayes.
Mr. Robertson recalled that at the meeting five weeks ago he
had expressed the view that there should be a gradual edging toward less
ease. Two weeks ago he expressed the same feeling, although his view
was moderated at that time by the advisability of maintaining an even
keel in the light of Treasury financing. Today, however, he did not
have the same view. There appeared to have been a moderating of the
pace of expansion and of credit demands such as to make it appropriate
to continue the degree of ease that the System had been seeking, with
a view to stimulating the domestic economy and thus enabling the
unemployment situation to be dealt with better. For the time being,
therefore, he would continue the same degree of ease that had prevailed,
abstracting the past two weeks, until after the next Treasury financing.
In any event, there was only a week remaining in which the Committee could
do anything. Thereafter, it would want to maintain an even keel, and
in his view the situation was not so clear as to warrant any firming
operation at this particular point. As to the discount rate, this would
be an inappropriate time for a change. However, the time might not be
too far off when a shift to appreciably less ease would be appropriate.
At such time the discount rate perhaps should be raised, but not now.

1/23/62 -18
Mr. Mills said he shared entirely the views stated by Messrs.
Hayes and Johns. He had been of that opinion for many weeks. However,
because of earlier monetary and credit policy decisions and the imminence
of the Treasury's refunding operation, policy formulation was now caught
in midstream. There was no opportunity at present to breast the current
and develop the firmer interest rate structure that in his opinion was
called for by balance-of-payments considerations and the general posture
of the economy. Accordingly, a policy that would produce the modest kind
of restrictiveness that was conceived of at the January 9 meeting of the
Comittee, but which was not achieved, should be the objective until the
next Committee meeting. If events should work in favor of an even more
restrictive policy, however, he would consider it desirable to capitalize
on them.
Looking toward the development of a consensus and the issuance of
instructions to the Account Management, Mr. Mills said he was concerned
about the framework in which the Committee's recent directives were
couched. In that connection he presented the following statement:
Experience with the current economic policy directives
issued at the Committee meetings held on December 19, 1961,
and January 9, 1962, cannot be considered satisfactory.
Essentially the instructions contained in the two paragraphs
of the directives are contradictory because of the practical
difficulty of attempting to develop a firmer interest rate
structure simultaneously with liberally supplying reserves.
As has been demonstrated by actual test, on the occasions
where positive reserve actions have been taken to shore up
Treasury bill rates, the supply of reserves has been reduced

1/23/62 -19
below levels deemed to be consistent with an adequate credit
base, while vice versa on the occasions where reserves have
been supplied to raise their level to a hypothetically
established point, it has tended to bring Treasury bill rates
down unduly. The general result of these diverse actions has
been a tinkering with the short-term interest rate structure
that in effect is a disguised attempt to peg the Treasury bill
rate. As a policy of this sort becomes more widely recognized
in investment circles, opportunities for playing the market
against the Federal Reserve System will be seized upon. (In
that connection, I call the Comittee's attention to an article
in the current issue of Business Week, which refers to the
views of certain former members of the Federal Reserve staff.)
A change in the character of the current economic policy
directives that are presently being issued is imperative because,
even now, the early publication in the Federal Reserve Board's
Annual Report of the record of the year-end meeting of the
Committee may prove to have been harmful. In my opinion, the
content of the current economic policy directive should be
confined to the kind of over-all guidance set out in the first
paragraph of the last two directives, and a second paragraph
such as has followed should be omitted. This refinement in
drafting the directive would serve the purpose of placing the
objectives of Federal Reserve System monetary and credit policy
within the framework of a historic relationship to a calculated
basis of credit availability on which interest rates are deter
mined largely by the interplay of market factors with a minimum
of artificial interference.
Mr. Wayne said that such additional statistical information as
had become available in the Fifth District since the previous Committee
meeting provided a rather substantial echo of the stentorian note sounded
at that meeting by Mr. Noyes. The District economy was showing continued
strength.
Mr. Wayne went on to say that during the past two weeks the Desk
had faced unusual difficulties in attempting to carry out the current
policy directive. Seasonal factors affecting reserves had behaved somewhat

1/23/62 -20
erratically, causing large errors of estimating, and there had been a
slow downward drift in short-term rates. He would have preferred a
lesser downward drift, or none at all, although he recognized the
circumstances involved. At present he would favor no substantial change
in policy, in view of the desirability of maintaining an even keel during
the period of Treasury financing that was just ahead. However, the
directive issued two weeks ago contemplated a three-month bill rate in
the area of 2.8 per cent, and he would try to get back to that level
before the Treasury announcement. For the period immediately ahead,
therefore, he would like to see the bill rate in that area and free
reserves somewhat below $500 million, with priority given to the bill
rate. He would hope that such conditions could be achieved in the next
statement week, after which he would hold as steady as possible during
the Treasury financing. In other words, the period of even keel should
start from a point of less ease than during the past two weeks: about
the same degree of ease that prevailed at the time of the January 9
Committee meeting. He did not feel that a discount rate change would
be advisable at this time. As to the current policy directive, he
would favor renewing the existing directive subject to the interpretation
he had just stated.
Mr. Clay commented that except for the first week, the period
immediately ahead again was one in which Treasury financing was the

1/23/62 -21
dominant consideration in the formulation of monetary policy--calling
for the maintenance of the so-called "even keel." For that first week,
as well as for the period of Treasury financing, monetary policy should
remain essentially unchanged, with approximately the same degree of
ease that had been maintained in recent weeks. So far as the international
balance-of-payments problem was concerned, it would appear in order to
continue the recent goal of about 2-3/4 per cent in the Treasury bill
rate. At the same time, domestic economic developments called for the
continuation of a monetary policy that would encourage expansion in
economic activity. Obviously, this view also would incorporate within
it no change in the Reserve Banks' discount rate.
Considerable encouragement, Mr. Clay noted, had been derived
from the improved consumer performance of the past three months or so,
but it was not a performance of such exuberance that it needed any
dampening down. A strong pick-up in business capital outlays would
appear to be essential to a satisfactory level of total activity. While
enlarged outlays for business equipment began early in this upswing,
available information did not yet give evidence of any pronounced upturn
in total business capital outlays. Residential construction last year
had been encouraging in that the record was better than anticipated, but
present evidence did not indicate any strong expansion in that sector.
Moreover, the pace of economic activity presently was being affected by

1/23/62 -22
stockpiling efforts in anticipation of a possible steel strike. As
mentioned by one Committee member at the January 9 meeting, this impact
needed to be discounted in determining basic monetary policy. When
these things were taken into account, along with the ample supply of
manpower and other resources, and the favorable performance of commodity
prices, the resulting case was one that argued against tightening of
monetary policy quite apart from Treasury financing requirements.
Mr. Scanlon said that in general economic activity in the
Seventh District was showing a favorable trend. However, there was
still considerable elbow room for further increases. As to policy, the
view expressed by Mr. Wayne tended to have appeal to him.
Mr. Deming reported that in December nonagricultural employment
in Minnesota was ahead of the year-ago level by one per cent. Also,
it was estimated by State officials, off the record, that employment
would be about 3 per cent higher this year than in 1961, with unemploy
ment about 1/2 of one percentage point below the 1961 average. While
these figures did not indicate a low level of unemployment, they did
indicate some improvement.
Mr. Deming also reported a rise in time deposits and business
loans in the Ninth District. As to time deposits, most banks were taking
advantage of the higher ceiling and were raising their rates. In the
three weeks ended January 10, total time deposits at city banks, including
savings deposits, moved up almost 3 per cent, a substantially greater

1/23/62 -23
upward movement than at any comparable time in the past and 4 to 6
times as high as the average. The next highest rise on record was
in January 1957, after the rate ceiling had been moved from 2-1/2 to
3 per cent. The one mutual savings bank in Minneapolis reported people
standing in the lobby to deposit money. In sumary, the results of
the rate increases seemed to provide a reasonably clear indication that
the rate of interest paid does make same difference. In large measure,
the gain in total time deposits apparently was coming in the form of
new money, though with some shifting from demand to time deposits.
Within the total of time deposits a significant shift from savings to
time certificates was indicated. As to business loans, during the past
three weeks there had been a contraseasonal increase at city banks.
While this was not a significant movement, it represented a change from
the pattern that had occurred previously. Loan demand, as judged by
bankers, was not expected to be unusually strong, but stronger than in
1961. For the first half of this year, it was anticipated that loans
would average 5 per cent above a year ago.
As to policy, Mr. Deming said he found himself pretty much in
agreement with Mr. Wayne. Although he subscribed to the analysis made
by Mr. Hayes, he did not agree with Mr. Hayes on the matter of timing.
For the next three weeks, he believed that an even keel should be
maintained. He was not quite sure how this thought should be translated
in the directive since, through inadvertence, an even keel was not

1/23/62 -24
maintained during the past two weeks. Essentially, however, he would
favor the degree of ease that the Committee had contemplated achieving
during the past two weeks.
Looking at the calendar, Mr. Deming noted that the statement
week figures for the next week would be released on February 1, the
same day that the Treasury refunding announcement was due to be issued,
and part of an even-keel policy would be to avoid shocking the market
on that date. Consequently, he would temper the goal of a somewhat
higher bill rate by keeping an eye on free reserves in view of the
imminence of the Treasury financing.
Mr. Rouse commented at this point that any lower free reserve
figure for the statement week ending January 31 would be preceded by
a firmer feel in the money market for several days during the statement
week. It might turn out that the Federal funds rate would be more or
less at 3 per cent throughout this period. Therefore, a somewhat lower
free reserve figure would not come as a shock to the market.
Mr. Rouse added that the maintenance of the bill rate at around
2-3/4 per cent had been due in part to special factors, including the
change in maximum permissible interest rates on time and savings deposits,
Treasury financing in the bill area, and year-end credit demands. At
present, reserve positions were about as easy as last fall when the bill
rate was around 2-1/4 - 2-1/2 per cent, and it might be difficult to
maintain the bill rate in the 2-3/4 per cent range.

1/23/62 -25
Mr. Deming said that he would not be concerned if free reserves
ran somewhere between $400 and $450 million, but he would be concerned
if they came out at $250 million right at the time of the Treasury
announcement.
Mr. Rouse commented that the reserve projections for the week
of January 31 assumed a rapid decline in float, which might not occur
due to continued adverse weather conditions. Therefore, the free reserve
figures might work out reasonably well.
Mr. Swan reported that there had been no significant change in
the economic picture in the Twelfth District during the past two weeks.
The expansion was continuing with considerable strength. Preliminary
figures on unemployment in the Pacific Coast States in December indicated
that there had been a slight further drop to the national rate of 6.1
per cent following a rather substantial drop to 6.2 per cent in November.
Department store sales were continuing strong in January, and steel
output rose sharply in the first two weeks of that month.
As to time deposits, Mr. Swan said there had been increases in
rates pretty much across the board as far as banks were concerned, and
time deposits including savings deposits, had risen substantially in
contrast with the usual decline for this period. There seemed to be a
considerable response to the higher rates, although to some extent there
may have been a shifting around of deposits to take advantage of the
rate changes. The large District banks had recently been net buyers of
Federal funds, and they expected to be net buyers in the current week also.

1/23/62 -26
As to policy, Mr. Swan said it seemed to him that thus far the
expansion had been fairly well balanced and noninflationary. There was
only a short time remaining before the Treasury refunding announcement,
and he saw nothing sufficiently compelling in the picture to require
attempting to move in the direction of a tighter situation during that
short period of time. Consequently, he would agree, generally speaking,
with the view that the Committee ought to continue pretty much along
the lines that it had contemplated two weeks ago. He would have in mind
a bill rate in the area of 2-3/4 per cent, which might be associated
with a level of free reserves somewhere around $450 million. As had
been mentioned previously, the higher free reserve level at the present
time reflected unforeseen developments in terms of float, and the level
was not as significant when float was in the picture as under other
circumstances.
Mr. Irons stated that Eleventh District conditions were funda
mentally sound, with evidences of strength and further advance. Certain
unfavorable developments during the past three weeks were attributable
to adverse weather conditions. There had been damage to agriculture in
the lower valley, and retail trade, including department store sales,
reflected the poor weather. However, the industrial production index
was up and employment had risen to a record level. Unemployment was
running about 4.9 per cent. Heavy construction projects were extensive
in Dallas, Houston, and other large cities.

1/23/62 -27
The financial situation, Mr. Irons said, was highlighted by
adjustments incident to the new higher permissible rates of interest
on time and savings deposits. Many of the larger banks had increased
their rates to the maximum, along with some of the smaller banks.
Talk was heard about a shifting of portfolios so as to include more
tax-exempt securities and real estate loans, but he did not think that
much had been done as yet. Reporting banks showed a decline in demand
deposits and loans, with an increase in time deposits and investments.
Some of the increase in time deposits might represent new money, but
there was apparently a considerable amount of shifting out of demand
deposits, savings bonds, and equities. Borrowing from the Reserve
Bank was at a low level. In the past three weeks, District banks had
shifted, on average, from net purchasers of Federal funds to slight
net sellers. Bankers and other informed persons seemed to anticipate
somewhat higher interest rates and to regard the recent change in
maximum interest rates on time and savings deposits as a step in that
direction.
Turning to policy, Mr. Irons said that the Committee continued
to face the problem of trying to strike a balance between the domestic
situation and the international situation. At present there was also
the fact that a Treasury refunding was in the offing. In the absence
of strong and clear evidence of need at this time for an appreciably
firmer policy, he would come to the same conclusion as at the past two

1/23/62 -28
or three Committee meetings, namely, no change in policy but a shifting
toward slightly less ease. He would disregard the past week or 10 days
and set upa s an objective conditions such as the Committee had been
hoping to achieve at the time of the January 9 meeting. If such
conditions were achieved, he would be quite satisfied. In short, he
would favor maintaining largely an even keel, with no change in policy
but with perhaps some slight shift or trend toward a little less ease.
Mr. Irons also said that he had felt for some time that short
term rates, including the bill rate and Federal Funds rate, should be
among the key indicators of what the Committee was doing. However, he
would not be inclined to set targets that were too precise. A Federal
funds rate averaging between 2-1/2 and 3 per cent was about as close
a target as it seemed reasonable to suggest. As to the bill rate, he
would suggest that it run around a level that would not aggravate the
international problem. The objective should be to maintain an availability
of reserves consistent with short-term rates that would not create trouble
in the international field. As to free reserves, he would suggest a
level around $400-$450 million rather than $550-$600 million, because he
did not see how short-term rates could be maintained with free reserves
as high as during the past 10 days. He would not favor a change in the
discount rate at this time. The domestic situation did not call for it,
and he was not sure that the international situation was as yet of such
a nature as to demand it.

1/23/62 -29
Mr. Ellis reported that in NeEwn gland consumer buying had
remained strong since the Christmas season. On the basis of preliminary
information, manufacturing output in December seemed to have risen
further. Unemployment continued to fall and employment to rise. In
short, business expansion was continuing a moderate, satisfactory pace
without evidence of excesses.
Mr. Ellis said a recent survey showed that none of the large
banks in Boston or Providence had raised their rate on savings deposits
beyond 3 per cent, although they had increased the rate on time deposits.
Smaller banks with a high percentage of savings deposits, and under
pressure to hold those deposits, had been under more pressure to raise
the interest rate beyond 3 per cent. The local competitive situation
seemed to control the decisions at those banks.
Turning to policy, Mr. Ellis commented that the economic presenta
tion today seemed to indicate that the rate of expansion was quite satis
factory. It did not appear that the expansion was any longer dependent
upon a continued stimulation of credit expansion. It appeared to him,
however, that monetary policy was continuing a high degree of stimulation
of credit expansion. He agreed with Mr. Johns' analysis. It was of
critical importance, of course, not to take action ahead of or during the
Treasury refunding that would be seriously disturbing to the market, yet
he was concerned about the trend of monetary policy. He liked the first
paragraph of the current policy directive, which suggested an intent to

1/23/62 -30
permit further bank credit and monetary expansion. That was appropriate.
However, he also liked the phraseology of trending toward slightly less
easy monetary conditions. That also was appropriate. The major thrust
of policy could be a trend toward slightly less easy monetary conditions
with a view to maintaining stable money market conditions. One way of
looking at the even keel was to give it the meaning of holding steady,
with a stable money market, on a course trending toward less ease. This
would rule out a discount rate change in the immediate future.
Mr. Bryan said that he had no strong views on policy. If he had
any preference, it would be to continue with no dramatic or overt change
of policy. Looking ahead somewhat further than the next few weeks, his
inclination was to say that the System ought to take care of seasonal
needs, with a small growth factor in reserves added. That growth factor
certainly should not be over 3 per cent, and for some time he would
prefer a lower rate, because reserves had gone a little beyond the target.
As to the Sixth District, Mr. Bryan said that it seemed to be
going along about the same as the nation. Heavy freezes had done some
damage to crops, particularly in Florida, but apparently there would be
a larger cash flow from the marketing of the smaller citrus crop due to
price adjustments.
Mr. Balderston commented that the imminence of the Treasury
refunding was basic to the Committee's instructions to the Desk for the
next three weeks. This impelled an even-keel policy regardless of views

1/23/62 -31
as to current domestic and international situations. Consequently,
it appeared that any detailed examination of the fundamentals of the
situation might well be deferred until another meeting of the Committee.
However, he would make this observation: with excess capacity here and
abroad, there seemed to be no imminent risk of price advances. Further
more, he sensed some diminution in business optimism. Certainly, there
was no speculative ebullience. This was something that had also been
noted in the early months of other years. It might be associated with
the process of budget-making or with post-mortems after financial reports
of the previous year were available. What he was suggesting was that
the System's longer-ran goals might become more apparent after float
had become stabilized and business psychology had emerged from its
early-year doubts.
Chairman Martin stated that in his judgment the only development
of any significance since the January 9 Committee meeting was the slight
diminution of pressure for loans. Generally speaking, the month of
January was not a good period in which to make evaluations. However,
he was inclined to feel that at this point there was less urgency for
tightening, apart from the international situation. That situation was
very difficult to evaluate; it was easy to see ghosts that might or might
not be there. In any event, the immediate fact of overriding importance
was the Treasury refunding. With the first of February as close as it
was, it would not be appropriate for the System to upset the money market

1/23/62 -32
by any minor adjustment of policy. If the Committee was convinced that
it was necessary to take some major action, that would be one thing.
In the circumstances, however, it would be a serious mistake to decide,
for example, to diminish the supply of reserves slightly.
Chairman Martin said he thought the consensus today was essentially
to maintain an even keel. There might be some question as to what the
even keel actually meant; that is, whether it should be related to how
things had worked out in the past two weeks or how the Comittee had
wanted them to work out.
The Chairman noted that the Secretary of the Committee, in con
sultation with the Economist and the Manager of the System Account, had
prepared, for consideration a draft of possible current economic policy
directive, the first paragraph of which would be the same as in the
directive issued at the meeting on January 9, 1962. The second paragraph
would state that operations for the System Open Market Account during
the next three weeks should be with a view to maintaining a supply of
reserves adequate for credit expansion, while avoiding downward pressure
on short-term rates. It would also state that during the period of
Treasury financing, emphasis should be placed on maintaining a steady
money market.
After copies of the draft had been distributed, Mr. Hayes said
he thought there was one fault in it. The language did not give any
flavor of eliminating the excessive ease that had occurred inadvertently

1/23/62 -33
during the past two weeks. From a count that he had made, those who
spoke today in terms of getting back to the kind of situation that the
Committee had hoped to achieve two weeks ago were in the majority.
Therefore, he felt that the directive should contain some reflection
of that modification.
Mr. Thomas commented, with respect to developments during the
past two weeks, that bill rates had declined only quite moderately and
were still higher than at the beginning of this year. Some decline in
bill rates usually occurs in January following a rise in December.
Actually, the Account Manager had done a good job of observing the
Committee's directive and in keeping the bill rate up in the face of
seasonal factors, a greater than seasonal contraction in the volume of
bank credit and required reserves, and a large increase in available
reserves due to the maintenance of float at an unusually high level.
Chairman Martin then commented that to him it seemed difficult
to write a current policy directive that would take into account accidental
occurrences. Further, although there might be some merit in using figures
in the directive, he did not think that the Committee could stick to any
particular figures. The directive must recognize factors such as the
color, tone, and feel of the market. The phraseology Mr. Young had
suggested was "a steady money market."
With reference to the comments of Mr. Thomas, Mr. Hayes said
that a drift in the three-month bill rate from 2.83 to 2.67 per cent,

1/23/62 -34
while not dramatic, was enough to cause him concern in light of the
critical international problem. Further, the proposed current directive,
in the form in which it had been drafted, was too general a directive.
Except for the last sentence which dealt with maintaining an even keel,
it was almost the kind of directive that could have been subscribed to
at any time during the past year.
In further discussion, Mr. Balderston said that he thought the
Committee, in its experimentation with instructions to the Desk, had
moved forward an appreciable distance. He had in mind particularly the
difficulty encountered in the past, when preparing the policy record,
in recapturing the flavor and tone of Committee meetings. While it was
difficult, he recognized, to do a drafting job around the table, he had
a feeling that the time spent on the directive at the January 9 meeting
would not have to be repeated meeting after meeting, that perhaps the
Committee would be able to settle on some reasonable combination of words,
and that such wording would then constitute a policy record comprising
a satisfactory exposition of the Committee's objectives. He would be
content, in this instance, with the wording suggested by Mr. Young. He
did not think that the Committee ought to spend long hours at each
meeting doing a drafting job, provided the effort placed before it for
consideration seemed to represent a reasonably accurate reflection of
what the Committee desired.

1/23/62 -35
Mr. Mitchell inquired about the intent of the proposed directive
in relation to the seasonal pressure on interest rates, and Mr. Robertson
suggested that the intent might be clarified by changing the second
paragraph to provide for operations with a view to maintaining a supply
of reserves adequate for further expansion of credit and a steady money
market during the period of Treasury financing, which would be announced
February 1. Mr. Mitchell commented that he was still not clear as to
the intent of the directive in relation to interest rates, and Mr. Young
replied that it would be the intent to permit usual seasonal variations
in credit and in interest rates. Mr. Mitchell said he thought that point
should be made clear.
Mr. Swan said it had been his reaction from Mr. Rouse's earlier
comments that the Desk was not going to have to worry too much longer
about downward seasonal pressure on short-term rates. Mr. Rouse stated
that this was correct, that the end of the period of seasonal pressure
was now approaching.
Chairman Martin then suggested that the emphasis of the directive
be placed on maintaining a steady money market, and Mr. Hayes said he
continued to feel strongly that the wording of the proposed directive
did not give the flavor of an edging toward a slightly less easy situation,
which sentiment was voiced by the Comittee at the January 9 meeting.
Chairman Martin noted that the degree of ease since that meeting had
developed inadvertently, to which he added that he thought the problem

1/23/62 -36
of the directive was principally one of semantics. It was difficult
to forecast what was going to happen against a background of what had
happened inadvertently in a previous period. This was all part of the
problem of maintaining a steady money market.
Mr. King suggested changing the word "avoiding" to "minimizing"
in the second paragraph of the proposed directive, his thought being
that this might capture some of the flavor that Mr. Hayes was seeking.
Mr. Hayes said he would like to mention, as a further comment,
that the proposed last sentence of the directive clearly implied the
maintenance of a steady money market during the period of Treasury
financing. However, such language would provide no guidance for the
period before the period of Treasury financing began. Chairman Martin
responded that he thought the consensus was that there should be no
change in policy preceding the Treasury announcement. In his opinion,
this was all part of the same picture.
Mr. Hayes commented that he thought the consensus was not to
depart during the next week from the policy that was intended two weeks
ago. In his opinion, the Comittee should not instruct the Desk to
continue a condition that had occurred inadvertently. Free reserves
had been higher than expected; they had averaged over $500 million.
Mr. Mitchell commented that he thought it was the posture of
the System, as outsiders saw it, with which the Committee should be
concerned. From that standpoint, there might be a tendency to exaggerate

1/23/62 -37
things that were not too important. The Chairman had stated a consensus
with which he (Mr. Mitchell) would agree. In fact, he felt that within
narrow limits all of the Committee members were of one mind. The
Committee did not want anyone to think that the System was making a
change of policy between now and the Treasury financing.
There followed a suggestion by Mr. Thomas for a change in the
last sentence of the directive that might help to avoid the question
raised by Mr. Hayes regarding the appearance of a gap in the instructions
to the Desk for the period prior to the announcement of the forthcoming
Treasury financing.
Mr. Wayne expressed the view that the suggestions that had been
made would meet substantially the points that seemed to be of some con
cern regarding the draft directive. He went on to say that he would like
to reiterate a view he had expressed previously; that is, that the
Committee, in preparing a directive, was not engaged so much in writing
a precise instruction for the Desk as in writing a statement for the
record. The Account Manager understood clearly from the discussion
today that the past week was recognized to have been an aberration and that
use of the term "even keel" did not carry with it the intent that the
Desk should strive to perpetuate the aberration. It was clearly the
intent to maintain a steady money market, whereas the past week was
unsteady. As he saw it, the important thing was to be sure that the

1/23/62 -38
Committee was writing a directive that would constitute an understandable
public record. Use of the word "minimizing" would reflect an opinion
that lower short-term rates would be contrary to the public interest
and a realization that the past week was an aberration.
Chairman Martin then asked the Secretary to read the proposed
directive, in form that would reflect suggestions made thus far.
After the Secretary had done so, Chairman Martin turned to Messrs.
Hayes and Rouse and inquired whether such a directive would be
reasonably clear. Mr. Hayes and Mr. Rouse indicated that they thought
it would be all right.
The Chairman next inquired whether there were those who
wished to record a dissent from the adoption of such a directive.
Mr. Hayes said that his reservations were so much a matter of degree
that he would not want to record a formal dissent. No other member
of the Committee indicated that he wished to record a dissent.
Accordingly, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York was authorized and directed, until
otherwise directed by the Committee, to
execute transactions for the System Open Market
Account in accordance with the following cur
rent economic policy directive:
It continues to be the current policy of the Committee to
permit further bank credit and monetary expansion so as to
promote fuller utilization of the economy's resources, together
with monetary conditions consistent with the needs of an expand
ing domestic economy, taking into account this country's adverse
balance of payments as well as the Treasury financing calendar.
To implement this policy, operations for the System Open
Market Account during the next three weeks shall be conducted

1/23/62 -39
with a view to maintaining a supply of reserves adequate for
further credit expansion, while minimizing downward pressures on
short-term interest rates. In view of the imminence of Treasury
financing, emphasis shall be placed on maintaining a steady money
market.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,
Hayes, Balderston, Irons, King, Mills,
Mitchell, Robertson, Shepardson, Swan, Wayne,
and Fulton. Votes against this action: None.
No changes were suggested in the continuing authority directive
to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York that had been adopted on
December 19, 1961.
It was understood that the next meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee would be held on Tuesday, February 13, 1962.
All of those present except the members and alternate members
of the Committee, the other Reserve Bank Presidents, and Mr. Young
then withdrew from the meeting.
At this session, discussion was concerned with the next steps
for consideration of the proposal before the Committee for the System
Open Market Account to engage in foreign exchange operations and to
hold at different times varying amounts of convertible foreign
currencies. Chairman Martin reported on his consultations about the
subject with the Chairmen of Senate and House Banking and Currency
Committees and commented briefly on the general problem of obtaining
legislation that would clarify the Committee's authority to conduct
foreign currency operations.
In the discussion that followed, differing viewpoints were
expressed as to the potential contribution that System foreign

1/23/62 -40
currency operations might make in fulfilling its responsibilities
for a sound dollar domestically and internationally, especially in
view of persisting deficits in the U. S. balance of international
payments. There was also reference in the discussion to the legal
opinions rendered by the Committee's General Counsel and the General
Counsel of Treasury (the latter having the concurrence of the Attorney
General) to the effect that the System's existing statutory authority,
although in some respects limiting, did provide a general sanction
for Committee operations of the kind in question.
In the light of the Chairman's report and the roundtable
comment, a majority of the Committee were favorably disposed
towards operations on an experimental basis. Several members
mentioned that the Committee would presumably review critically
any operations undertaken, and that the Committee might later decide
to discontinue them if constructive benefits appeared not to have
been achieved.
In bringing the discussion to a head, it was moved by
Mr. Balderston and seconded by Mr. Hayes that the Committee go on
record at this session as favoring in principle the Committee's
initiation on an experimental basis of a program of foreign currency
operations; that Mr. Young, the Committee's Secretary, and Mr. Coombs,
Vice President in charge of foreign operations of the New York

1/23/62 -41
Federal Reserve Bank, be authorized to explore for the Committee
with the Treasury needed guidelines for actual operations, drawing
on experience that the Stabilization Fund had had in recent months,
and to develop plans for effective working relationships in the
foreign exchange field with the Stabilization Fund; and further that
Chairman Martin be authorized to refer to this development in his
statement and testimony before the Joint Economic Committee scheduled
for January 30, 1962. Discussion having reached the point of question,
Chairman Martin called for a vote and the motion was carried.
Votes for the motion: Messrs. Martin,
Hayes, Balderston, Irons, King, Mills,
Shepardson, Swan, Wayne, and Fulton. Votes
against the motion: Messrs. Robertson and
Mitchell.
Messrs. Bopp, Clay, Deming, Ellis, Johns,
and Scanlon indicated that if they were presently
members of the Committee, they would have voted
for the motion. Mr. Bryan, also not a present
member, said that he would have voted aye on the
motion because he believed that operations in
foreign currencies were in principle a proper
function of a central bank; but he added that he
was opposed to the Committee's initiating such
operations until statistics for the latest
available twelve-month period showed the United
States to be operating with a balance-of-payments
surplus, not a balance-of-payments deficit.
In opposing the motion, Mr. Mitchell felt he was not prepared,
on the basis of the information at his disposal, to see the Committee
take this step at this time. He believed that an undertaking of this
importance to the System needed analysis by outside experts as well

1/23/62 -42
as public discussion before any Committee action and that the
Committee would be better equipped to proceed with a program of
foreign currency operations if its consideration of the matter had
been preceded by legislative clarification of its statutory authority
to acquire and hold foreign currency assets.
Mr. Robertson voted against the motion for reasons set forth
in more detail in the memorandum he presented to the Committee at its
meeting on December 5 and included in the minutes of that meeting.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary