A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, September 11, 1962, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Deming
Mr. Ellis
Mr. Fulton
Mr. King
Mr. Mills
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Messrs. Bopp, Scanlon, Clay, and Irons, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Wayne and Swan, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Brandt, Brill, Furth, Garvy, Hickman,
Holland, Koch, Parsons, and Willis,
Associate Economists
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market
Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of Governors
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
Mr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Mr. Broida, Economist, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors

9/11/62
Mr. Francis, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis
Messrs. Eastburn, Baughman, Tow, and Coldwell,
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Philadelphia, Chicago, Kansas City, and
Dallas, respectively
Messrs. Parthemos and Arlt, Assistant Vice Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and
St. Louis, respectively
Mr. Sternlight, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
August 21, 1962, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report on open market operations in United States Govern
ment securities covering the period August 21 through September 5, 1962,
and a supplementary report covering the period September 6 through
September 10, 1962. Copies of both reports have been placed in the files
of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone commented as
follows:
The money market in the past three weeks has maintained
a moderately firm tone, with Federal funds trading at 2-3/4 and
3 per cent throughout the period. The effective rate was most
often at 3 per cent, although a good volume of funds moved at
2-3/4 per cent even on most of those days when the heaviest
trading was at the 3 per cent level. Member bank borrowing,
meanwhile, has been generally moderate.
Notwithstanding this situation in the money market, three
month bill rates have hovered around 2.80 per cent, while six
month bills have remained under 3 per cent. There was a
substantial corporate demand for bills in the early part of
the period, but this tapered off to some extent around the Labor
Day week end. This demand, however, was vigorously reasserted
after the Treasury announced its advance refunding and corporations
began to switch out of rights and into bills in an effort to
capture the attractive premium to which the rights moved in re
flection of the generous yields offered by the Treasury in the
refunding.

9/11/62
Developments in the bill market were a factor influencing
the approach to System operations over the period, although
of course the general direction and magnitude of those opera
tions was shaped primarily by the need to offset large seasonal
movements in reserve factors and to preserve a steady market
atmosphere with the advent of the Treasury's operation. Thus,
in the early part of the interval, when reserves were being
supplied to meet month-end and pre-holiday drains, funds were
injected mainly through purchases of short- to intermediate
term coupon issues, through repurchase agreements, and through
purchases of bills directly from foreign accounts. In the last
few days, with market factors providing funds, the System has
absorbed reserves through the termination of repurchase contracts
and sales of bills to foreign accounts. Moreover, we arranged in
yesterday's bill auction to run off $203 million of bills matur
ing this Thursday, thus in effect augmenting the market supply of
bills.
For the next week or so, as indicated in the reserve projec
tions attached to our supplementary report and also to the Board
staff's memorandum on reserves, free reserves are expected to
bulge quite substantially--even after giving effect to the run
off of bills that I just mentioned. This appearance of over-ample
reserve availability may be a bit illusory, however. We are now
experiencing the mid-September bulge in liquidity needs as
corporations seek to acquire cash to pay dividends and taxes;
and superimposed on these seasonally heavy liquidity requirements
is a burgeoning of dealer financing needs as dealers acquire
rights to the Treasury's advance refunding operation. Yesterday,
for example, dealer financing needs were over 1/2 billion dollars-
most unusual for a Monday. All this suggests that if the Committee
should wish to see about the same market conditions maintained, a
somewhat higher level of free reserves may well be necessary, for
the next week or two, to maintain those conditions; to put it the
other way, the maintenance of recent free reserve levels over the
next week or two could well result in substantially tighter market
conditions than we have experienced in some time.
The long-term market has behaved quite steadily in the recent
period, losing some of the buoyancy that carried prices up during
much of August but retaining an underlying tone of confidence.
The market apparently feels that while interest rates will of course
fluctuate in response to day-to-day developments, a decisive move
in rates one way or the other is not a likely prospect. In this
atmosphere, it appears that the Treasury's advance refunding, for
which the subscription books close tomorrow, is being well received.
Highly tentative and preliminary guesses as to the amount of rights
that will be exchanged center around $5 - $7 billion.

9/11/62
The System holds a little over $7 billion of the rights. I
do not, however, propose to exchange any of those holdings.
I should mention to the Committee that the Account has had to
be reallocated four times since the beginning of July, and three
times in the past three weeks, owing to the reserve ratios of
individual Reserve Banks falling below 30 per cent. With the
seasonal rise in note and deposit liabilities about to get
under way, and with the possibility that we may experience
further gold losses, we may well have to reallocate with in
creasing frequency in the months ahead. I have discussed this
with the Board staff, and we are in agreement that under these
circumstances it may be necessary to suggest to the Committee,
in the relatively near future, that the ratio at which the Ac
count shall be reallocated be reduced from 30 to 28 per cent.
Mr. Mitchell noted that the volume of capital market financing had
been relatively moderate. He asked the Account Manager whether expectations
of some future easing in the long-term rate might be a factor or whether
the moderate volume of borrowing appeared to reflect primarily a lack of
demand for funds.
Mr. Stone replied that the demand for new capital appeared to be
relatively light. The level of rates in the past week or two was begin
ning to bring forth some refunding issues, but this had not built up to
any substantial proportions.
Mr. Mills inquired whether any study had been made of the composi
tion of the Open Market Account, particularly whether the holdings of bills
were sufficient for the System's needs looking to the future. He also in
quired whether the amount of bill holdings was compatible with the total
of outstanding short-term Government securities.
Mr. Stone replied that he was not aware of any formal study as
to what would constitute an ideal maturity structure for the System
portfolio. However, holdings of bills were about $3 billion, with the

9/11/62 -5
end-of-year seasonal rise still ahead of us. Earlier this year, System
holdings of securities maturing within one year amounted, as he recalled,
to between $16 and $18 billion, which meant that it would have been
possible to absorb virtually all of the reserves in the banking system
without selling maturities beyond one year. In his opinion the Account
was amply liquid.
Mr. Mills then commented that with a growing Federal debt and a.
growing effort to introduce liquidity throughout the economy, he had
been wondering whether holdings of $3 billion in bills were sufficient
to provide a fulcrum for carrying out System policy, particularly where
there was so little inclination, or ability, to divest long-term securi
ties that the System had acquired.
Mr. Stone reiterated that in his opinion short-term holdings of
the System Account, particularly holdings of bills, were quite ample.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the open
market transactions in Government securi
ties during the period August 21 through
September 10, 1962, were approved, rati
fied,and confirmed.
Mr. Brill presented the following statement with respect to
economic developments:
It would appear that optimism about economic prospects
engendered by the July statistics may have to be tempered as
the August results come in. It is too early in the month for
a complete picture, but the fragments in to date don't suggest
any follow-through on the relatively strong performance in July.
In fact, in some areas there were setbacks, with the unemployment
rate up sharply and employment down; in others, such as indus
trial production, retail sales, and private construction expendi
tures, there was a levelling off or some downdrift.

9/11/62
The unemployment figures have by now been widely reported,
and to a large extent discounted in terms of special factors
operating during the period when the survey was taken--concen
tration of model change-overs in the auto industry, inclusion of
prospective teachers awaiting opening of the school term, and so
forth. Suspect as the increase in the unemployment rate may be,
however, it needs to be borne in mind that more comprehensive
data on employment--the employer reports of the Bureau of Labor
Statistics--showed some decline last month, and the average work
week in manufacturing drifted off again for the fourth consecu
tive month. All in all, perhaps the safest conclusion to draw
from recent labor force and utilization data is that the improve
ment earlier in the summer and the more recent retrogression both
represented rather random jiggles around a plateau.
Similarly, advance reports on August retail sales from the
Department of Commerce show a reaction from the July spurt, con
firming earlier indications of our own department store statistics
and the weekly data on auto sales. July apparently was even
better than the early reports, but in August total sales showed
a small decline. Private construction expenditures were also
down last month.
The up and down movements in the economy this summer have
been characteristic of the uneven pace of the whole recovery
expansion period. Months of rapid advance have alternated with
periods of slow rise, or even of slack, but on net, growth since the
beginning of the year has been modest, particularly in contrast to
the 10 per cent annual rate of rise during 1961.
Previous postwar cycles have also shown a marked slowing in
expansion after four or five quarters of vigorous growth. Thus,
both industrial production and real GNP showed only a slight fur
ther rise in the long interval from late 1955 to the summer of
1957. In the 1958-60 recovery, which was both brief and distorted
by the steel strike, output was little higher at the upper turning
point in the spring of 1960 than it had been the year before.
Looking back to even earlier cycles, shortages of manpower and
of industrial capacity may have been important elements in the slow
downs in expansion after initial run-ups. In recent years, however,
when resources have been ample even at cyclical peaks, it appears
to have been the demand--rather than the supply--side which has
limited expansion in output and declines in unemployment. Currently,
demand forces again appear to be the main constraints on output.
With substantial unused capacity, it is not surprising that business
plant and equipment outlays are not scheduled to increase much fur
ther this year. It is too early, of course, to expect that the
recent liberalization of depreciation rules would produce signifi
cantly higher spending plans, and it is perhaps reassuring that
businessmen, by and large, are not trimming sights as a result of
stock market developments or sluggishness in final demand. Never
theless, the latest survey of businessmen's plans indicates that

9/11/62
this key area of economic demand will be providing little further
lift to the economy over the balance of the year.
Inventory policies also continue cautious, reflecting the
ample supply and capacity situation. The latest survey of manu
facturers' inventory anticipations suggests a continuation for
some time of only a moderate rate of restocking.
Surveys of consumer buying plans do not hold out the prospect
of substantial lift from this sector either. Housing starts-
and residential construction activity in general--are already down
from their spring highs. While auto sales have generally been at
advanced levels, the most optimistic of industry forecasts for
1963 is no higher than prospective sales of the 1962 models.
In summary, "sluggish" remains the most apt description of
the economy's recent and prospective performance. Monetary ease
alone may not be a sufficient condition to move the economy from
its apathy, but it is a necessary support to any other stimulative
force. Considering the slack in resource utilization, the sta
bility of prices in markets for industrial goods and equities,
and the general absence of symptoms of inflationary expectations,
it would appear appropriate to provide a financial climate in which
the banking system is able--indeed anxious--to accommodate the
financing and liquidity needs of business and consumers.
Mr. Koch presented the following statement on credit developments:
Since this is the first opportunity I have had to talk to
this Committee for some time, I shall look at financial develop
ments over a somewhat longer time span than just the three-week
interval since your last meeting.
First, looking at bank credit, this is an area where one who
feels a stimulative monetary policy is appropriate can currently
get some encouragement, at first glance at least. Seasonally ad
justed total loans and investments at all commercial banks increased
about $2-3/4 billion in August, though after a large decline in
July. The seasonally adjusted annual rate of rise in bank credit
thus far this year has been 7-1/2 per cent.
Moreover, in August there was considerable strength in business
and real estate loans, dynamic areas of bank lending that are
usually associated more directly with spending and investing than
some other areas. In business loans, the rise was in heavy industries,
like metal producing and fabricating lines, and public utilities,
and not only in the soft goods and seasonal lines.
Business loan growth in the last two weeks, however, has been
much less vigorous, and it is still too early to say whether the
August strength was a flash in the pan or an early indicator of the
fall trend. Capital market financing, in contrast to bank financing,

9/11/62
has been weak all summer, and the September calendar of
prospective new issues is particularly light. There is
also the question as to what proportion of the bank credit
growth thus far this year has represented the investment
of savings rather than money creation, and it is this
question to which I should like to turn.
Looking at the liquidity creation function of monetary
policy, a function, it seems to me, that must be given as much
weight as the credit availability function, the news isn't so
good. As a matter of fact, the most current news is quite
disturbing. The narrowly defined money supply may have de
creased about $800 million in the last half of August.
Currently, it is about 1 per cent below the level at the end
of last year.
Also disconcerting in recent weeks, in view of the sluggish
demand deposit performance, has been a marked slowdown in the
rise of time and savings deposits of commercial banks. In the
first half of the year, these deposits had risen at a season
ally adjusted annual rate of about 20 per cent, but recently
the rate of rise has fallen to about 10 per cent. In the 18
months prior to the revision of Regulation Q, these deposits
had risen at an annual rate of about 14 per cent.
But how could bank credit growth have been quite satis
factory and private deposit growth so disappointing in August?
The answer lies mainly in the continued very large level of
Treasury balances. These balances have been running much
higher than usual all summer. In the last half of August they
averaged over $8 billion, whereas they normally run $2 to $3
billion less.
The question naturally arises as to whether some allowance
should be made for the sharp growth in time and Treasury deposits
since the first of the year in assessing the effectiveness of
our recent money creating job. To state my conclusion before
its support, I believe some allowance should be made in the
case of time deposits but not in the case of Treasury deposits.
My reasoning is as follows:
Consider, first, the excess in the rate of growth in time
deposits thus far this year over the rate prevailing last year
prior to the change in Regulation Q. Making the admittedly
arbitrary, but perhaps as good as any alternative, assumption
that half of this excess came from demand accounts and, there
fore, should still be counted as demand deposits for purposes
of comparability, this year's rate of growth in the money
supply would be increased from about minus 1 to about plus 1
per cent.

9/11/62
I base my view that no allowance should be made for
the continuing high level of Treasury deposits in assessing
the adequacy of the money supply on two observations. In
the first place, the amount of Government spending is ob
viously not materially affected by the size of its cash
holdings, and secondly, the Government presumably had to
borrow more and hence drain funds from the market to the
extent that it has accumulated any temporarily excess
deposits. We may get some flow back from Treasury to
private deposits in October, in which case it seems to me we
should be careful not to absorb too aggressively the reserves
released by any decline in Treasury balances that may occur.
Thus, I conclude that the effective money supply, using
as comparable concepts as possible at the beginning and end
of the period, could not have gone up more than at about a
1 per cent seasonally adjusted annual rate thus far this year.
Now this rate is somewhat more reassuring than a small negative
rate, but it is still considerably less than the 5 per cent
annual rate of increase in GNP that has occurred over the same
period.
I can be much briefer when it comes to the reserve in
dicators of recent policy, for they show much the same story
as the money supply figures. We have now dropped to over
$200 million below our required reserve guide; that is, the
guide that allows for a 3 per cent growth in required reserves
behind private demand and time deposits. Free reserves have
fluctuated around $400 million, although they would have
averaged somewhat lower had it not been for a late downward
revision in the required reserves of country banks that affected
the figures for two of the three weeks since the Committee's
last meeting.
So much for the question of what have been the effects of
recent monetary policy. I think enough facts are now in for
us to begin to consider very seriously whether recent monetary
policy may not actually have been something of a damper rather
than a stimulus to economic expansion. Treasury financing
activities in progress and in prospect may preclude our doing
much about it in the immediate future even if we wanted to, but
when the opportunity arises, I feel a somewhat easier monetary
policy would be highly desirable. I say this even though my
own view is that the more basic need for stimulation lies in
the area of longer run fiscal policy rather than shorter run
monetary policy.
The two main objections usually given to increasing monetary
ease even slightly are the adverse balance of payments position

9/11/62 -10-
and the possible impetus it might give to speculative activities
that may be developing in the economy, for example, in the real
estate area. I cannot add to the intelligence on the interna
tional financial situation except to express my own judgment
that the basic balance is improving, albeit not very fast. But
I also feel that a more satisfactory rate of economic growth is
essential to the achievement of a solid and sustainable inter
national balance. As to speculative activities in particular
sectors of the economy, they do not appear to me to be wide
spread. In any event some loosening of lender standards
probably has to be expected to accompany monetary ease,
particularly prolonged ease. Unless we are willing to see the
whole economy adversely affected, or to adopt selective con
trols, we must expect to see--but guard against as best we can-
some excesses in lending on marginal types of economic activity.
Here too, appropriate tax reform may be a more appropriate
response than less credit ease.
Mr. Furth presented the following statement with respect to the
balance of payments and related matters:
The international economic scene has not changed since
mid-August. In August the deficit in our balance of payments
still was probably about $400 million, half of it due to the
continuing reflux of funds to Canada. Preliminary figures for
the last week of August and the first week of September suggest
substantial improvement, but it is too early to judge whether
these figures can be taken as indicating a new trend. In any
case, the position of the dollar in major exchange and gold
markets is on the whole much better than the size of our deficit
would suggest.
The most disappointing aspect of our July deficit was the
fact that it apparently was due to a deterioration in our basic
accounts, including a drop in our exports and in our trade
surplus of about $150 million.
In major exchange markets, the dollar remains weak against
the Canadian dollar, the French franc, and the Italian lira. It
remains close to par against the pound sterling and the German
mark, and below par but above the bottom against the other
major European currencies. These relations conform to the pay
ments position of the countries involved. Canada, France, and
Italy continue to gain reserves, but other major countries did
not register substantial gains, and in some cases had net losses.
Even for Canada and Italy, the gains might prove temporary: for
Canada, because the reversal of the outflow of funds that had

9/11/62 -11
occurred during the last quarter of 1961 and the first half
of 1962 is believe to be nearing completion; for Italy, be
cause of the approaching end of the tourist season. In fact,
the last days of the past week have, for the first time in
many months, seen no further rise in Italian dollar holdings.
This would leave France, which in August for the sixth month
in a row increased its reserves by an adjusted sum in excess
of $120 million, as the main chronic surplus country.
In the London gold market, the price continued to move
narrowly around $35.12, but apparently without net sales by
the Bank of England. The net drain on the U.S. gold stock
resulting from the latest flurry in the market, which began
three months ago, has been only $64 million. Of this sum, $14
million was transferred to the Bank of England last week. The
only further gold transaction in prospect is a sale of $30
million to Spain, scheduled for some time this month. This
will bring the amount of gold sold to Spain since the beginning
of 1960 to $425 million--all of it presumably paid for out of
the financial aid we are giving to that country for defense and
development purposes.
In response to a question, Mr. Furth said there did not seem to
be any substantial outflow of short-term capital at present. In July
the reflux of funds to Canada seemed to reflect primarily a reversal of
the so-called leads and lags in commercial payments rather than a flow
of short-term capital. In the past few days the covered interest rate
differential between Canada and the United States had exceeded 1/2 per
cent, the point where significant flows of funds usually start. Thus
far, however, there seemed to have been no significant covered flows
to Canada, apparently because of the imminence of the September 15
tax date. Yesterday the covered rate differential was .8 per cent,
and the uncovered differential was much greater, running to 2 per cent
or more. One reason for the lack of a flow of funds might be the nar
rowness of the Canadian bill market.

9/11/62 -12-
Mr. Hayes noted that there was in prospect a sizable flow
of long-term funds to Canada because of the expectation of large
private financing. This might be in the order of $250 million in
the next three months.
Mr. Stone reported having been informed yesterday that $125
million of that amount would move on the fifteenth of October.
Mr. Hayes then presented the following statement of his views
on the economic outlook and monetary policy:
The domestic business situation continues its modest
upward progress, although this trend is of uncertain strength.
In July industrial production, nonfarm employment, personal
income, retail sales, and new orders for durable goods all
increased; and in our view early signs suggest no basic change
in the over-all economic picture in August. To some extent,
of course, the improvements merely reflect the removal or
lessened influence of special factors that had depressed the
June figures. Private spending plans--those of consumers and
of businessmen--have been maintained despite the steep stock
market decline in May and June and the tendency that one might
have expected to postpone spending and investment decisions
because of the uncertainties in the business and fiscal outlook.
There is little change in the price picture. While the
consumer price index continues its upward drift, there has been
practically no change in industrial wholesale prices or sensi
tive raw material prices.
We still have a good distance to go in our endeavor to make
fuller use of men and machines. The August figures for employ
ment, unemployment, and hours worked are quite discouraging.
The liquidity of the economy remains adequate. While the
private money supply (seasonally adjusted) has shown little
change for several months, in the months to come disbursements
from the unusually high Treasury balances are likely to add to
the supply.
Unfortunately, we still face a serious balance of payments
problem. About halfrof the very large July-August deficit is
due to the sharp improvement in the Canadian payments position
and the resultant return flow of funds to Canada. While for
this reason the two-month deficit is not so alarming as it

9/11/62 -13-
would otherwise be, it is still much too large. On the other
hand, it is encouraging to note that the dollar has been
fairly strong in European exchange markets, except against the
French franc and the Italian lira.
Quite aside from short-term capital outflows, long-term
lending by domestic financial institutions to foreigners, direct
investments abroad, and the purchase of foreign securities on
original issue have been high. For some of the New York banks,
over 70 per cent of their total foreign loan portfolio is in
term loans. Relatively low interest rates here, together with
the greater availability of funds in this country, continue to
place more dollars in the hands of foreign holders.
Federal Reserve policy continues to be one of relative
ease. In my opinion greater ease would not provide a signif
icant stimulus to our domestic economy. While the international
situation might point to the desirability of a less easy policy-
and of course particular attention will be focused on this aspect
at next week's gathering of finance ministers and central bankers
from all over the world--such a move is probably precluded, for
the time being, both by the uncertainties of the domestic economy
and by the current Treasury advance refunding program, i.e., by
the need for maintaining an "even keel." Thus we should, I
believe, maintain the status quo.
Specifically, it would seem appropriate that both the Fed
eral funds rate and the three-month bill rate continue in the
2-3/4-3 per cent range, with both rates preferably in the upper
part of the range much of the time. With maintenance of the
status quo as a goal, I see no reason for any change in the
directive, nor for considering any change in the discount rate
at this time.
Mr. Ellis reported that New England economic indicators seemed
to reflect no decisive trend. In July there was some seasonal decline
in factory employment partially offset by growth in nonmanufacturing
employment, and there had been a slight shift in the labor force tending
to greater unemployment, this being in line with the experience nationally.
In New England, counter to the national trend, there was a gain in
average factory hours in July to a level higher than in any previous
month, except one, since 1956. Should this trend continue, it might

9/11/62 -14
portend gains in manufacturing employment rather than further gains
in weekly hours. If the new orders index was indicative, there might
be some broad upturn in production in the next few months because the
index showed some strength. However, the manufacturing index registered
a 1/2 point decline in July. The Reserve Bank's recent follow-up
survey of capital expenditure plans indicated a slight upward revision
of 1962 outlays. Consumer spending in August showed a slightly lesser
rate of gain than previously, and the use of consumer credit had slowed
down. The consumer credit index in August was below the year-ago level,
with no change from July to August.
First District banks were experiencing a strong and steady busi
ness loan demand. Weekly reporting banks had had a strong seasonal
runoff in demand deposits; this, coupled with the strength of loan
demand, had caused them to resort heavily to the Federal funds market
during the past several weeks. Unless loan demand should slacken or
deposits rise, loan-deposit ratios were going to reach a postwar peak.
Turning to policy, Mr. Ellis saw no reason for not maintaining
an even keel during the period of the Treasury advance refunding. Look
ing further ahead, the Committee continued to face a choice of less ease,
no change, or greater ease. It seemed difficult to him to substantiate
a case for less ease. The warning signals were flying for a business
downturn next year; industrial prices were stable and employment was
too low. Only in the event of an international monetary crisis would
it seem desirable to lessen the prevailing degree of ease. On the hand,

9/11/62 -15
he found it hard to accept the view that monetary policy had exerted a
dampening effect on economic growth in recent months, and difficult to
build a good case for a materially greater degree of ease. While the
arguments made today and at the July 21 meeting were persuasive to a
degree, he could not convince himself that the availability of more
money would stimulate spending. As he had just reported, while money
was available to consumers in New England, they did not choose to go
further in debt in August. Business firms reported no difficulty in
securing credit for their operations, and Mr. Stone reported a light
capital financing calendar. In these circumstances, it was hard to
believe that sufficient credit was not available in the economy, and
a position of no change in System policy was attractive to him. Such
a policy would, of course, involve considerable activity in meeting
seasonal needs for reserves, and it would be important not to fall
into inadvertent tightness in the next few months. In fact, he felt
that the System should supply reserves somewhat in advance of seasonal
needs, although with an eye to the impact on short-term rates.
As to free reserves, Mr. Ellis said he would favor a target
of around $400 million, with reserves supplied on a basis that would
accommodate a growth trend at an annual rate of about 3 per cent.
The short-term bill rate should be around 2.80 per cent. He saw no
reason for a change in the discount rate or the policy directive at
this time.

9/11/62 -16
Mr. Irons reported that in the past month there had been few
significant economic or financial changes in the Eleventh District.
Most sectors showed rather insignificant pluses or minuses, revolving
around very high or near-record levels. Banking figures showed small
decreases, although a generally satisfactory demand for loans was
reported by city banks. Borrowing from the Reserve Bank continued to
be negligible. Average sales of Federal funds had increased, thus
reducing the margin between purchases and sales. On the whole, the
District's banking position seemed to have moved toward a little more
ease in the past month.
Mr. Irons said it was his feeling, in the light of developments
in the domestic economy as well as the international situation, that
present policy should be continued. He would favor open market opera
tions designed to aim for free reserves in the area of $350-$400 million,
a Federal funds rate in the 2-3/4 - 3 per cent range, and a bill rate
around 2-7/8 per cent, give or take a few points. In summary, his
recommendation would be substantially the same as that of Mr. Ellis.
He saw no reason to change the discount rate or the directive.
Mr. Irons also said he was not inclined to believe that there
was inadequate liquidity or that bank reserves were insufficient to
meet any requirements that might reasonably be expected. He would
supply reserves for seasonal purposes and perhaps even tend a little
toward the side of ease if doubts should arise. Essentially, however,
he would favor maintenance of the status quo over the next three weeks.

9/11/62 -17
Mr. Swan said the situation in the Twelfth District reflected
little change from his description at the August 21 meeting. Data for
August were not yet available to any extent, and he would simply make
one or two observations that seemed characteristic of District trends.
Weekly figures on department store sales through August did not seem
to show any particular increase from June and July. One major labor
market area (Spokane) had been reclassified from substantial to moderate
unemployment, leaving only three major areas in the District in the cate
gory of substantial unemployment. All of these were in California. San
Diego was by far the most important, and because of the situation in
aircraft it was the only one showing no improvement. In fact, the
situation in that area had worsened over the past year.
Even with smaller acreage the prospect was for near-record crops
in the District, close to the 1959 output. In the canning industry there
was a large carryover as well as a substantial pack this year. Thus, it
appeared that canned fruits and vegetables would be in near-record supply,
with the expectation that some price weakening might develop.
Mr. Swan also reported that during the three weeks ended August 29
there had been a considerable increase in loans of weekly reporting member
banks, with commercial and industrial loans sharing in the rise to a con
siderably greater extent than earlier. Real estate loans also increased.
The major banks of the District had been substantial net sellers of

9/11/62 -18
Federal funds in the past three weeks, and borrowings from the Reserve
Bank had been small.
Turning to the national economic picture, Mr. Swan commented
that developments were still far from decisive. The August increase
in commercial and industrial loans had not lasted long enough to be
sure whether it was more than a seasonal rise. In the circumstances,
his views continued to be much the same as he had expressed previously.
In terms of the domestic situation a modest easing of policy would seem
justified, and he felt that this could be done without violence to the
international position of the dollar or even the current Treasury refund
ing. Therefore, he would recommend a target for free reserves of $400
million or above, a bill rate of 2.80 per cent or slightly less, and a
Federal funds rate of 2-3/4 per cent with more regularity than recently.
It seemed to him, Mr. Swan said, that the System should be care
ful to meet fully the seasonal needs for reserves, not only in the period
immediately ahead but over the next several months. The System should
not get itself into a position where market forces representing no more
than seasonal factors were allowed to tighten the situation. He would
recommend no change in the discount rate and no change in the policy
directive.
Mr. Deming said there was nothing particularly new to report
for the Ninth District; the same trends that had been noted earlier
continued. As he had mentioned at the August.21 meeting, figures on

9/11/62 -19
bank loans for early August indicated a strong expansion for that month
after some softening of demand in July. The final figures bore out this
estimate. City bank loan growth in August was larger than in any other
August since 1955, with business loan growth particularly strong. At
country banks, loans declined somewhat less than last year, but more
than in other recent years.
With respect to the national economy, Mr. Deming agreed that
the proper adjective to use was "sluggish," but he noted that it still
modified the noun "advance." He would like a different adjective, but
he saw nothing in the picture at the moment to suggest that there would
be a change. Neither did he see, however, much likelihood that the
noun would change in the foreseeable future.
Mr. Deming expressed interest in Mr. Koch's analysis. While he
was not sure that he would weight the time and Government deposit figures
just as Mr. Koch did, the latter's analytical approach did tend to bring
into sharper focus the question of central bank action in relation to
monetary liquidity. More work should be done on this question.
At the same time, Mr. Deming continued to believe that the general
level of liquidity and of bank liquidity was adequate, and that the cur
rent rate of bank credit expansion was satisfactory. Total deposit
growth remained impressive and recent interest rate behavior gave no
indication of any particular tightness; in fact, it might be taken to
imply a bit more ease in the markets than was true three or four weeks
ago.

9/11/62 -20
Given the current character of the national economy, Mr. Deming
saw no reason to make monetary policy less easy. He would not want to
have System actions inhibit in any way a further growth in bank credit,
and particularly in bank loans, which now seemed to be running a bit
better. Thus, he would agree that seasonal demands for reserves should
be met generously. Perhaps the System should slightly anticipate those
demands and furnish reserves a bit before they were seasonally needed.
The foregoing, Mr. Deming brought out, was a suggestion for a
policy posture for a somewhat longer period than the next three weeks.
For the period immediately ahead, he believed "status quo" was the
proper policy. But, as pointed out by Mr. Stone, status quo should be
measured more by tone and color, by short rates and Federal funds and
borrowings, than by free reserve levels during this next three weeks.
Specifically, he would try to keep about the same tone and color, and
he would not be much concerned if free reserves ran significantly
higher than the $350-$400 million level that had been prevailing.
Given this prescription, he saw no reason to change the directive or
the discount rate.
Mr. Scanlon reported that business sentiment in the Seventh
District seemed a little brighter, not so much because of any pro
nounced improvement in the underlying trend but apparently because
there was little evidence of the general deterioration anticipated
in some quarters in July and early August.

9/11/62 -21
However, the area would be seriously affected by the shutdown
of the Chicago North Western Railroad should the strike continue much
longer. Most of the important manufacturing centers in Wisconsin are
heavily dependent upon this line, as are some localities in Iowa and
Illinois. Secondary layoffs had already been announced by manufactur
ing and mining firms and grain handlers, and he had been told that
other cutbacks could be expected to follow shortly. October would be
a crucial month for agricultural areas dependent upon the North Western
because of the large quantities of grain and livestock customarily
moved at that time, so the timing of this strike was significant.
Aside from the effects of this tie-up, employment in the District
appeared to be following seasonal patterns.
All automobile manufacturers were now producing 1963 models,
Mr. Scanlon noted. Dealers were liquidating 1962 models rapidly, and
it was estimated that inventories at the end of September would total
740,000, which would include only 250,000 1962 models. As a result,
there was a conspicuous absence of vigorous sales promotions to make
way for new models. This was the time of year for Detroit auto ana
lysts to forecast next year's sales and, as today's Wall Street Journal
indicated, estimates ran from 6.2 million to 7 million.
Home building continued to be slow in most Seventh District areas,
well behind the national pace, and business loan demand at District banks
in recent months had not kept pace with the rest of the nation.

9/11/62 -22
In view of the continuing moderate pace of business activity,
the lack of strong credit demand, and the Treasury financing, Mr. Scanlon
recommended no change in monetary policy at the present time. Like Mr.
Deming, he would not worry about the free reserve figure in accomplish
ing this end. He would not change the discount rate or the directive.
Mr. Clay noted that latest information on the domestic economy
indicated that the basic situation remained essentially unchanged. The
two most important pieces of recent evidence were the reports on unem
ployment and on business capital outlays, both of which underscored the
problem of inadequate resource utilization. With the unemployment ratio
rising and the projected pattern of business capital spending showing no
improvement, the need for a higher level of economic activity continued
to be quite clear.
So far as domestic economic considerations were concerned, Mr.
Clay said, monetary policy ought to be more expansive, with a moderate
downward movement of interest rates all along the line. Because of
international balance of payments considerations, however, the Treasury
bill rate probably should be maintained within the range of the past
three weeks. Whatever Treasury bill rate level might be determined to
be necessary for international purposes, open market operations should
be conducted with a view to producing some further reduction in longer
term interest rates and to providing the reserves necessary for bank

9/11/62 -23
credit expansion on a seasonally adjusted basis. No change was recommended
in the Reserve Bank discount rate.
Mr. Wayne reported that, as in the past several months, Fifth Dis
trict business activity apparently continued to move along a plateau.
Variations in recent published statistics had been typically small and
inconclusive, and the Reserve Bank's grass roots contacts suggested that
these conditions continued at least through August. Opinions and expec
tations regarding general business conditions continued to improve, but
manufacturers on the survey panel on balance reported a softening in
their own businesses. Reports from the textile industry, which employs
over one-fourth of all District factory workers, indicated declining
orders and shipments, larger inventories, reduced employment, shorter
hours, and lower prices. These reports were submitted prior to the
Tariff Commission's recent rejection of a cotton price-equalization fee
on imports, an action which was likely to have an adverse effect on
expectations. Returns from durables producers were less consistent but
on balance also showed declines. Only nondurables manufacturers other
than textiles continued to report increased orders, shipments, employment,
and hours. Tobacco sales, which usually account for about one-third of
the value of farm marketings, had to date been well below those of 1961.
While prices and volume were improving, tobacco marketings would probably
fall 5-10 per cent short of last year's total.

9/11/62 -24
Mr. Wayne found little reason to expect any strong upward thrust
in the national economy in the weeks ahead. The fragmentary August evi
dence suggested that the encouraging pace of improvement in July may not
have extended into August. It was true that automobile prospects con
tinued favorable, and that bank loans to business were showing strength.
But these developments should be considered in the light of reductions
in private construction outlays and heavy construction awards and a
probable drop in retail sales. While nonagricultural employment was
at an all-time high, the sharp mid-August increase in the unemployment
rate was bound to be a source of concern, although much of it could be
satisfactorily rationalized.
In establishing policy, Mr. Wayne noted, the Committee continued
to be confronted with the dual problem of a less than satisfactory rate
of domestic expansion and persisting external imbalance. Over the past
several months it had sought to maintain a degree of ease at once condu
cive to a more rapid rate of advance at home and yet in line with liquidity
conditions in foreign money and capital markets. The fact that neither
the domestic nor the external problem had disappeared did not mean that
the posture of monetary policy had been inappropriate. It seemed to him
probable that present in both problems were structural elements not
susceptible to solution through purely monetary and credit action and
that the Committee had pursued the best available course while efforts
were being made to devise more basic remedies. In the present circumstances

9/11/62 -25
vigorous policy measures aimed at either problem could result in serious
aggravation of the other. Accordingly, he would favor maintaining about
the present posture. The new advance refunding was another argument for
doing so. Mr. Stone's views on market prospects for the next several
weeks were persuasive and suggested that some bulge in free reserves
might be appropriate. He would like, Mr. Wayne said, to see free
reserves in the vicinity of $400 million and bill rates in the 2.80
2.90 per cent range. He also believed that the discount rate should be
left unchanged. It might be wise, however, to drop the word "further"
(preceding "monetary expansion") from the opening clause of the direc
tive, since the money supply had actually been declining recently.
Mr. Mills said that, assuming the absence of any event requiring
emergency policy action, he would favor experimenting with a monetary
and credit policy that implied relative ease rather than relative tight
ness and focused on the money supply. To outline his views more
specifically, he then presented the following statement:
In the interval before its next meeting, the Open Market
Committee would be well advised to aim its objectives at raising
the level of free reserves to a range of $450 million or above.
A higher level of free reserves would serve the purpose both of
facilitating the completion of the Treasury's advance refunding
operations and of nurturing an increase in the faltering money
supply, which latter is a matter of growing importance. While
the increase in the Treasury's balances in Tax and Loan Accounts at
its depositary banks has been a factor in keeping down the growth
in the money supply as conventionally defined, it may also have
had the effect of exerting a generally deflationary economic
influence, in that the funds drawn out of private sectors of

9/11/62 -26-
the economy by Treasury financing, in not having flowed back
into private uses, have deprived the economy of whatever stim
ulous it would have received if these funds had remained for
spending in private hands. Under these circumstances, the
employment by commercial banks of additional reserves placed
at their disposal by Federal Reserve System policy actions
should help to foster an expansion of credit that, in turn,
would support the money supply.
Inasmuch as there continues to be a lack of aggressive
demand for commercial, industrial, and securities types of
commercial bank loans, any marked expansion of credit in
that area is unlikely, whereas time and savings deposit
accretions should be sufficient to finance further growth
of real estate mortgage and consumer instalment loans.
Such being the case and as statistical measures indicate
ample unused credit availability, a Treasury financing
operation offers the most desirable expedient through which
the money supply can be stimulated in the near future. It
is, therefore, to be hoped that the Treasury will extend Tax
and Loan Account privileges to commercial banks participating
in its approaching offerings of tax anticipation bills and
that adequate reserves will be supplied by Federal Reserve
System actions to carry this financing. In my opinion, there
is an overriding necessity for the Open Market Committee to
focus its attention on actions backstopping the money supply
so as to forestall any possibility of an accelerating downward
trend in its volume that could lead eventually to liquidating
pressure on commercial bank loans and investments and to an
undermining of the values on which they are based.
Also, in my opinion, attainment of the policy objectives
proposed could better be achieved by a reversion to a "bills
only" policy for supplying and withdrawing reserves which
would allow a free market to set a pattern of interest rates
consistent with both the domestic and foreign financial con
siderations that have been the subject of the Open Market
Committee's discussions for a long while. Moreover, I
believe that an interest rate structure developed out of
free market movements and unimpeded by artificial inter
ference, in being acutely sensitive to Federal Reserve
System policy actions, offers the best means by which any
desired changes in policy can be brought to bear most
promptly and effectively as they are needed.
In conclusion, Mr. Mills commented that his thinking had a great
deal in common with the reasoning expressed by Mr. Koch. He also said

9/11/62 -27-
that he did not feel the directive needed changing or that there should be
any change in the discount rate.
Mr. Robertson presented the following statement:
I favor a policy of greater monetary ease--introduced as soon
as the pending Treasury financing is past--as the best means avail
able to us of promoting lasting progress toward the two objectives
of domestic prosperity and a viable balance of payments position.
I have not been persuaded of the need for tighter credit policy
at home to reverse short-run capital outflows, and indeed I have
been somewhat critical of the lack of evidence to support such a
policy. On the other hand, it is most important that we all keep
trying to explain our persuasions, as clearly and concretely as
we know how, in order that the Committee collevtively can make
its decisions in the light of all pertinent information.
Accordingly, let me try to set forth, as plainly as I can,
where and how I think an easier monetary policy can contribute
to the national interest. In the first place, I think there is
room for more aggressive loan competition among banks. More
stimulative effects would result if businesses could be encouraged
as much as possible to choose bank rather than nonbank alternatives
for financing assistance, particularly at this time when some signs
of increased business demand for short-term credit are appearing.
While lenders may speak of funds being available, the fact is they
have not been sufficiently available to lower bank lending rates.
Rates on consumer loans appear little changed, mortgage rates are
only slightly lower, and the prime rate for business loans has
stuck at 4-1/2 per cent for two years, following a one-half point
drop from its cyclical peak in 1959 and 1960. Protests might be
made that interest rates make little difference in the lending
field, but I would remind you of the galvanized changes that took
place in another area where interest rates were not supposed to
have much effect--namely, the savings field--following the changes
in bank rates paid on time deposits that were introduced earlier
in this year. Interest rates do affect a fraction of decisions;
they do condition people's choices among financial alternatives;
and I believe our structure of lending rates ought to be on the
side of encouraging expansion at this stage.
Proponents of added monetary ease can draw assurance from
the relative absence of credit abuses prevalent today. Both
business and consumer credit seem to be extended on a fairly
judicious basis; we hear little about competition in easing
terms, and reported delinquencies and loan losses are low.

9/11/62 -28-
Even securities credit, which certainly has been tested more
strenuously than other types of credit in recent months, has
shown no sign of general weakness. The one area of credit
about which some reservations may be justified is real estate
credit. But here two points should be kept in mind. First,
in the particular geographical and functional areas in which
real estate markets show signs of overextension, more factors
than credit ease have contributed to the condition, and it is
likely to require a good deal more than credit restraint to
remedy the situation. Indeed, to judge from the experience
of other markets, the real estate adjustment, if and when it
comes, is likely to proceed more constructively in an atmos
phere of reasonable credit availability rather than the reverse.
Second, we must remember that we are operating with general
monetary controls, and this compels us to judge their appro
priateness in terms of general credit conditions, not those
of the specific market most exposed. To change policy, or
to refrain from changing it, on the grounds of developments
in a particular market is to try to use our general tools as
instruments of selective credit control. We must either trust
the operations of the private financial system to arrive at
sensible distribution of credit (as we did, by and large
successfully, in the case of the sharp expansion of consumer
credit in the mid-1950's) or retreat to reliance upon some
form of selective control, which I know is an administrative
anathema to all of us.
There was a time, earlier this year and last, when a policy
of less credit availability was advocated in order to reduce the
"leakage" of credit ease abroad in terms of bank loans to foreign
ers and foreign capital issues in this country. Recent months
have seen a sharp falling off of such flows, for reasons which
I believe we all could agree are largely unrelated to conditions
in United States credit markets. Any inhibitions to greater
monetary ease because of such flows should now be correspondingly
reduced.
But the impact of monetary policy does not end at the loaning
officer's desk. The unique aspect of bank credit is that it in
volves deposit creation as well. The economy needs both bank loans
and bank deposits, and it is the responsibility of monetary policy
to see that there is enough of both. On this latter score the
record is most discouraging. The latest figures show the money
supply dropping almost a billion dollars in the last half of
August, to a level 1 per cent below the turn of the year despite
the intervening advance in business activity. Notwithstanding
the fact that the current directive to the Account Manager
explicitly calls for "providing moderate reserve expansion in

9/11/62 -29-
the banking system," we have in the past three months seen the
total of required reserves behind private deposits slide over
$200 million below the moderate seasonal-plus-3 per cent-growth
pattern posited in the staff memorandum. We must not become
complacent about a level of free reserves which is being main
tained in good part by unseasonal shrinkages in required
reserves. A similar misinterpretation of free reserve statistics
threatened us with some serious difficulties in the winter and
spring of 1960; I am sure we all want to avoid that happening
again.
To be sure, the slackness in the privately owned money
supply has been associated with a higher than usual total of
Government deposits, but that level of Government deposits
has averaged in the neighborhood of $7 billion since May and
is likely to continue high for another month; this has been
no temporary and insignificant shift of deposits away from
private hands.
Where once one could take some comfort from the belief
that a good deal of monetary growth was being concealed in
the rapid upsurge in time deposits earlier this year, the
fact must now be faced that time account growth has slackened
to less than its 1961 pace.
I am sure no one in this room wishes to be a slavish
advocate of any particular mechanistic formula for monetary
expansion, but I think we must be equally wary of falling
into the trap of assuming that whatever rate of change in
money supply accompanies our policies is prima facie suffi
cient for the economy. Other forms of privately owned liquid
assets are continuing to mount, but the sum total of privately
owned liquidity, however, defined, does not appear to be ex
panding at a pace commensurate with prosperous levels of
economic activity. Furthermore, the increased importance of
short-term Treasury securities in total financial saving, and
the increased importance of net financial saving in total
savings flows, means that the funds of consumers and businesses
are being funnelled into something less than the most stimula
tive channels. The prevailing interest rate structure is
helping to influence private savings, spending, and investment
decisions in this direction. In brief, that rate structure,
which our current monetary policy is helping to sustain, is
aggravating a significant restraint upon domestic expansion,
namely, the present extraordinary penchant of businesses and
consumers for financial claims rather than goods.
Could we do something about it? It seems to me we could.
If we would provide additional reserves to the banking system
(say, maintain $500 million free reserves, to be overprecise

9/11/62 -30
in order to be concrete), banks without doubt would employ the
added funds. If they found limits in the amount of loan demand
which they could develop and accommodate within the limits of
prudence, they could again step up their purchase of investment
securities, adding to public liquidity and contributing to lower
interest rates and more buoyant capital markets which might
attract some hesitant long-term borrowers.
All these effects might not, and indeed need not, lead to
more than moderate increases in a fraction of the spending de
cisions being made in our economy. These, after all, are pre
cisely the dimensions in which monetary policy is supposed to
operate at its best. Faith in monetary policy as a useful
countercyclical tool has been built upon its timely marginal
influence. I see no reason for us to lose that faith. By
exercising our powers for greater monetary stimulation now,
when real resources are available to produce and when our
gold stock is still more than sufficient to protect us from
any rumor-spawned speculative raids on the dollar, we can
hope to contribute to a prosperous and more rapidly growing
economy that will command renewed and more deeply rooted
respect for both our economic system and our currency.
With regard to the directive, Mr. Robertson said he could agree
with the wording. However, the manner in which the directive was being
implemented must mean that his interpretation of the language was
different from that of others. Therefore, the directive should be changed,
in his opinion, to indicate that the Committee desired greater monetary
ease. With this in mind, he would drop the part of the final sentence
that called for maintaining a "moderately firm tone in money markets."
Messrs. Young and Coombs joined the meeting at this point.
Mr. Shepardson said that Mr. Wayne had stated his position about
as completely as he could state it himself. He felt that the Desk should
be prepared to meet seasonal reserve needs, but within the framework of

9/11/62 -31
the present degree of monetary ease and the present tone of the market. In
view of the current Treasury refunding, it seemed to him that the Committee
would almost automatically want to maintain a position of stability for the
next few weeks. In summary, he would favor no change in current policy or
in the language of the directive.
Mr. King expressed general agreement with the views stated by
Messrs. Wayne and Shepardson. He did not believe that a policy of greater
ease would actually solve any current problems. However, he did not attach
to the bill rate quite the degree of significance that others seemed to
attach to it. Mr. Wayne, as he recalled, had suggested maintaining the
bill rate between 2.80 and 2.90 per cent. He (Mr. King) would not be
upset if the bill rate slipped a little below the present levels.
Mr. Mitchell said it seemed to him necessary to come back to the
basic question of what could be expected of a private enterprise economy.
If one were satisfied with the current levels of resource utilization, he
should be in favor of continuing the status quo in terms of monetary policy.
For others it seemed to him the questions were whether it was known what
was wrong and whether it was felt that something could be done about the
stiuation. He was not sure that he knew what was wrong. The economy was
healthy in many respects. Inventories were in very good shape and, com
pared with several months ago, the stock market was better adjusted to
the prospects of the economy. The country was not in an ideal position
as far as the wage-price spiral was concerned, but it was better off in

9/11/62 -32
this respect than it had been for a long time. Thus, it might appear that
the economy was now in pretty good shape.
Regardless of such an analysis, however, Mr. Mitchell was not fully
prepared to believe that the only way to achieve a better utilization of
resources was through changes in Government spending and taxes. In any
event, moreover, it would be a matter of six to nine months before any
action in those respects could be anticipated.
There was another factor that had been bothering him for some time,
Mr. Mitchell said. He felt that the maintenance of the short-term rate was
a road block because it was too profitable for investors to remain liquid.
If an investor was uncertain about the prospects of the economy, he could
afford to stay invested short at the level of current short-term rates.
An effort should be made to cure this situation. If the System would
release its grip on the short-term rate a little, perhaps debt management
would also release its grip somewhat. This might provide enough marginal
stimulation and enough incentive to bring about an improved utilization of
resources with a minimum of Governmental interference in the private econ
omy. The System, he thought, could do a little more in this regard than
it was presently doing. This was the basis on which he would suggest
letting the short-term rate drop, although not so far as to create a
balance of payments dilemma. If it were not for that dilemma, he would
advocate a 2 per cent rate, or perhaps an even lower rate. In the present

9/11/62 -33
circumstances, he would suggest giving the 2-1/2 per cent level a chance
to operate.
Mr. Fulton reported that sentiment among businessmen in the Fourth
District was not quite as gloomy as it had been, perhaps for no other rea
son than that businessmen were becoming inured to the shocks, such as the
stock market decline, that the economy had experienced. While they expected
no sharp improvement, neither did they seem to expect a sharp and abrupt
downturn.
In the steel industry, production had been rising gently over the
past couple of months, mainly because customers were running out of inven
tory, but there was no substantial upturn in orders. Thus far the automo
bile industry was not ordering in quantity; one wondered when the companies
would begin to order steel in greater volume for the new-model cars.
Seasonally adjusted unemployment had remained substantially unchanged for
several weeks; despite lay-offs due to auto model changeovers and plant
vacations. For the District as a whole, building activity turned down
sharply in July, and August reports for Cleveland and Cincinnati showed
a further decline. The region had made the poorest statistical showing
in construction activity of any area in the nation. Except for one poor
week, department store sales in August were about comparable to the July
level, and for the year to date they were about 2 per cent ahead of a
year ago. All in all, it might be said that activity in the Fourth
District was sluggish.

9/11/62 -34
Turning to District financial developments, Mr. Fulton said that
the earning assets of reporting banks--both loans and investments--moved
up slightly in August, this having been the first August increase in the
past four years. Considerable competition for loans was reported. There
were complaints that lenders from outside the District were offering mort
gages at around 5-1/4 per cent with maturities up to 30 years, and rates
of 5 to 5-1/2 per cent were being offered on instalment loans to encourage
borrowing. Considerable competition also was reported for term loans.
Thus, it seemed that there was an adequate supply of funds if people
could be induced to borrow.
Mr. Fulton expressed the view that monetary policy had been favor
able to the borrower, and that credit was rather obviously available. He
felt that a continuation of the present policy pattern was in order rather
than a policy of trying to saturate the banks with money, with the compli
cations that would ensue. While he did not pretend to know exactly what
was wrong with the economy or the specific cure, the policy that had been
followed seemed to be favorable to the general situation. He would not
change the discount rate at this time, and he would have no objection to
continuation of the directive in its present form.
Mr. Bopp reported little evidence of vigor in the Third District
economy. It was true that department store sales were improving and
residential construction awards had moved up recently; but weekly hours
in manufacturing had been dropping since April, the help wanted index had

9/11/62 -35
been dropping since March, and manufacturing employment recently declined
somewhat. And, of course, the persistent problem of continuing high and
rising unemployment rates in all but a few favored areas was still present.
Loans at District banks had been increasing rapidly, with about
half of the increase in business loans. Consumer loans, real estate loans,
and loans to sales finance companies and other financial institutions had
also increased significantly. The increase in loans, together with de
clines in investments and deposits, had produced a decrease in bank
liquidity. Moreover, bank reserves, particularly at the larger banks,
appeared to be under increasing pressure.
So long as unemployment and prices continued at present levels,
Mr. Bopp felt that System policy should be directed not only toward pro
viding enough reserves to accommodate impending seasonal needs but toward
producing a liberal expansion of money and credit. For the present, how
ever, he would maintain the status quo. He would continue the existing
directive and make no change in the discount rate.
Mr. Bryan reported that he could find no developments of real
significance in Sixth District economy, which seemed to be following
about the same pattern as indicated by the national figures.
There seemed to be some debate, Mr. Bryan noted, as to whether
monetary policy could be more stimulative, and as to what the System
might have been expected to do that it had not done. Part of the
argument centered around the perverse behavior of the conventionally
defined money supply in recent months. The banking figures had done

9/11/62 -36
precisely what one would have expected them to do in a situation in which
the Federal Reserve supplied reserves. From November 29, 1961, to June 27,
1962, banks expanded their loans and investments by $10.6 billion, on a
seasonally adjusted basis. However, since the public had chosen not to
put its funds in demand deposits, the money supply--as conventionally
defined--had not behaved in the way that might have been expected. There
was always a problem in appraising a situation of that kind. When the gross
national product did not behave according to estimates, there was an incli
nation to blame the economy rather than the estimates. When the money supply
did not behave as it was thought that it should behave, there was a tendency
to get upset, whereas one ought to question the definition.
Mr. Bryan noted that the volume of total reserves had been kept
mounting fairly well. The long-run trend line had been exceeded for a
while; and in recent months the figures were fairly close to that line.
Borrowings from the Federal Reserve Banks were low, so there was no
restraint indicated there.
His judgment, Mr. Bryan said, was that the System ought to supply
reserves to meet seasonal needs fully, and to provide a growth factor which,
for want of a better figure, he would put at 3 per cent annual rate. This,
he thought, could be reconciled with free reserves of $400-$450 million.
However, if temporary tightness should develop in the market because of
factors such as Mr. Stone had mentioned, he would not be upset if free
reserves went above $450 million. This was a time when the tone and feel

9/11/62 -37-
of the market was appropriately a part of the guide that the Account Manager
should use.
As to the discount rate, Mr. Bryan said he would not advocate any
change. As to the directive, he was not convinced that any change in
language was necessary at this particular time. He did feel, however, that
a reform in the pattern of the directive was worthy of continued considera
tion.
Mr. Bryan also said that he was not as yet convinced that the economy
was now peaking out and going into a decline. However, that could prove to
be the case. If so, the Committee at some point might be confronted with a
"moment of truth," so to speak, with regard to policy. If it supplied the
reserves necessary for growth in the face of a declining economy, there
were going to be interest rate reductions from the pressure of savings.
Then, if the System tried on account of the international situation to
maintain interest rates, it would in effect be pursuing the economy down
ward and aggravating a deflation. That would be the moment of truth.
Mr. Francis reported that Eighth District business activity con
tinued to fluctuate in July and August around levels established in the
second quarter of the year. Employment had increased only slightly since
the beginning of the second quarter and the unemployment rate had leveled
out at just over 5 per cent. Department store sales in recent months
were near the March levels.
Bank debits had shown a slight increase since April. Business
loans, after recovering from a first-quarter decline, were unchanged

9/11/62 -38
since June. An element of strength was found in the continuing advance in
the industrial use of electric power. Bank deposits were unchanged since
June; they had advanced only slightly since the first quarter. The con
tinued increase in time deposits during July and August was offset by a
decrease in demand deposits, which had declined in six of the past eight
months. Cash receipts from farm marketings in the first half of the year
were about 3 per cent above the total for the same period in 1961. Dry
weather had damaged pastures quite severely in some areas. Corn, cotton,
and soy beans had been damaged somewhat, but not sufficiently to alter the
over-all prospects greatly.
Mr. Balderston commented that the Committee continued to face a
conflict between domestic and international problems. At the August 21
meeting he had suggested that the effect of greater liquidity on domestic
activity was uncertain, whereas the impatience of foreign central banks
holding increased amounts of dollars was being made clear increasingly.
Thus, he found himself caught between domestic troubles, about which he
felt somewhat uncertain, and foreign claims being pressed upon this
country, about which he felt certain.
Since the current Treasury refunding implied a continuation of
present policy for the next three weeks, Mr. Balderston said, he would
like to suggest certain limitations that surrounded monetary policy as
a prelude or orientation for the problems that seemed likely to confront
the Committee once the refunding was over. On the domestic side he saw

9/11/62 -39
two limitations on achieving national goals through monetary policy.
For one thing, of the total flow of credit and equity market instru
ments the part supplied by commercial banks was now running about
one-fourth, whereas in 1959--also the second year after a cyclical
upturn--the percentage was only one-tenth. Second, monetary policy
seemed unable to improve the profit expectations that were so necessary
to greater investment. It was able to do little to induce employers
to hire more people at wage rates they considered too high; and this
country did not look as inviting as it once did in the eyes of investors.
Job opportunities were restricted by wage rates that had been raised
unconscionably.
On the international side, meanwhile, it seemed clear that
the patience of this country's creditors was nearing an end. This
country was being told, not alone through withdrawals of gold, that
its creditors wanted no more dollars. Suggestions were coming from
abroad in the form of measures that could be contrived to enable the
central banks of other countries to hold dollars despite political
and other pressures to draw gold from the United States. What monetary
policy could do about that problem was not clear to him. The basic
cause of the trouble, namely, Government spending and lending abroad
in excess of what this country could afford to pay, constituted some
thing that monetary policy could not solve.
In arriving at the System's policy determinations for the fall,
Mr. Balderston considered it important to do everything possible on

9/11/62 -40
both of these fronts, but to recognize all the while the severe
limitations.
As to the next three weeks, Mr. Balderston said he would not
change the policy directive. He called attention, however, to the
format of policy directive that had been suggested by Mr. Knipe with
the thought of casting the directive in more concrete terms and thereby
making it more understandable. Mr. Balderston expressed the hope that
the bill rate and the Federal funds rate might remain close to three
per cent, but he agreed that seasonal reserve needs should be met fully.
Chairman Martin commented that he found this meeting encouraging.
The presentations indicated that everyone was thinking seriously about
the problems confronting the Committee and the economy, which was all
that could reasonably be asked. He would like to associate himself
with those who disclaimed their ability to discern precisely the right
thing to do at the present time.
It seemed obvious to him, the Chairman continued, that the
majority position at this meeting favored maintenance of the status
quo for the next three weeks.
Continuing with a personal comment on the broad picture,
Chairman Martin said he would not give up the ship too readily because
of the slowness of economic advance. He thought it would be necessary
to wait and see what the fourth quarter held.

9/11/62 -41
In another observation, the Chairman noted that statistics are
important. However, he was distrustful of them when his common sense
told him something different from what the statistics suggested. At
the present time there was, in his opinion, no inadequacy of funds and
no lack of liquidity. His inquiries had not produced evidence to such
effect, or situations where parties would have borrowed, or borrowed
more, if money was available at 1/2 per cent less. He was convinced
that there was a point at which further monetary ease would do harm
instead of good. He did not know exactly when that point was reached,
nor would he want to say that it had been reached. Sometimes, however,
shadows can be seen in advance.
The Chairman went on to make the comment that Messrs. Robertson
and Mitchell had performed a service at this and recent meetings by pre
senting so thoroughly the reasoning underlying their positions. Similarly,
Mr. Mills had rendered a service earlier this year by explaining a position
that was contrary to the view of the majority at the time. There should
not be disagreement just for disagreement's sake. However, if the
Committee was going to succeed in its task of formulating appropriate
monetary policy, all ideas should be put on the table, after which the
Committee should try to pull together. Fortunately, while there had
been questions from time to time within the group, there had also been
a close enough approach to unanimity of opinion to permit a feeling that
the Committee was able to make progress. Obviously, if there was an

9/11/62 -42
inclination to pursue any particular line of thought as a hobby, that
could be disastrous in the area of monetary policy.
Chairman Martin mentioned that he had observed over a period of
years a tendency on the part of persons outside the System to suggest
that monetary policy should bear an undue share of the burden in achieving
national objectives. The existence of this general tendency was something
to which the Committee must reconcile itself.
The Chairman said it was his observation that, while the economy
could suffer severely from undue stringency of credit, over the longer
run it was not likely to suffer so severely from a monetary policy that
was too restrictive as from one that was too easy. Mr. Mitchell had made
his point well: in a period of uncertainty the holding up of the short
term interest rate might deter some people from taking chances that they
otherwise would take. At the same time, although a good many years had
passed since the end of World War II, the economy of this country was
still suffering from the inflationary overhang.
It concerned him, the Chairman said, that at some point there
might be a world-wide slowdown. Further, if there should be a domestic
slowdown in the fourth quarter--something he had not yet conceded in his
own mind--that would be the second occasion in recent times where the
economy of European countries would appear stronger than that of the
United States. As to the situation abroad, while Europeans were talking
about six or nine months more of expansion, they were beginning to see
strains in their own economies.

9/11/62 -43
One must recognize, Chairman Martin continued, that there were
some fundamental factors in the picture of a structural nature--part of
the heritage of a long period of inflation. While he was in favor of
doing everything within reason through monetary and credit policy to
assist the necessary adjustments, he was not in favor of creating
money simply to accommodate foolish expenditures, speculation, or
lower credit standards, and thus postpone adjustments of a fundamental
nature that must be made. He was not saying that this was necessarily
the time at which such results would occur, and he might be wrong in
his judgment. This summer, however, he felt that monetary policy had
behaved correctly, in terms of both the domestic economy and the
international situation. He did not believe that monetary policy
had been a damper on the domestic economy in any sense of the word.
It might become a damper, of course, if the economy got into a period
of real decline. In that event, steps should be taken, perhaps, to
ease money further, but during this past summer stability was the
primary objective; the confidence factor was of paramount importance.
In his opinion, monetary policy would have been put in the role of
tending toward irresponsibility if the Federal Reserve had pursued
an inordinately easy policy during the summer in the aftermath of the
stock market adjustment. At present, with the annual Fund and Bank
meetings about to occur and the balance of payments situation preca
rious, it would be irresponsible to assume that the Federal Reserve

9/11/62 -44
could ignore the exigencies of world finance, particularly the con
fidence factor.
In further comments, the Chairman spoke favorably of the
complementary nature of debt management and monetary policy at the
present time. During the past two years, the blending of these opera
tions had been particularly effective, as effective as he could remem
ber in his experience. This had worked toward a stability in monetary
operations, and he believed stability was needed. In his view the
most effective contribution monetary policy could make was not to
go off half-cocked in either direction at the present time but rather
to lend stability to the economy. A time might be approaching when
the business picture could be appraised more clearly; that might be
possible by the date of the next Committee meeting.
Chairman Martin forecast a fast decline in interest rates,
regardless of anything the Federal Reserve might do, if business
should decline appreciably. And he would not want to abet such a
decline in interest rates in advance of a recession. There were a
lot of problems, he repeated, that were a part of the heritage of
World War II, and he did not pretend to know the answers. Neither,
as he had said many times on previous occasions, did he pretend to
understand the workings of the money supply. Of one thing, however,
he felt fairly certain. When people were not complaining of inability
to obtain money and lenders were trying to seek out borrowers, there

9/11/62 -45
was something in the picture of a more fundamental character than
lack of growth of the money supply.
Reverting to the consensus of this meeting, the Chairman
repeated that it was his understanding that the majority position
was clearly in favor of maintenance of the status quo.
In discussion of this point, Mr. Mills asked the Account
Manager how he would interpret "status quo." His feeling, Mr. Mills
said, was that one would have to think in terms of at least the two
most recent meetings of the Committee, which would imply a level of
free reserves of around $350-$400 million. His impression--and he
thought perhaps the impression of a majority of the Committee--was
that it would be appropriate to raise the level of free reserves to
some degree to obtain the results that were being sought. This was
consistent with Mr. Stone's suggestion that in the immediate future
there might be a hidden tightness in the reserve position that should
be lubricated by allowing free reserves to increase.
Chairman Martin said he had been going to comment on the
difficulty of using the free reserve figure as a guide in the present
circumstances. He would go along with the thought of Mr. Deming and
others that reference should be made primarily to the color, tone,
and feel of the market in talking about maintenance of the status quo
at the present time, rather than to a specific level of free reserves.
Mr. Stone said that this coincided with his interpretation.

9/11/62 -46
Mr. Mills then commented that if he were the Account Manager
he would feel rather at loose ends in trying to determine the appropriate
nature of day-to-day operations for the System Account.
Mr. Stone replied that he had interpreted the intent of the
Committee's recent instructions as placing emphasis on maintaining
the color, tone, and feel of the market. That was what had been sought
by the Desk, and he would like to continue on that basis.
In this connection, the Chairman commented that he did not
know what words might best be used in the policy directives to clarify
the Committee's instructions to the Account Manager. In a memorandum
distributed yesterday, Mr. Knipe had made a suggestion for a somewhat
different type of directive, and this suggestion deserved thought and
study. This was a question that had come up repeatedly. Everyone
should continue to give attention to the possibility of improving the
nature and elements of the directive. However, he doubted whether the
Committee was going to be able to contrive any method of instruction
that would offset the need for exercise of discretion on the part of
the Account Manager. This was exemplified by problems that arose at
the Desk one day recently when he and Mr. Deming happened to be present.
He questioned whether it was possible to deal with such things satis
factorily in the policy directive.
The Chairman then inquired as to the members of the Committee
who would like to be recorded as dissenting from a policy of maintaining

9/11/62 -47
the status quo, within the context of the preceding discussion, and
Messrs. Mitchell and Robertson said they would like to be recorded as
dissenting.
Mr. Mills said he would like to make a comment in this regard.
If the Account Manager's interpretation of the color, tone, and feel
of the market should develop to be markedly different from his own
interpretation, and if he (Mr. Mills) felt that adequate reserves had
not been supplied, he would reserve the right to be frankly critical
at the next Committee meeting.
Chairman Martin noted that this right was reserved to each
Committee member at each meeting.
Mr. Hayes commented that in listening to Mr. Mills' earlier
statement he had gotten the impression that the policy favored by
Mr. Mills would be somewhat easier than that favored by a majority of
the Committee. Therefore, he would expect Mr. Mills to be dissatisfied
if operations for the Account reflected the policy that appeared to be
favored by the majority.
Chairman Martin said this was also his understanding. Accord
ingly, he wondered whether Mr. Mills would not be well advised to vote
against the majority position.
Mr. Mills then suggested a poll of the Committee to ascertain
whether there was a clear majority in favor of maintenance of the
status quo.

9/11/62 -48
Accordingly, such a poll was taken, with the result that nine
members of the Committee expressed themselves as favoring maintenance
of the status quo while Messrs. Mills, Mitchell, and Robertson dissented.
Mr. Bryan, who had aligned himself with the majority in the
poll, explained that his suggestion for a free reserve target ($400-$450
million) did not seem to be too far from the view of the majority,
particularly when the status quo was being thought of primarily in
terms of maintaining the color, tone, and feel of the market.
In further discussion, Mr. Stone repeated that he had been
interpreting the Committee's position as placing primary emphasis on
the tone, color, and feel of the market. The Desk had looked at the
Federal funds rate and the bill rate, among others. In recent weeks,
this had resulted in the prevailing range of free reserves. In future
weeks, it might involve a higher level of free reserves.
Mr. Hayes expressed agreement with Mr. Stone. It seemed impor
tant to distinguish this approach from Mr. Mills' view, for the latter
had spoken of a higher level of free reserves as an objective. Under
Mr. Stone's approach, a higher level of free reserves might develop,
but only as the necessary concomitant of an attempt to maintain the
prevailing color, tone, and feel of the market.
Mr. Mills commented that if there was reluctance to supply
reserves and they were only supplied under the pressure of other
guides, it was his contention that the Desk would be exerting a
distinctly restrictive policy pressure.

9/11/62
Mr. Hayes replied that he did not think the Account Manager
had indicated any particular reluctance to supply reserves. He had
indicated complete willingness to attempt to achieve stability. If
it developed that this attempt involved higher levels of free reserves,
Mr. Hayes assumed the Manager would not be reluctant to supply reserves.
Chairman Martin then inquired whether there were any further
comments, and none were heard.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York was authorized and directed, until
otherwise directed by the Committee, to
effect transactions for the System Open
Market Account in accordance with the
following current economic policy direc
tive:
It is the current policy of the Federal Open Market
Committee to permit the supply of bank credit and money
to increase further, but at the same time to avoid redun
dant bank reserves that would encourage capital outflows
internationally. This policy takes into account, on the
one hand, the gradualness of recent advance in economic
activity and the availability of resources to permit
further advance in activity. On the other hand, it gives
recognition to the bank credit expansion over the past
year and to the role of capital flows in the country's
adverse balance of payments.
To implement this policy, operations for the System
Open Market Account during the next three weeks shall be
conducted with a view to providing moderate reserve expan
sion in the banking system and to fostering a moderately
firm tone in money markets.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,
Hayes, Balderston, Bryan, Deming, Ellis,
Fulton, King, and Shepardson. Votes against
this action: Messrs. Mills, Mitchell, and
Robertson.

9/11/62 -50
Mr. Broida withdrew from the meeting at this point.
There had been distributed to the Committee a report from the
Special Manager of the System Open Market Account on foreign exchange
market conditions and on Open Market Account and Treasury operations
in foreign currencies for the period August 21 through September 5,
1962, and a supplementary report for the period September 6 through
September 10, 1962. Copies of these reports have been placed in the
files of the Committee.
In the course of comments supplementing his written reports,
Mr. Coombs noted that an easing had occurred in the exchange rates of
certain European currencies, and the Account Management had been
trying to take advantage of the situation. Purchases of Netherlands
guilders had reached a total of about $35 million equivalent, against
System drawings of guilders to the extent of $50 million under the
swap arrangement with the Netherlands Bank. Drawings of $35 million
having been repaid through use of the purchased guilders, that amount
of the swap facility had reverted to a standby basis. The Treasury
had outstanding $20 million, so the total short position in guilders
was now about $35 million.
Also, Swiss francs to the equivalent of about $10 million had
been picked up in the past week or so, and would be used toward the
repayment of drawings under the swap arrangement with the Bank for
International Settlements. Further, it appeared that it might be
possible to make some start shortly toward repaying drawings under

9/11/62 -51
the swap arrangement with the National Bank of Belgium.
Mr. Coombs said that the System's efforts to pay off its
drawings under the swap arrangements as fast as possible had made a
good impression on bankers abroad. These efforts had quieted appre
hensions that the swap facilities might be abused; that short-term
credits could drag on indefinitely. Therefore, it was fortunate that
there had been a reversal of the flows of funds so quickly after the
drawings were made, and that the System had been able to move so fast
to make repayments.
Purchases of about $15 million of German marks had replenished
the System's mark holdings almost to the level at which they stood
before the intervention operations of June and July. The Treasury
also had replenished its holdings of marks, and combined Treasury and
Federal Reserve holdings now totaled around $60 million equivalent.
Mr. Coombs noted that the Canadians had received a heavy flow
of money during the past few months; their reserves had been built up
by more than half a billion dollars since the Canadian stabilization
program was inaugurated in the latter part of June. However, the Bank
of Canada had expressed a desire to have the swap arrangement with
the Federal Reserve, which would expire September 26, 1962, renewed
for another three months on the same terms as the existing arrangement.
Question had been raised whether a standby swap facility might not
serve as well, but the Bank of Canada would prefer actually to have

9/11/62 -52
the U. S. dollars in its reserves. Hence, it would like to renew
the present arrangement if that was agreeable to the Federal Reserve.
The Bank of Canada had been kept posted on the efforts of the Federal
Reserve to pay off its outstanding drawings under swap arrangements
in advance of maturity, but thus far there had been no indication
that, if the Canadian swap were renewed, the Bank would move to unwind
it before the end of the renewal period. It would be expected, of
course, that the swap would be unwound at the end of the additional
three months.
In the course of further discussion of the Canadian situation,
it was brought out that the rationale of the original swap was to allow
the Canadians time to introduce constructive measures to improve the
country's basic international payments position. Although the Canadian
position had already improved markedly, a three-month renewal of the
swap facility could be justified on the basis that there had not yet
been time for adoption of a longer-run program of constructive measures.
Accordingly, a three-month renewal
of the Federal Reserve-Bank of Canada
$250 million swap arrangement on the same
terms and conditions as the original
agreement was authorized.
Turning to the swap arrangement with the Netherlands Bank,
Mr. Coombs noted that it would mature on September 14, 1962. In his
opinion a three-month renewal would be agreeable to the Netherlands
Bank and of advantage to the Federal Reserve. However, he believed

9/11/62 -53
the Netherlands Bank might request a shift in the interest rate basis
from an arbitrary 2 per cent rate to one based on the U. S. Treasury
bill rate.
Thereupon, upon recommendation of
Mr. Coombs, the Committee authorized a
renewal for three months of the $50
million swap arrangement with the
Netherlands Bank.
In the case of the $50 million swap with the National Bank of
Belgium, Mr. Coombs noted that this arrangement would not mature until
December 20, 1962. The possibility of a standby facility had been sug
gested by him to the National Bank of Belgium, but the National Bank
had preferred to have the original swap agreement executed on an out
right basis.
Mr. Coombs next referred to the problem he had mentioned at
the August 21 Committee meeting relative to acquiring guilders through
direct transactions with the Netherlands Bank. He had recommended,
and the Open Market Committee had concurred, that guilders should
continue to be acquired at the market rate rather than to accept a
proposal from the Netherlands Bank that System purchases be arranged
at a special arbitrary rate at such times as the System wished to
purchase guilders in substantial quantity. The problem was that on
some days guilders were available in the market in only limited amounts.
In the circumstances, he had endeavored to think of some compromise
solution that would enable the purchase of larger quantities of guilders

9/11/62 -54
while continuing the market rate principle. It had occurred to him
that the System might pay a stipulated commission or fee to the
Netherlands Bank for the convenience ofo btaining sizable lots of
guilders through direct transactions with the Netherlands Bank. He
had mentioned this possibility to the Netherlands Bank, and yesterday
he had received word that the Bank would be agreeable in principle to
such an arrangement. The Bank had suggested that the commission might
be fixed at the rate of 1/8 per cent. Such a rate, Mr. Coombs pointed
out, would result in roughly an equal sharing between the Federal
Reserve and the Netherlands Bank of the profits accruing from System
drawings of guilders when the dollar was weak and purchases of guilders
after the dollar had strengthened. The Treasury also was involved
because it had $20 million of guilder drawings outstanding that it
was anxious to liquidate quickly. Accordingly, he had inquired whether
such an arrangement would be acceptable to the Treasury, and had found
that the Treasury would be agreeable. If the Open Market Committee
concurred in such an arrangement, it should be possible to clean up
the guilder operation completely in the course of the next week through
purchases of $15 million of guilders for System account and $20 million
for Treasury account. If the arrangement was not favored, he feared
that the guilder operation would drag on, with relatively meager
possibilities of acquiring guilders through the market.

9/11/62 -55
In reply to questions, Mr. Coombs confirmed that the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York made no charge when it executed foreign exchange transac
tions on behalf of foreign central banks. The commission would be unusual
in interbank relationships, but the use of an arbitrary rate that deviated
from the market rate concerned him even more. He felt that the System
would be on better ground if it continued to adhere to the concept of
executing foreign exchange transactions only at the market rate, but
paid a fee to the Netherlands Bank for the convenience to the Federal
Reserve of the execution of wholesale transactions direct with the
Netherlands Bank.
Mr. Coombs recalled that the current swap arrangement was initiated
with a view to mopping up dollar holdings of the Netherlands Bank in excess
of the traditional $200 million limit of that Bank. The Netherlands had
subsequently experienced an outflow of funds. At present its total hold
ings of dollars were down to around $135 million, and another prospective
out-payment appeared likely to reduce the holdings close to the $100
million level. Thus, repayment of the System's drawings would build up
the dollar holdings of the Netherlands Bank only to a point well below
the traditional dollar conversion point.
In reply to additional questions, Mr. Coombs reiterated that the
effect of the payment of the proposed commission would be to reduce a
windfall profit to the Federal Reserve from its guilder operations. While
no parallel question had arisen under swap arrangements with other foreign

9/11/62 -56
central banks, conceivably a question of the same nature might arise else
where; the System was just getting into this field. A similar problem,
incidentally, had arisen in connection with the repayment of drawings from
the International Monetary Fund.
Mr. Coombs further pointed out that the question whether commissions
or fees should be paid on other occasions remained at the initiative of the
Federal Reserve. In markets the size of the Swiss franc, German mark, or
pound sterling markets, there should not be too much difficulty in buying
in sufficient quantity at market rates. Hence the question of the size
and depth of the various currency markets was involved. He had not been
able to think of any absolutely satisfactory solution to the guilder
problem, but he had a feeling that the commission plan was the least dis
advantageous.
In reply to a question regarding the possibility of waiting until
the terminal date of the drawings, Mr. Coombs commented that this would
focus the present point of difficulty more sharply. He would prefer to
pay off the drawings in advance.
In reply to another question, Mr. Coombs repeated that he saw a
substantial advantage in liquidating the swap with the Netherlands Bank
as fast as possible in order to demonstrate that the System's operations
were designed to deal with reversible flows of funds and that the opera
tions were effective. One never knew when the tide might move the other
way, and he would like to have this credit facility completely restored

9/11/62 -57
if possible. The System had to feel its way on this sort of thing. He
did not think that the arrangement he proposed would necessarily create
a precedent, even in the case of guilders.
Mr. Hayes agreed, noting that the System could always say, even
to the Dutch, that it would not be able to operate the same way again.
In view of factors such as the differences in the size of the various
foreign exchange markets, the System could distinguish among its arrange
ments more or less on an ad hoc basis.
After further discussion, Chairman Martin commented that the Federal
Reserve was engaged in experimental operations. The Committee might want
later to establish some principles that would apply to swap arrangements
generally. However, if it seemed desirable for the Federal Reserve to
liquidate the current guilder drawings and the arrangement proposed by
Mr. Coombs seemed to provide the best available mechanism, agreement on
a small fee probably was not too much of a price to pay.
Mr. Mitchell commented that in his view the payment of the fee was
not too important in itself. The important thing was the principle of
parallel treatment. So far as he could see, the payment of a fee had no
basis from the standpoint of principles that the System ought to be
following.
Mr. Deming inquired whether there might not be more justification
for paying a premium if the swap arrangement was being unwound at the last
minute then if this were done in advance. Mr. Coombs replied that the

9/11/62 -58
United States would be saving interest. Also, by waiting it might forego
the opportunity to make a sizable profit. Mr. Deming then commented that
he was not too concerned about the making of a profit or the sharing there
of. It was the principle of paying a fee that was of more concern to him.
Mr. Furth noted that if the System endeavored to buy 15 million
dollars of guilders through the market, the market price probably would go
up by an amount at least equal to the 1/8 per cent commission. It was quite
customary, in the case of Fund drawings, to pay a rate close to the market,
taking into consideration the effect of a market transaction on the rate.
Therefore, he was not particularly apprehensive about the establishment of
a precedent. On a market broader than the guilder market, this simply
would not happen. Further, if it became known that a swap operation
always was to be reversed on the last day, it would be relatively simple
for a central bank to have the market on that day less favorable to the
System than the rate involved in the payment of a small commission.
Question was raised of Mr. Coombs whether payment of a commission
was actually more desirable than departing from the market rate. If some
kind of agreement was in effect whereby the market rate was made subject to
a certain adjustment, would this not be better than paying a commission?
Mr. Coombs replied that a rather nebulous area was involved when
one tried to ascertain the effect of a large transaction on the market
rate. The effect of such a transaction on the market rate might be more
or less than 1/8 per cent. As he had indicated previously, the payment

9/11/62 -59
of a commission of 1/8 per cent would come close to splitting between
the Netherlands Bank and the Federal Reserve the benefit of this
particular operation. This seemed to him better than getting into
the question of what would happen to the market rate if an attempt
was made to execute a large transaction in the market.
Chairman Martin then suggested that the Open Market Committee
approve the plan proposed in this instance by Mr. Coombs, with the
understanding that this was clearly not to be regarded as establish
ing a precedent.
Thereupon, the plan proposed by
Mr. Coombs was approved on the basis
stated by the Chairman.
Mr. Coombs then commented that over the next few months, a
period of the year when there was usually some pressure on the pound
sterling, there might be opportunities to pick up sterling at rates of
par or below. He thought it might be well, as and when such opportu
nities arose, to acquire sterling up to a total of not more than
$25 million equivalent. Such holdings might be useful in pilot opera
tions after the turn of the year, when the seasonal flow of funds to
London might be expected to begin.
Without objection, purchases of
sterling along the lines recommended by
Mr. Coombs were authorized.
Mr. Coombs also noted that last week in London he had mentioned
to British officials that the Federal Reserve System might be prepared to

9/11/62 -60
consider an increase in the present swap facility to $250 million. The
reaction, however, was that this might not be the most appropriate time.
It was thought that an enlargement of the swap facility might tend to
disturb the quiet in exchange markets by suggesting that there might be
some apprehension in official quarters about another wave of speculation.
If necessary, the British would be prepared to consider an enlargement
of the swap facility, but they appeared to feel that about as much was
being gained psychologically from the $50 million swap facility as could
be gained from a larger one.
After further comments by Mr. Coombs on matters relating to the
area of System foreign currency operations, Chairman Martin requested
Mr. Coombs to outline a proposal that he had made for the publication
of a report on System and Treasury foreign exchange operations.
In reply, Mr. Coombs recalled that at recent hearings before the
Congressional Joint Economic Committee, at which President Hayes testified,
Congressman Reuss of Wisconsin had pressed again for a report on System
foreign currency operations. Thereafter, Mr. Coombs said, he dictated a
summary of Treasury and Federal Reserve operations in this field. On his
recent trip to Europe, he showed the draft to each of the central banks
with which the Federal Reserve had had any sizable operations, and no
objection was indicated to the publication of such a paper. When it
came to the most appropriate method of publication and the matter of
timing, Mr. Coombs was not sure. However, Under Secretary of the

9/11/62 -61
Treasury Roosa had pointed out that a meeting of Working Party 3 of the
Economic Policy Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development was to be held in Washington at the end of this week.
Mr. Roosa suggested that it might be helpful if copies of the paper
could be shown to the members of the Working Party. Mr. Roosa also
thought that it might be of some use if the paper could be published
during the period of the Fund and Bank meetings, to be held next week.
Chairman Martin suggested that the Open Market Committee authorize
the publication of the paper and leave the details to be worked out by Mr.
Young, with the thought that if it was agreeable to the people involved
the paper would be issued as promptly as possible. If it could be issued
during the Fund and Bank meetings, those attending the meetings would have
available to them something authoritative on what had actually been done in
this field.
In reply to a question, Mr. Young said he would have in mind that
the paper would be sent to the Congressional Committee and released to the
public simultaneously.
Mr. Mills inquired whether this was purely a factual report or a
report aimed at explaining the purposes and objectives of System operations
and whether they had been realized. In reply, Mr. Coombs said that where
it appeared that the operations had been useful in reversing a flow of
funds, that would be pointed out. He also mentioned that the larger part
of the document was devoted to a discussion of Treasury operations.

9/11/62 -62
The issuance of the paper described by
Mr. Coombs was then authorized.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the open market transac
tions in foreign currencies during the period
August 21 through September 10, 1962, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
At its meeting on August 21, 1962, the Open Market Committee gave
consideration to a letter from Congressman Patman, Chairman of the Joint
Economic Committee, to Chairman Martin dated August 14, 1962, with which
Congressman Patman transmitted in galley form an unpublished Joint Com
mittee Print consisting of a digest based on the minutes of the Federal
Open Market Committee for 1960. The Committee Print was entitled, "How
Policies of the Federal Reserve System are Determined." Congressman
Patman cited in his letter a resolution adopted by majority vote of the
Joint Economic Committee that the Committee Print "be submitted in a
letter by the Chairman to the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System with the request that he allow us to make it public."
In reflection of the position taken by the Open Market Committee
following consideration of this matter at the August 21 meeting, there was
sent to Chairman Patman on that date a letter over the signature of Chair
man Martin indicating, for reasons stated, that the Open Market Committee
had concluded it would be desirable to carry over until its next meeting,
to be held on September 11, the question raised concerning general publi
cation of the Joint Committee Print. The interim reply from Chairman Martin

9/11/62 -63
also stated that Congressman Patman would be advised of the Open Market
Committee's views promptly following the September 11 meeting. In addi
tion to citing the need for more time in order to allow careful study by
the members of the Open Market Committee of the question whether it would
be in the public interest to publish the Joint Commnittee Print, Chairman
Martin's interim reply referred to an indication in the galley proof of
the document that the Joint Committee might plan to include a final chap
ter that had not been forwarded with the galley proof. Chairman Martin's
letter stated that it would be helpful to the members of the Open Market
Committee to have an opportunity to review the galley proof of the final
chapter if the Joint Committee intended to include such a chapter.
No reply had been received from Congressman Patman to Chairman
Martin's letter of August 21. However, there had been distributed to
the members of the Open Market Committee for consideration prior to
discussion at this meeting a draft of a further reply that might be
made to Congressman Patman. The proposed reply would take the posi
tion that publication of the proposed Joint Committee Print would not
be in the public interest. The view would be expressed that to publicize
without a substantial time lapse the minutes of the internal discussions
preceding the actions of the Open Market Committee would do public
mischief rather than public good. Therefore, the Committee would repeat
the request made in Chairman Martin's letter of July 21, 1961, transmitting
the minutes for 1960 to the Joint Committee, that their contents be held
in confidence.

9/11/62 -64
In the initial phases of the discussion at this meeting, several
members of the Committee indicated that they regarded the draft of pro
posed reply as generally satisfactory and said that their comments, which
already had been sent or could be sent to the Committee Secretary for con
sideration, were of an editorial nature.
Mr. Robertson, on the other hand, indicated that he would not favor
sending the proposed letter in its present form because in his view it would
foreclose the Open Market Committee from publishing minutes of the Committee
in full. He noted that the Committee had considered from time to time the
possibility of publication of its minutes for some past period, but no
decision had as yet resulted from those discussions. One question involved
had always been the lapse of time that would be appropriate. In his view
there was every reason for publishing the minutes, after what might be
concluded to be a suitable lapse of time, so that they would be available
to students of the monetary system. He felt that the reply to Congressman
Patman should take the position that the publication of a document such as
the Joint Committee Print before the complete minutes were made available
to the public would not be in the public interest, but the form of the
proposed letter gave him concern.
The reactions to Mr. Robertson's interpretation of the draft of
proposed reply varied. One view expressed was that the language of the
draft, when read carefully, did not preclude the Open Market Committee,
if it so desired, from reaching a decision to publish the minutes of the

9/11/62 -65
Committee after the lapse of a suitable period of time. According to
another view, presented by a member of the Committee who did not favor
publication of the Committee's minutes, the sending of a letter in the
form of the draft would, as Mr. Robertson suggested, raise a substantial
question from the standpoint of publication of the minutes.
In this connection, Chairman Martin commented that he did
not agree with the view that the minutes of the Open Market Committee
should not be published even after a suitable lapse of time. In his
opinion, it would be desirable for the minutes to be published after
some lapse of time on the theory that this was the best way to reveal
to the public the nature of the processes followed in the formulation
of monetary policy. While individuals could write in terms of their
own impressions, the Committee's minutes were not colored to fit the
views of any particular author. However, quite apart from any decision
that might be reached later regarding the publication of the Committee's
minutes, it was.his feeling that the points made in the draft of letter
to Congressman Patman were appropriate.
Mr. Ellis said he would like to correct what may have
been an erroneous impression created by his remarks at the Committee
meeting on April 17, 1962. He had not meant to argue that the Committee
should not ever publish its minutes. His argument was intended to go
to the point that there should be a suitable time lapse in order to
permit the Committee to have the full benefit of private deliberations.

9/11/62 -66
The draft of reply, he noted, pointed out the value of private delib
erations to other Governmental bodies in the process of decision-making,
and the Open Market Committee should not do anything that would tend
to inhibit full and free discussion. As he read the proposed letter,
however, it would not preclude the Open Market Committee from publishing
its minutes after a suitable time lapse if it so desired.
There followed further discussion based on the differing opinions
that had been expressed as to the manner in which the proposed letter
might be interpreted. In the course of this discussion, Mr. Mitchell
made the comment that the letter should be studied from the standpoint
of being sure that it did not prevent the Open Market Committee from
taking steps to alter the characteristics of the record of open market
policy actions published each year in the Board's Annual Report. In
his opinion, the published policy record was in need of improvement.
While he had no specific suggestions at this time as to how an improve
ment might be accomplished, nothing should be said in the proposed
letter that would inhibit the Committee from making as full a disclosure
of its policy actions as it might determine to be desirable.
There followed certain relatively minor suggestions for changes
affecting the tone of the proposed reply. However, since the more basic
issue raised by the comments of Mr. Robertson had not been resolved, the
meeting recessed and reconvened at 2:10 p.m. with the same attendance as
at the conclusion of the morning session except that Messrs. Noyes, Koch,
and Yager were not present.

9/11/62 -67
At the beginning of the afternoon session, Mr. Wayne indicated
that he would be inclined to favor the letter as drafted, with certain
minor changes. However, in order to put before the Committee for con
sideration an approach that might meet the point raised by Mr. Robertson,
he outlined possible changes that would result in a considerably shortened
version of the letter.
In the course of a discussion based on the revisions Mr. Wayne
had outlined, Mr. Deming suggested that in any further consideration of
the possibility of publishing the minutes of the Committee, thought
should be given to the material that had been included in the minutes
over the past year or so with regard to System foreign currency opera
tions. This aspect was not of concern in connection with the minutes
of 1960 or prior years. However, if it should be the decision of the
Committee to embark on a procedure of publishing its minutes after a
period of time had elapsed, there would ultimately be the question of
releasing minutes containing references to foreign central banks and
Governments in connection with discussions of foreign exchange operations.
Other members of the Committee agreed that this was a point
that should be borne in mind. In this connection, there was a sugges
tion that exploration of the practices followed by the Department of
State might be helpful.
There followed suggestions for the deletion from the draft of
letter to Congressman Patman of certain sentences or phrases not

9/11/62 -68
affecting the substance, and there appeared to be general agreement
that these sentences or phrases could appropriately be eliminated.
Mr. Bryan indicated that he favored the general approach
taken in the draft of letter, which he thought would not preclude
the Committee from reaching a subsequent decision, if it saw fit, to
publish its minutes for a prior period. He proposed that the Committee
approve the draft as the basis of reply to Congressman Patman, subject
to such editorial changes as Chairman Martin might consider advisable
in the light of today's discussion.
Subsequently, Mr. Ellis offered a proposal to the effect that
the Open Market Committee approve the sending of a letter to Congressman
Patman, as Chairman of the Joint Economic Committee, stating formally
its opposition to the publication of the Joint Committee Print based on
the Open Market Committee's minutes for 1960. Such action would make
known to Chairman Martin the fundamental position of the Open Market
Committee. Then, with the benefit of the discussion that had taken
place at this meeting, the Chairman could edit the draft of reply in
such manner as he thought appropriate. As Mr. Ellis understood it,
the majority view within the Open Market Committee was that the Joint
Comittee document, based on access to the 1960 minutes, should not be
published, that such publication would be against the public interest,
and that the Committee therefore wished to request observance of the
position it had taken in forwarding the 1960 minutes to the Joint

9/11/62 -69
Committee. The further question had to do with the manner in which
this position should be presented in the letter to Congressman Patman.
He would propose to leave that question to the discretion of Chairman
Martin against the background of the various views and comments that
had been expressed at this meeting.
Mr. Robertson indicated that he would be willing to accept a
proposal for action by the Open Market Committee along the lines stated
by Mr. Ellis.
As the discussion proceeded, however, several members of the
Committee expressed agreement with the view that the draft of proposed
letter before the Committee constituted, subject to editorial changes,
a suitable form of reply. This tended in the direction of action by
the Committee along the lines suggested by Mr. Bryan. At the conclusion
of this phase of the discussion, Mr. Ellis indicated that he would be
prepared to support such a proposal.
Accordingly, it was moved by Mr. Bryan
and seconded by Mr. Shepardson that the Open
Market Committee approve the draft of pro
posed reply to Congressman Patman that had
been distributed prior to this meeting as the
basis of the reply to be made, subject to
such editorial changes as Chairman Martin
might wish to make in the light of the dis
cussion at today's meeting.
A vote was taken on this motion and all
of the members of the Committee voted "aye"
except that Mr. Robertson voted "no" and
Mr. ills abstained.

9/11/62 -70
In explanation of his abstention, Mr. Mills said he was con
cerned that the sending of a letter along the lines that had been
agreed upon would cause irritation in the Congress, particularly insofar
as it made comparisons between the Open Market Committee and the Executive
Branch of the Government, the courts, and committees of Congress. He
did not feel that these comparisons were germane. In his view the record
of the past three weeks provided an answer to the problem: there was a
flurry of discussion when the proposed Joint Committee Print was leaked
to the press, but the discussion appeared to have died away subsequently.
If the Open Market Committee had agreed to the publication of the Joint
Committee Print, expressing regret that such action was being taken and
that Congressman Patman had not observed the Committee's request that
the 1960 minutes be held confidential, Mr. Mills felt that the Open
Market Committee would have been in a better position. If the publica
tion of the Committee Print had produced serious challenges to the
Committee's 1960 actions, which he doubted, the Committee would have
been in a position to answer those challenges on its own ground and
against the record of the minutes.
Secretary's Note: There follows the text of
the letter that was sent to Congressman Patman
over Chairman Martin's signature under date of
September 11, 1962, pursuant to the action taken
by the Federal Open Market Committee at today's
meeting:

9/11/62 -71-
"This is in further response to your letter of August
14, 1962, in which you informed me that the Joint Economic
Committee is considering publication of a 'condensed report'
evolved from the 1960 minutes of the Federal Open Market
Committee. Your letter asks for my position regarding the
publication of this document. After carefully considering
your letter and the galley-proof version of the report that
you sent with your letter, the Federal Open Market Committee
today concluded that publication of the proposed report
would not be in the public interest, a conclusion with which
I agree, and with which I hope your Committee will agree when
it reaches its final decision as to whether it will publish
this document.
"In weighing the considerations of public policy involved
in your Committee's decision, it should be borne in mind that
a complete record of all policy actions taken by the Federal
Open Market Committee is maintained by the Board of Governors
and is set out in full each year in the Board's Annual Report
to Congress, as required by the Federal Reserve Act. Included
in the report thus made public are: (1) a record, by name, of
all votes cast by each member of the Committee in connection
with the determination of open market policies; (2) summaries
of the economic and financial developments and conditions
taken into account in arriving at policy actions; (3) state
ments of the reasons underlying the actions of the Committee;
and (4) statements of the reasons underlying dissents, when
there are dissents.
"The statute does not, of course, require publication of
the minutes of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee;
indeed, it does not prescribe the form of such minutes as may
be kept by the Committee. It has been the practice of the
Committee, nevertheless, to maintain full, detailed, often
nearly verbatim minutes of its discussions and debates prior
to final determinations of policy actions. In distinction
from policy actions, for which the complete record has been
published as stated, the discussions covered in the minutes
have never been made public by the Open Market Committee. In
that respect, the Committee has followed a principle long
established and universally accepted in the public service-
by the Judicial and the Executive branches of the Government,
and by the Committees of Congress as well, including your
Committee, in respect to their own operations.
"Neither the United States Supreme Court nor any other
court, Federal or State, makes public any record of discus
sions in chambers preceding the announcement of a decision,

9/11/62 -72-
although the courts do announce the underlying reasons
therefor and the statements of dissents, if any, as does the
Open Market Committee. The same privacy of pre-decision
discussions extends to the jury room, for reasons that the
late Mr. Justice Benjamin Cardozo of the United States Supreme
Court put this way: 'Freedom of debate might be stifled and
independence of thought checked if jurors were made to feel
that their arguments and ballots were to be freely published
to the world.'
"The Executive Branch of the Government likewise dis
tinguishes in respect to publication between the conversations
taking place at a meeting and the decisions reached at it and-
in contrast to what the Open Market Committee has done in this
instance--has declined many times, from the days of President
Washington down to the present, to make the records of pre
decision discussions at meetings in the White House or various
departments or agencies available even to the Congress. As it
was explained on one occasion by President Eisenhower, 'It is
essential to effective administration that . . . the broadest
range of individual opinions and advice be available in the
formulation of decisions and policy . . . . The disclosure of
conversations, communications or documents embodying or concern
ing such opinions and advice can accordingly tend to impair or
inhibit essential reporting and decision-making processes ... .'
"The Congress, itself, in the Legislative Reorganization
Act, recognized the need for privacy in working sessions of
Congressional Committees, by excepting 'executive sessions for
marking up bills or for voting' from the general requirement
that Committee hearings be open to the public. Indeed, the
same Act provides that any committee meeting may be closed to
the public upon a majority vote of the members of the committee,
as in fact they sometimes are. As a matter of practice, minutes
of executive sessions of Congressional Committees are not made
available to the public.
"Thus, throughout the public service, the principle has been
widely recognized that, in the absence of anything approaching
criminal conduct or malfeasance in office--and no question as
to either is involved here--internal deliberations (intra
organizational advisory opinions, recommendations, tentative
plans and proposals, minutes of committee meetings, oral advice,
et cetera), as distinct from official actions, must, in the
public interest, be held confidential for the purpose of
encouraging candor on the part of officials and employees in
speaking their minds freely and uninhibitedly.
"The report that you have had prepared contains over one
hundred quotations excerpted from the Federal Open Market Com
mittee minutes, some of them of considerable length, plus
selective but extensive accounts of conversations in literal
or lightly paraphrased form. These quotations and paraphrasings

9/11/62 -73-
"are clearly inconsistent with our request, made in my letter
of July 21, 1961, turning over the minutes to you, that these
minutes not be disclosed 'in whole or in part.' Moreover,
your document does not reveal a single policy action by the
Open Market Committee that was not recorded in the Annual
Report of the Board of Governors for 1960, along with the
economic circumstances of the action, the votes of the Committee
members, and the underlying reasons why the action was taken.
"There is no question here of a denial of information to
the Congress: your request for opportunity to examine the
minutes of the Open Market Committee was granted more than a
year ago. Neither is there question of hostility to criticism
nor of unwillingness to improve upon the presentation of the
Committee's policy record in the Board's Annual Report; the
Committee in fact is earnestly striving now to effectuate
further improvement.
"The decision of your Committee in this instance will
have implications for the Judicial and Executive branches of
the Government, other governmental agencies, and the commit
tees of Congress, including your Committee. It seems to us
that to publicize to the world without a substantial time
lapse the pre-decision discussions and conversations in any
of these meetings would serve to institute a procedure--one
virtually certain to result either in weakening internal de
bate for the sake of the public record or in weakening the
record for the sake of the debate--that would do public mis
chief rather than public good.
"For the reasons stated, the Federal Open Market Committee
believes that to publish at this time the minutes of the
internal discussions preceding its 1960 actions--in whole or
in the form of the proposed report--would be contrary to the
public interest. We therefore repeat our request, made in
my letter of July 21, 1961, transmitting the 1960 minutes to
your Committee, that you hold their contents in confidence."
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, October 2, 1962.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary