A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, February 13, 1962, at 10:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Irons
Mr. King
Mr. Mills
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Swan
Mr. Wayne
Mr. Fulton, Alternate
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Ellis and Deming, Alternate Members of the
Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bopp, Bryan, Scanlon, and Clay, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Atlanta, Chicago, and Kansas City, respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Messrs. Baughman, Coldwell, Einzig, Garvy, Noyes,
and Ratchford, Associate Economists
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Messrs. Holland and Koch, Advisers, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Furth, Adviser, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board of
Governors
Mr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Mr. Broida, Economist, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors

2/13/62 -2-
Mr. Francis, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis
Messrs. Coombs, Eastburn, Hostetler, Jones, Parsons,
and Tow, Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, St.
Louis, Minneapolis, and Kansas City, respectively
Mr. Brandt, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta
Mr. Eisenmenger, Acting Director of Research, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston
Mr. Sternlight, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meetings of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on January 9 and January 23,
1962, were approved.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
the action of the members of the Committee
on February 5, 1962, approving the recom
mendation of the Manager of the System Open
Market Account that Account holdings of
Treasury notes maturing February 15, 1962,
and April 1, 1962, be exchanged in entirety
through subscription for approximately
$3,305,000,000 3-1/2 per cent certificates
maturing February 15, 1963, and approximately
$1,500,000,000 4 per cent notes maturing
August 15, 1966, was ratified,
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report of open market operations covering the period
January 23 through February 9, 1962. A copy of this report has been
placed in the files of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written report, Mr. Rouse made the follow
ing comments:
Open market operations since the last meeting of the Commit
tee have been directed mainly toward maintaining an even keel while

2/13/62 -3-
the market focused on the Treasury's February refunding operations.
The over-easy reserve situation which had prevailed as a result of
a high level of float was rapidly unwound and money market condi
tions became more normal with a drop of average free reserves to
somewhat over $400 million. At these lower levels of reserve
availability, Federal funds fluctuated between 2 and 2-3/4 per
cent and Treasury bill rates have held around 2.70 per cent for
91-day bills. Although there has been less downward pressure on
bill rates from banks trying to put their surplus reserves to
work, there has been a continuous nonbank demand from a variety
of sources, notably from corporations. Dealers, however, are
still wary of current bill rates and have reduced their bill
holdings substantially, evidently expecting a sharp rise in
short-term rates after the completion of the Treasury's refunding
operation. This caution was reinforced by the comments of
Secretary Dillon in his testimony before the Joint Economic
Committee, which suggested that a further rise in short rates,
including the Federal Reserve discount rate, might be in order if
the balance-of-payments situation demands it. An additional
factor has been injected in each of the past two weeks by rumors
in the market of an imminent reduction in the British bank rate.
Attitudes toward the long-term bond market have been
progressively more optimistic with the feeling growing that
long-term interest rates may not move much higher in the present
economic environment, a view which was strengthened by Secretary
Dillon's remarks indicating that the Administration would not
look with favor on a significant rise in longer-term rates.
The Treasury's February refunding has been an outstanding
success, with attrition at a minimum. A significantly large
exchange was made into the 4 per cent 4-1/2 year notes, confirming
that many banks because of their heavy position in very short
maturities are moving into a longer position, particularly because
of the higher interest rates that they are paying as a result of
the greater latitude now permitted under Regulation Q. In this
exchange the larger banks were heavier subscribers for the inter
mediate issue than was the case with the recent cash offering of
4s of 1969. The exchange operation will be completed with the
final settlement on Thursday, February 15.
Indications are that the Treasury will try an advance refunding
shortly to take advantage of the present improving market conditions.
The market, too, is expecting something of this kind. Presumably,
an offering would be made as soon as possible after the completion
of the current exchange.

2/13/62 -4-
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the open market transactions
during the period January 23 through
February 9, 1962, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
Mr. Noyes presented the following statement with respect to
economic developments:
Since mid-summer, economic expansion has been less
vigorous. You will recall that the rate of expansion
slackened in late August and September, and that industrial
production, in fact, declined two points.
This was followed by an upsurge in October and November,
especially in retail sales, but it also carried with it an
important and long-awaited drop in the rate of unemployment.
Since November there has been another period of slower
expansion. Retail trade declined a little from the advanced
November level in December, and again in January. Industrial
production gained only a point in December and is not expected
to advance further in January. It might even decline.
While the over-all unemployment percentage improved a little
from December to January, a more detailed analysis of the under
lying data suggests that there has been very little change in the
basic employment picture in the last two months. If anything,
factory employment is off a little.
Construction activity has been substantially unchanged in
December and January at the advanced level reached in November.
At the same time, surveys of consumer buying intentions show
very little real strength in housing or durable goods markets
in the period ahead. Auto demand appears to be stronger than a
year ago, but this is counterbalanced by weakness in household
durables. House purchase intentions are close to year-ago levels.
One bright spot is the relatively good showing of corporate
profits in the fourth quarter, which perhaps provides, in turn,
an explanation for the improvement in the stock market in the
last several weeks.
Prices have continued stable, both in terms of the latest
available comprehensive indexes and the recent behavior of the
commodity markets.
At best, industrial production in January was less than two
per cent above the August level. After a fast run-up last spring,
nonfarm employment has increased by only about 100,000 since July.
Housing starts in December, at 1,3 million annual rate, were well
below the high reached in the fall.

2/13/62 -5
It would certainly be a mistake to place undue emphasis on
the relatively sluggish performance of the economy in two
winter months. On the other hand, the reduced rate of advance
in key economic indicators over a period of six months is a
fact that cannot be gainsaid, and should not be discounted.
In the fourth quarter the advance in gross national product
was well maintained, but it now appears unlikely that the first
quarter will show as much further gain as would be consistent
with the goals for 1962 set forth in the President's Economic
Report.
At this point, the question certainly does not appear to be
one of imminent downturn, nor indeed of excessive demand pressures
on scarce resources--but rather of maintaining a rate of advance
that will enable us to discharge the domestic and international
commitments we have undertaken. We can certainly expect to be
reminded often in the period ahead that our position of leadership
in the free world does not depend solely on our ability to stem
the drain on our gold reserves arising out of short- and long-term
capital outflows, but also on our capacity to make our economic
system perform at a sustained high rate. Whether it was wise or
not, the United States took strong leadership in rallying the
OECD countries to pledge themselves to a high and sustained growth
rate for the decade ahead. We took much the same position in
promoting the Alliance for Progress. To allow our own still
moderate economic recovery to falter within less than a year after
these events would be embarrassing.
As things now stand, much will depend on the rate of
expenditure for new plant and equipment that emerges as the year
progresses. Plans reported in the last survey--which indicated
4
a per cent increase over 1961--would not be sufficient to carry
the economy forward to levels of activity which have been widely
accepted as within its potential. It is generally assumed that
these plans will be revised upward, but we will not know for about
a month.
In summary, the business situation does not yet show signs of
need for restraint, currently or in the foreseeable future. Nor,
on the other hand, is there any evidence that limited credit
availability has inhibited the advances thus far. If the situation
can be characterized in a few words, they would seem to be that the
disposition of the public to hold liquid balances rather than to
make expenditures is still high. This disposition may change, but
until it does, restriction on the availability of liquid balances
could result in an unnecessary and undesirable curtailment of the
demand for goods and services--and would have to share the blame
for any short-fall in the economy's performance in 1962.
Mr. Thomas presented the following statement with respect to
credit developments:

2/13/62 -6
When allowance is made for the wide--and often variable-
seasonal movements that occur around the turn of the year, it
appears that on balance during the past two or three months
bank credit has continued to show a moderate expansion. Total
demands on capital markets have been fairly large. The money
supply, seasonally adjusted, lost in January most or all of its
very large December gain, but at the same time there has been a
striking increase in time deposits at commercial banks.
Interest rates generally have remained relatively firm,
after rising in the last few weeks of the year. Rates on
Treasury bills, which rose much more than seasonally in December,
have subsequently declined much less than seasonally. Yields on
medium- and long-term U. S. securities have generally maintained
the higher levels reached in December or early January. Yields
on the high-grade corporate bonds have continued to show little
change.
In contrast, yields on State and local government issues
have declined sharply, and the spread between the average yield
on high-grade municipals and that on long-term U. S. bonds is the
largest on record. This contrast is attributed to bank buying of
longer-term tax-exempt issues as a medium for investment of their
growing time deposits. Evidence of any large-scale buying, how
ever, has not yet appeared in the banking figures. To the extent
that the buying has been of currently offered new issues, some lag
in actual settlement is to be expected. The volume of new State
and local government issues has been exceptionally large. Yield
declines, however, have occurred in outstanding issues.
The calendar of new securities offerings for February indicates
a continued large volume of offerings in the corporate, municipal,
and Government agency sectors of the market. The corporate calendar
is swelled by the $300 million A.T.&T. issue scheduled for this
week. The total of all new corporate issues is expected to equal
about $950 million and the total for State and local government
securities is almost as large.
The Treasury has raised $1.8 billion of new cash in January
and February, in addition to refunding maturing obligations with
little attrition and some debt lengthening. It will need to
raise cash again in March and April--between $4.5 and $5 billion-
but will retire $3.5 billion of maturing tax bills. After April,
further cash borrowing will probably not be needed until July.
The net increase in the debt for fiscal 1962 will be about $8
billion.
The Treasury may need to borrow as much as $7.5 billion to
raise cash during the last half of 1962, but the net increase in
the debt for this calendar year as a whole, after allowing for

2/13/62 -7-
redemption of maturing issues, may be less than $5.5 billion.
For fiscal 1963, current budget estimates indicate the possibility
of a small net reduction in the public debt.
On a seasonally adjusted basis, the cash budget continues to
show deficits during the first two quarters of calendar 1962, but
will be approximately in balance during the latter half of 1962.
A surplus is projected for the first half of 1963. The national
accounts budget, which allows for the effect of tax accruals, is
estimated to show a small but growing surplus throughout 1962,
aggregating about $2.5 billion for the year. These accounts,
however, do not include some $4 or $5 billion of credit operations
by Government agencies, the funds for which must be provided by
the Treasury. On balance, therefore, it may be said that the
Federal Government's fiscal operations are likely to be a stimulat
ing factor in the economy through most or all of 1962, but that the
degree of stimulation will be diminishing.
Bank credit data for January, together with partial figures
for banks in leading cities for the first week of February,
indicate a decrease in total loans and investments of at least
customary seasonal amounts. Because of the very large December
increase, however, there appears to be a net increase since
November, which may be considered contraseasonal.
For the past ten weeks as a whole, the net decline in business
loans at city banks was apparently somewhat smaller than usual.
The figures show no indication of borrowing by fabricators of metal
products to build up steel inventories. Loans to finance companies
showed about the usual seasonal increase and decrease over the
period. Loans on securities, mostly to brokers and dealers, also
declined sharply following a large seasonal increase in December.
Banks added moderately to their holdings of U. S. securities in
both months and also increased holdings of other securities-
substantially in December and only slightly in January.
The most striking development in banking since the turn of the
year has been the sharp increase in time deposits, accompanied by a
smaller but substantial decline in demand deposits after adjustment
for seasonal variation. The increase in time deposits at all com
mercial banks during the five weeks ending January 31 amounted to
about $2.5 billion--distributed among all classes of banks. At
weekly reporting member banks in leading cities, about a third of
the increase was in savings deposits; practically none was in the
reported categories of foreign deposits.
At the same time, private demand deposits adjusted for usual
seasonal variations declined by $1.9 billion. U. S. Government
deposits declined by about $1.5 billion--close to the usual
seasonal decrease. There was a less than seasonal decline in

2/13/62 -8
currency in circulation. On a seasonally adjusted daily average
basis, the private money supply in the last half of January was
over $1 billion less than in the last half of December, and
later data would indicate some further decline to below the
November level of about $144 billion. This would mean an increase
of less than 2 per cent from the average level generally maintained
from late March until early September.
The total of money supply and time deposits at commercial
banks, however, is about $15 billion, or 7 per cent, larger than a
year ago. In addition, it appears that nonbank holdings of U. S.
Government securities have increased somewhat during the past two
months. Hence, liquidity in general has continued to increase,
though it cannot be viewed as excessive in relation to expanding
economic activity.
Reflecting the combined effect of the time deposit increase
and the decreases in private and Government demand deposits,
required reserves declined by more than the usual seasonal amount
in the first three weeks of January, following the much greater
than seasonal increase in December. During the past three weeks,
changes in required reserves have conformed closely to the
seasonal pattern. The seasonally-adjusted figure for required
reserves against private deposits is now close to the 4 per cent
per annum growth line projected from November, and not much below
the 5 per cent line projected from last February or from mid-1960.
Total reserves available to be held against private deposits
have declined somewhat more than required reserves since early
January and have decreased somewhat since late November, while
required reserves increased. These differences are reflected in
the lower level of excess reserves that has prevailed during the
past two weeks. Reserves have been absorbed since the beginning
of the year by a decline in float, which exceeded the post-holiday
return flow of currency, and by a moderate reduction in Federal
Reserve holdings of Government securities.
Customary variations in required reserves and in factors
affecting the supply of reserves would indicate little need for
other than temporary Federal Reserve open market operations during
the next ten or twelve weeks. The projections presented include
an expansion allowance of about $60 million a month--or 4 per cent
a year--in required reserves. A variation of one per cent a year
in this increment would make a difference of about $15 million a
month, or less than $4 million a week.
Turning to broader questions of Federal Reserve policy in the
immediate period ahead, it would appear from the report and analysis
of the current economic situation in this country that there has
been some slackening or lag in economic expansion relative to the
rate that may be viewed as desirable. Under the circumstances,

2/13/62 -9-
there would seem to be little need for imposing any particular
restrictions on the availability of bank credit. If attention
is paid only to events, without an assessment of underlying
causes, one might even conclude that some stimulants were desir
able. This conclusion, however, is of doubtful validity, when
consideration is given to our balance-of-payments situation and
to the likelihood that that situation and also the slackening in
the rate of domestic economic expansion are probably due in large
part to structural difficulties that could not be remedied by
fiscal deficits or easy credit. They might even be worsened by
such palliatives.
Such an analysis leads to a conclusion that credit should
continue to be available to meet any further expansion in demands
of a moderate nature, but that additional reserves need not and
should not be supplied in mounts that would result in a decline
in interest rates or encourage speculative commitments. If
demands should develop at a pace that seems excessive, then some
restraint would need to be exercised in supplying reserves to
banks. In that event interest rates may be permitted to rise.
Mr. Furth presented the following statement with respect to the
United States balance of payments and related matters:
According to incomplete data for January, net transfers of
gold and dollars to foreigners declined sharply from the monthly
average for the last quarter of 1961. The improvement may be
exaggerated by statistical quirks, which probably made the
December figure appear a little worse than it was. Still, the
December-January average, corrected for extraordinary receipts
from foreign year-end payments to the U. S. Treasury, was much
smaller than the October-November average, though far too high
for comfort. Preliminary and fragmentary data for the first
week of February suggest further improvement.
Another encouraging sign is the fact that the December
deficit was accounted for by extraordinarily large increases in
claims on foreigners as reported by U.S. banks. As stated before,
a deficit is a deficit, whether caused by an unfavorable trade
balance or by an outflow of capital. However, an outflow that
leads to increases in liquid claims on foreigners, such as bankers'
acceptances or deposits with foreign banks, hardly affects the net
liquidity position of the U.S. economy, and therefore does not have
the same adverse connotation as a deficit in the so-called "basic"
balance.
Less encouraging are the continuing net gold sales to foreigners,
which still seem to be running at a monthly rate in the neighborhood
of $100 million.

2/13/62 -10-
Developments abroad are on the whole favorable to U.S.
trade prospects in the developed countries, but less so in
underdeveloped areas. Canada's recovery seems to parallel our
own. In Britain, the downturn may have run its course, and
international reserves have increased. Until recently, the
market expected some relaxation of monetary policy, especially
in the form of a decline in bank rate, but it has apparently
given up that hope for the time being.
France, the Netherlands, and Austria acknowledged the
continuation of boom conditions by taking mildly restraining
actions. On the other hand, Italy and Belgium relaxed monetary
restraint a little, presumably in view of their continued
balance-of-payments surpluses. In Germany, economic activity
has been no higher than last spring, but the labor situation
continues extremely tight. A spectacular drop in official
reserves in January reflected not so much a change in the
country's basic international payments, but rather the shifting
of foreign exchange holdings from the Federal Bank to the
commercial banks, encouraged by forward cover granted by the
Federal Bank at lower than market rates.
In Japan, restrictive policies have apparently succeeded
in improving the balance-of-payments and reserve positions, at
the cost of ending, at least temporarily, the rise in industrial
production.
In less developed countries, inflation remains the main
danger. The Philippines have started on a stabilization program,
but the most important countries of South America, Argentina and
Brazil, are still (or again) unable or unwilling to check
inflationary pressures. These pressures may tend to inflate
imports from the United States for the time being, but their
continuation will force these countries to take more drastic
restrictive action in the future.
On the foreign exchange and gold markets, the past three
weeks were on balance favorable to the U.S. dollar. The spot
dollar rate strengthened slightly in relation to the main
Continental European currencies, in particular the Netherlands
guilder and the Swiss franc, For the first time in many weeks,
the dollar was quoted approximately at par with the Netherlands
guilder. Sterling was very strong, reflecting heavy commercial
demand and some capital inflow from the Continent; there does
not seem to have been any sizeable movement of U.S. capital to
Britain. The London gold market showed very active private demand
late in January, reportedly because of gold purchase connected
with the activities of the French "secret army" organization.
Since then, the market has been quiet and has not required
substantial support by the Bank of England at the expense of our
gold stock.

2/13/62 -11-
After noting that Mr. Hayes had been unable to attend this meeting
because of illness in his family, the Chairman called on Mr. Treiber,
who presented the following statement of his views on the business outlook
and credit policy:
The domestic business situation is about unchanged from
three weeks ago. Despite the very sizable rise in gross national
product in the fourth quarter, the statistics for December, and
apparently for January, show signs of a slight hesitation; and
the pronounced business optimism that was beginning to appear
around the turn of the year is now somewhat tempered. Consumer
buying in the past two months has slowed somewhat from the very
high pace reached in November, and industrial production has
leveled off. Nevertheless, apart from the uncertainties connected
with the steel wage negotiations and a possible steel strike, the
probabilities continue to favor a further business expansion.
Yet the employment situation does not show further improvement.
There are indications that the upward trend of business
spending on plant and equipment is likely to continue. As for
inventories, steel stockpiling does not appear to have been as
extensive as some observers had expected earlier. Nevertheless,
some rise in the rate of total inventory accumulation may be
looked for during the first quarter. Prices continue to be
generally fairly stable, with perhaps a bit more upward pressure
than earlier.
As for credit, an unusually sharp loan contraction took
place at weekly reporting member banks in January, following the
pronounced upsurge in December. For the two months together,
however, loan expansion at weekly reporting banks was better
than seasonal, and the January loan picture at all commercial
banks may be somewhat better than at the weekly reporting banks
alone. Visibility with respect to the strength of bank loan
demand is obscured in January by seasonal factors, but the
recent sluggishness of demand fits logically with our general
impression of conservative inventory policies on the part of
business concerns and perhaps with the bolstering of corporate
liquidity brought about by a large total of security issues
floated last year. Loan officers of the major New York City
banks have been disappointed by the absence of sizable demand
for loans since the turn of the year. However, the capital
markets are showing considerable strength.
The relatively satisfactory domestic picture continues to
contrast sharply with the gloomy balance-of-payments outlook.

2/13/62 -12
The latter shows signs of further deterioration, while
domestic conditions continue strong. Tnerefore, may we not
be justified in giving somewhat greater relative weight to
international considerations than we were giving three, six,
or twelve months ago?
It is hard to find much cheer in any analysis of the
recent balance-of-payments figures. The so-called "basic
deficit" was at an annual rate of about $3 billion in both the
third and the fourth quarters--a rate about half again as high
as the "basic deficit" for the full year 1960 and clearly far
higher than we can afford to see continue. Yet the probability
of higher imports, as the domestic expansion continues, high
lights the difficulty of achieving an early correction of this
heavy imbalance. Meanwhile the outward flow of short-term
capital has been far too high, accounting for the increase in
the over-all deficit from an annual rate of some $3 billion in
the third quarter to one of nearly $6 billion in the fourth
quarter. To a considerable extent the British economic
difficulties of the first half of the year and the subsequent
Berlin crisis shielded us temporarily--that is, until the
fourth quarter--from the impact of strong influences working in
the direction of a seriously adverse flow of short-term capital.
In view of the very heavy total deficit of the last six months,
it is hardly surprising that we are experiencing a continuing
drain on our gold stock; and the publication of the fourth
quarter figures within the next week or so could accentuate our
difficulties and lead to further gold losses.
Relative interest rate levels and relative credit avail
ability here and abroad certainly have an important bearing on
the capital flows of recent months. The fact that our over-all
balance-of-payments problem cannot be solved by monetary policy
alone does not relieve us of the responsibility for contributing
to a solution. Our failure to do so could subject the System to
severe and justified criticism if the situation should deteriorate
to a state of crisis. While domestic conditions, considered by
themselves, certainly do not call for any change of policy, the
momentum of domestic expansion seems strong enough to reduce to a
minimum whatever risk to that expansion may be involved in a
policy of reduced monetary ease.
For some time we have been looking towards the latter part
of February and early March as a "free period" for monetary
policy, i.e., a period in which we would not be forced to maintain
an "even keel" because of Treasury financing programs. Now there
seems to be a strong possibility that an advance refunding
operation may be announced in the very near future. If so, our

2/13/62
-13-
hands may be tied until close to the time of the next meeting.
On the other hand, if the advance refunding program is not
undertaken, I believe we should now move moderately but clearly
towards a policy of less ease.
In terms of open market operations, this would mean an
objective of a short-term bill rate in the 3 per cent range,
with a reduction in free reserves to the extent necessary to
bring this about.
Probably our most difficult decision over the next few weeks
will concern the discount rate. Assuming that the Committee
would agree to move toward less ease--to the extent to which the
Treasury's program might leave us free to do so--there would
still be the question at what point the discount rate might be
raised, say by 1/2 per cent. We could, of course, wait until our
open market operations had been reflected in a rise of short-term
market rates above the present discount rate. Perhaps the
upward trend in market rates by itself would be regarded abroad
as clear evidence of our determination to adjust monetary policy
to our international needs. And a delay to this extent in a
discount rate increase would make our tightening action much more
easily reversible in the event that the risks on the domestic
side should loom larger than they do now. On the other hand, a
discount rate increase that would lead rather than follow the
market rate rise would constitute a more decisive and dramatic
signal clearly understood abroad, and would point dramatically
to the need for more forceful coordinated measures of other kinds
in this country to cope with our bad balance-of-payments deficit.
There is, of course, a middle ground between these extremes, with
discount rate action coming soon after the tightening process had
gotten under way. I think this is about where I come out,
although I recognize that our directors may be reluctant to make
a move which might seem premature in the light of the needs of
the domestic business situation, taken by itself. It will not
be an easy decision, but I believe we can't escape the logic of
the System's heavy responsibility for the defense of the dollar.
Mr. Ellis reported that economic conditions in New England had
been favorably affected by unusually mild weather, which had stimulated
construction activity and retail trade. At the same time, weather
conditions in the upper part of New England were conducive to good
business at the ski resorts. Manufacturing output was up in December

2/13/62 -14
from the year-ago level and the average work week in manufacturing was
substantially longer than a year earlier in all States. Gains in
earnings were coupled with a pronounced leaning on the part of consumers
to use credit more freely, and both department stores sales and
automobile sales exceeded the previous year's levels. Less favorable
developments included a seasonal increase in unemployment, which had
resulted in two labor market areas being moved downward in classification,
and the fact that nonresidential construction contract awards were lagging
behind a year ago,
As to the financial picture in the District, Mr. Ellis noted that
demand deposits rose rapidly over an extended period ending in November
and since that time had been relatively level. District banks had
continued to buy Federal funds and to shorten the maturity of their
portfolios of Government securities. A study of the rates of interest
being paid on savings deposits indicated that the chief factor in
deciding on increases was whether the bank had a large proportion of its
deposits in the form of savings deposits, along with the proximity of
savings banks competing for those funds.
Turning to policy considerations, Mr. Ellis commented that although
the most recent statistics showed some hesitation in the pace of economic
expansion, economic visibility always tended to be low at this time of year.
On balance, the weight of evidence suggested to him that economic
expansion was proceeding satisfactorily in relation to the standard

2/13/62 -15
cyclical pattern. At the same time, the weight of evidence on the
balance of payments suggested that a critical imbalance was continuing.
In the circumstances, it seemed appropriate to ask whether monetary
policy was making its maximum contribution to the balance-of-payments
problem while at the same time avoiding serious disturbance to domestic
expansion. His opinion was that there could afford to be some further
adjustment in monetary policy in recognition of the balance-of-payments
problem.
Mr. Ellis said that he had been comparing the situation in
February 1961 with the most recent three weeks, from the standpoint of
the general posture of System policy. The average of free reserves was
almost identical, borrowings from the Federal Reserve Banks were down,
the Federal funds rate was running at around the same level, and the
90-day bill rate was slightly higher. In the meantime, the System had
greatly expanded its portfolio of Government securities and the total
amount of available credit. In summary, after a period of 12 months
System policy was now substantially the same as it had been at the
bottom of the recession. Therefore, it could not be claimed that policy
had been altered to make any real impact on the balance-of-payments
problem, except perhaps in the way of support given to the short-term
Treasury bill rate.
Mr. Ellis went on to say that he had come to this meeting
prepared to argue that the Committee should try to make some visible

2/13/62 -16
progress in the next three weeks in trending toward less ease. In
view of the prospect of an imminent Treasury advance refunding, it
might be necessary to postpone such progress, but he would like to feel
that the basic position of the Committee was one of trending toward less
ease. Such a position might mean that free reserves would fall to a
target range of $350-$400 million, that the growth target for nonborrowed
reserves would be slowed down to perhaps a 3 per cent annual rate, that
the target for the Treasury bill rate would be raised above 2-3/4 per
cent, and that the Federal funds rate would hold occasionally at 3 per
cent. As to the discount rate, he would prefer to withhold action
until short-term interest rates had advanced. The current policy
directive might be revised to eliminate the reference to Treasury
financing and refer instead to a slower expansion of reserve credit,
with increasing attention to the avoidance of declines in short-term
interest rates.
Mr. Irons reported that Eleventh District conditions were showing
the mixed movements typical of this season of the year. Expansion was
progressing satisfactorily, though with perhaps a little hesitation.
Figures for the past 3 or 6 weeks indicated that some items were steady,
some were moving up, and some were drifting downward, in line with
typical seasonal movements. This was true also on the financial side.
During the latest period for which figures were available, loans and
demand deposits were down about seasonally, investments were up slightly,

2/13/62 -17
and time and savings deposits were up substantially. The last-mentioned
development was due in considerable measure to the fact that a relatively
large proportion of the banks had increased their rates of interest.
About 70 or 75 per cent of the banks had announced some kind of increase
since the first of the year, with a substantial number going to 4 per cent.
Borrowings from the Reserve Bank were negligible. Purchases of Federal
funds had exceeded sales, but not in large amount.
As to policy, Mr. Irons stated that he would not want to argue
for any substantial change, that is, for anything in the way of
dramatic or overt action. For some time, however, he had felt that as
the opportunity presented itself, it would be desirable to trend toward
a little less ease. On balance, therefore, he came out at approximately
the same position as Mr. Ellis. He would still follow a policy of
providing reserves as needed, at the same time striving to maintain
the covered bill rate in a balanced position with foreign short-term rates.
During the past three weeks, this kind of balance had prevailed. The
prospect of the Treasury coming into the market shortly was a factor that
argued for holding steady. Even without that prospect, however, he
would do no more than trend toward less ease unless there was some
dramatic factor in the international situation of which he was unaware
that might call for prompt and forceful action.
In summary, Mr. Irons said, that he would come out that System
policy should stay roughly about as it had been, with some slight trend

2/13/62 -18
toward less ease as and when the opportunity presented itself. He
would have in mind a bill rate of 2-3/4 per cent or somewhat higher,
but more particularly a level that would be in satisfactory relationship
to foreign short-term rates. He would not raise the discount rate at
this time. As to the directive, it might be well to include some
reference to the possibility of an imminent Treasury financing, although
at present it was not know with certainty whether or not that would occur.
Mr. Swan said that the Twelfth District had continued in
January with conditions a little better, perhaps, than in the country
as a whole. This situation was true through the latter part of 1961 and
represented a reversal of the situation earlier in the year. Although
District figures for January were still incomplete, it seemed doubtful
that there had been any significant developments during recent weeks.
Department store sales achieved a record for January, but were down
slightly from the December figures. Similarly, new car registrations
in California, after reaching an all-time high for the month of December,
were off somewhat in early January. The lumber market appeared to have
strengthened a little in January, according to preliminary figures.
However, if there was a lack of ebullience anywhere, it was in the
lumber-producing areas.
Continuing, Mr. Swan said that District weekly reporting banks
reflected the usual loan decrease in January, virtually all in commercial
and industrial loans. There was little change in other categories, except

2/13/62 -19
for some further increase in real estate loans. Savings and time
deposits continued to rise through the end of January, while demand
deposits declined. Along with the decline in loans went a small
reduction in the security holdings of the weekly reporting banks. So
far this year these banks had been net buyers of Federal funds in every
week except one.
Turning to policy, Mr. Swan said he recognized that seasonal
factors were difficult to weigh at this time of year. However, in terms
of what he sensed to be the general behavior of the business situation,
it did not seem to him that the Committee should take any deliberate
action to induce a substantially less easy situation. Rather, the
Committee should continue about as it had been, at least since the week
ended January 24, when the theretofore excessive free reserve figures
were reduced. He would think in terms of a bill rate of 2-3/4 per cent,
certainly not below that figure, and free reserves of around $400-$450
million. In other words, he would try to meet ordinary seasonal demands
for reserves, with perhaps a very moderate growth factor added. If
there should be a much more significant increase in credit demands than
appeared likely at the moment, he would allow that increase to exert an
effect on interest rates and on free reserves. However, in the present
situation the System should allow any tightening to come from the market
rather than from positive actions on the part of the Federal Reserve.
Although recognizing the problem involved in the balance of payments, it

2/13/62 -20
seemed to him that with a bill rate of 2-3/4 per cent there was
probably not a great deal more that the System should or could do
under present conditions. There had been references at the January 23
meeting to the question of borrowing from abroad, but he had some doubt
whether the Federal Reserve could affect that situation significantly
without a considerably more sizable interest rate increase, both in the
short-term rate and out through the rate structure, than would be
appropriate in view of the domestic situation.
Mr. Swan concluded by saying that, as suggested by his previous
comments, he thought this was not the time to raise the discount rate.
He would rather wait until there was a somewhat clearer signal from the
credit markets than at present.
Mr. Deming commented that January figures on Ninth District
business conditions were not yet complete. However, the available
statistics did not indicate as much economic pause in the District as
apparently had occurred in the nation as a whole. Except for retail
sales, which were affected by severe winter weather, the indexes watched
in the District showed a continuation of some strength. In January,
bank debits were 13 per cent ahead of a year earlier, and construction
contracts were up rather sharply. Nonagricultural employment in
Minnesota showed a 2-1/2 per cent gain from a year earlier, and
manufacturing employment in the State was up 5.3 per cent. The gains
were better than had been predicted in December on the basis of employer

2/13/62 -21
interviews, and stronger than the trend then anticipated by State
employment officials. Prospects for the next several weeks were viewed
as moderately optimistic.
On the banking side, Mr. Deming said there was some strength
in the District loan picture and considerable strength in the deposit
picture. City banks reported a seasonal loan decline equal to about
one-third of the average decline for the past five years, while the
pattern at country banks was fairly normal for this time of year.
As to policy, Mr. Deming said he had gone through an analysis
not greatly different from that presented by Mr. Treiber. As he saw it,
however, the pause in the general economic advance argued for no change
in the posture of policy. While the credit picture showed no significant
gains in strength, it was stronger than the economic situation and
stronger than normal for this time of year. This could be said to argue
for caution and perhaps a mild trending toward a little less ease, but
any further tightening should come through market forces rather than a
deliberate policy on the part of the System.
Accordingly, Mr. Deming said, his prescription would be for no
change in open market policy in the next three weeks. This left him
vaguely unhappy because a period when the Federal Reserve would be free
to act had seemed at hand, and such periods are relatively scarce at
this time of year. Of course, if there was an advance refunding, the
opportunity would be foreclosed. In fact, however, an even keel was

2/13/62 -22
what he thought the general economic situation called for at this time
Consequently, he would favor "staying where we are" even if the
Treasury should not be in the market. With respect to the directive,
there would seem to be no reason to make a change if it was certain that
the Treasury was going to undertake an advance refunding. If it was not
certain, there was a question whether the final sentence of the directive
could be retained in its present form, but otherwise he saw no reason
to change the directive. The view on policy that he had expressed would
argue for making no change in the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Scanlon said that he thought the prospects were good for
further moderate gains in business activity in the Seventh District.
Production, employment, and manufacturing were continuing to rise,
although production schedules for passenger cars had been reduced
somewhat as dealers' inventories approached the one million level. New
orders were rising in the capital goods industries. Purchasing agents
in the area reported some tendency for order lead times to stretch out,
and one out of five reported higher prices in January than in December.
This was similar to what had developed in 1959, but the increases were
much less widespread than in 1955, when an inflationary boom was taking
shape. Some small manufacturers of construction machinery had been
encouraged by increased demand to raise prices, but most capital goods
producers saw little prospect for price increases unless current orders
strengthened considerably. Prospects for heavy construction continued

2/13/62 -23
to improve. Apartment building was strong, but the construction of
individual homes showed little, if any, improvement. Savings and loan
associations had an abundance of funds for mortgages, and banks and
other lenders were showing greater interest in Government guaranteed
and insured mortgages as well as conventional mortgages. Those banks
that increased their interest rates on time and savings deposits to
3-1/2 or 4 per cent, mainly in Illinois, reported that such deposits
had increased sharply. However, it was not clear what proportion of
those deposits had come from demand deposits in the same banks. Those
banks that had raised the rate of interest only on time certificates
of deposits reported sizable shifts from regular savings accounts. In
Indiana, where the State authorities had retained a 3 per cent maximum
rate, there had been some shifting of funds to out-of-state institutions.
The increase in share accounts at savings and loan associations in
January in those places where commercial banks were now offering 4 per
cent was about one-fourth less than a year ago. Savings and loan
associations had moved rather cautiously in adjusting their dividend
rates, with many apparently experiencing some difficulty in finding
favorable outlets for their funds.
Mr. Scanlon said that his views with regard to policy, so far as
the international situation was concerned, were similar to those of
Mr. Ellis. Domestically, except for the possibility of an excessive
build-up of steel inventories, the current business expansion in the

2/13/62 -24
Seventh District seemed to be orderly and balanced. There was still
no strong rise in the demand for credit. In view of the amounts of
unused labor and plant capacity, he saw no need for any material
change in policy at this time. Accordingly, he would favor maintaining
essentially the same posture as in recent weeks. He would not favor
changing the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Clay expressed the view that the weight of recent evidence
on the performance of the domestic economy indicated clearly the need
for a monetary policy designed to encourage further expansion in the
volume of economic activity. Moreover, the available evidence made it
equally clear that the domestic economic situation did not justify any
lessening in the degree of stimulation that had generally been the
objective of Federal Reserve monetary policy in recent weeks. The
Committee would need to remain alert to the international balance-of
payments problem, but, so far as the Treasury bill rate was concerned,
it would not appear appropriate at this time to lift the rate above the
range previously determined. In keeping with this policy posture, no
change should be made in the Reserve Banks' discount rate.
While he would not favor pushing the Treasury bill rate to
higher levels at this time, Mr. Clay noted that such action was
suggested at the last meeting of this Committee and had again been
suggested at this meeting. If that were done, it would tend to tighten
credit and, in the present state of the economy, he felt that this should

2/13/62 -25
be avoided if possible. If, in the judgment of the Committee, it could
not be avoided, offsetting open market operations in longer maturities
should be undertaken in order to maintain the necessary reserve position
and to minimize upward pressure on interest rates in those sectors of
the market.
It should be borne in mind, Mr. Clay suggested, that actions
affecting interest rates in the Government securities market would also
have repercussions upon interest rates in the private capital markets.
The progress of the domestic economy toward a satisfactory level would
depend to an important degree upon substantial expansion in those very
sectors of the economy that would be adversely affected by higher
long-term interest rates.
Mr. Wayne said that recent weeks had produced little change in
the plodding progress of Fifth District business into new high ground.
The unevenness of the advance was apparent in both employment and man
hour statistics. A slight ebbing of seasonally adjusted nonfarm
employment occurred in December, occasioned by the first decline in
the number of nonmanufacturing jobs since last February. At the same
time, both factory employment and man-hours, which had been lagging,
turned upward again. Variety in the manufacturing sector was readily
apparent. The current outlook, judging by trade reports, statistics,
and the Reserve Bank's latest opinion survey, was moderately good for
most District manufacturers. Furniture manufacturers closed 1961 with

2/13/62 -26
orders, production, and shipments well above year-end 1960 (close,
in fact, to December records set in 1959), and dealers attending the
January furniture shows made substantial additions to factory backlogs,
showing that they expected the expansion in sales which began last
summer to develop further strength this spring. Textiles, on the other
hand, had recently shown only slight improvement and faced many
uncertainties as spring drew nearer, while the lumber business still
waited for real evidence that the recession had ended. In contrast to
the generally uncertain pattern of progress, retail trade had
consistently done rather well since about the middle of the fall,
construction activity had retained its vigor, the coal business viewed
the future with growing optimism, and agricultural prospects were good
for the coming year. Most respondents to the Bank's latest survey were
fairly confident about business volume, but many were skeptical about
the outlook for profits.
Turning to banking, Mr. Wayne commented that recent activity at
Fifth District weekly reporting banks paralleled closely the situation
in the rest of the country. Seasonal forces and the Treasury's January
refinancing appeared to have been the dominant factors. Loan volume
fell off about seasonally, with only real estate loans showing better
than usual strength. Sizable increases in holdings of short- and long
term Governments accounted for a contraseasonal rise in total investments.
In the policy area, Mr. Wayne noted that the Desk had been quite
successful in the past three weeks in maintaining an even keel despite

2/13/62 -27
wide fluctuations in market forces and some downward pressure on bill
rates during part of the time. He was disturbed, as he felt sure the
Desk was, by the great difficulties encountered in compiling reliable
estimates to be used as a guide to the Desk in day-to-day operations
and by the large adjustments frequently made in free reserve figures
after they were first released. He hoped that ways could be found to
improve techniques in this area.
Now that a period of even keel in the financial markets for the
accommodation of Treasury financing was nearing completion, Mr. Wayne
said it appeared to him that the Committee might follow an even-keel
policy to accommodate the economy. The domestic economy was showing no
signs of speculative activities or overexpansion that needed to be
curbed. In fact, the incomplete evidence now available suggested that in
recent weeks the upthrust of business activity may have lost just a
little of its momentum. Internationally, the situation seemed to be
fairly stable, and there appeared to be nothing in the immediate picture
that would override consideration of domestic conditions.
Mr. Wayne said he found himself in almost complete agreement with
Messrs. Swan, Deming, and Scanlon. For the next three weeks, he would
favor a policy that would in general be a continuation of recent policy.
A free reserve target between $400 and $450 million seemed to him
appropriate. He would hope this would produce a bill rate within five
or ten basis points of 2-3/4 per cent. He would not favor any change

2/13/62 -28
in the discount rate at this time and would renew the current economic
directive after eliminating the references to Treasury financing. He
had come prepared to suggest the addition of a phrase reading: "and
allowing slightly higher rates to develop if they are generated by
market forces," but he would not now urge that such wording be included
in the directive.
Mr. Mills noted that, as already mentioned, the first quarter
of each year tends to be dull and a time when commerce and industry
regroup their positions in advance of a new sortie. If history was
repeating itself in 1962, there was seemingly no reason for the Federal
Open Market Committee to take alarm and attempt to inject undue credit
ease into the economy. Instead, advantage should be taken of this pause
to review and observe developments carefully before positive actions
were taken.
In that connection, Mr. Mills said, he thought the Committee
might do well to look back to the deeper past. In one or two of the
papers that had been prepared by economists and submitted to the Joint
Economic Committee, the observation had been made that the primary
difficulty that must be contended with was a lack of demand. Transferring
that line of reasoning back 30 years, the terminology used in that period
was oversaving and underconsumption. He did not think it had been clearly
determined whether that phase of history was being repeated. Transfer
payments, including social security and unemployment compensation, had

2/13/62 -29
tended to sustain the economy, but it was not impossible that structural
unemployment and the problems associated with it were more deep-seated
problems that must be reckoned with and went back to the lack of demand
emphasized in the papers he had mentioned. Whether the slack at the
present time was seasonal or whether it was of a more deep-seated nature,
the Federal Reserve had an opportunity to wait and observe rather than to
jump the gun and attempt to stimulate the economy with excessively easy
credit, because there was no reason to believe that credit could be a
substitute for demand. In fact, excessively easy credit could produce,
if it had not done so already, the situation that was referred to by
economists some years ago as repressed inflation. At present the economy
was not strait-jacketed by wage and price controls, but there was the
possibility that the growing liquidity in the hands of the public was in
a sense a type of repressed inflation that, subject to economic influence
and consumer attitudes, might break out into inflationary pressures at
some time not long distant.
Therefore, Mr. Mills said, looking both at the near term and the
historical references for examples that were worthy of review and
analysis, he could not feel there was any occasion for permitting
greater ease in the credit structure or for placing a greater supply of
reserves at the disposal of the commercial banking system for some time
to come. On the contrary, with Government securities markets having
been conditioned by official utterances leading to the anticipation of a

2/13/62 -30
somewhat firmer interest rate structure at the short end, there was an
opportunity to take advantage of that psychology to move in the direction
Mr. Treiber had recommended (in which recommendation Mr. Mills joined),
to produce somewhat higher rates of interest, approaching 3 per cent at
the short end, as an indication that the United States had not relegated
the balance-of-payments problem to a subordinate position in its policy
making. As far as higher interest rates were concerned, he could not
believe that they would be any detriment to the kind of sustainable
economic growth that was being sought, and which could be derived from
the use of idle resources and the application to more dynamic uses of
the liquid holdings now in the possession of all sectors of the economy.
Mr. Robertson said he was not overly concerned about the apparent
slippage in economic activity recently. This was something that
frequently tended to occur at this time of the year. He saw a need for a
continued availability of credit to permit growth in the economy, but he
would not favor a greater degree of ease than had been achieved recently.
As a matter of fact, he felt that the Committee was getting near to the
point at which policy must tend in the opposite direction. He would
favor, therefore, permitting some growth of total reserves, but only at
approximately the same rate as during the past two or three weeks--not
at the rate which was permitted somewhat before that time. Until credit
demands pushed interest rates upward, the System should do nothing toward
that end. On the other hand, if credit demands did exert that effect, he

2/13/62 -31
would not attempt to offset it. Further, in his view it would not be
appropriate to change the discount rate before that circumstance
occurred. If it did occur and rates moved up, then a change in the
discount rate should be considered.
In view of the statements that had been made concerning the
possibility of Treasury operations in the near future, it seemed to
Mr. Robertson that it would be advisable for the current policy directive
to make provision for the maintenance of a steady money market should the
prospective refinancing take place. This might be accomplished by
changing the last sentence of the existing directive to state that in
view of the possibility of Treasury financing in the immediate future,
emphasis should be placed on maintaining a steady money market.
Mr. Shepardson said he shared the view of those who felt that the
apparent pause in economic activity could not be disassociated from the
season of the year, which was one frequently marked by a development of
this kind. In general, it seemed to him that the outlook for continued
economic growth and expansion was encouraging. As to the recent
operations of the Desk, which had achieved or permitted some slowing down
of the rate of growth of bank reserves and the money supply, he felt that
such operations were desirable and that the Committee should continue to
press in that direction, not with a view to actual tightening but with a
view to reducing the rate of growth of total reserves. In other words,
while he did not feel that the Committee should take a strong position

2/13/62 -32
at this time, it should, in his opinion, aim at allowing a somewhat
lesser rate of growth. If the demands for credit developed as he
thought they were apt to develop in the period ahead, such a policy
would be reflected in a somewhat lower level of free reserves.
Mr. Shepardson also said that he did not think the Committee
could afford to overlook the continuing seriousness of the balance-of
payments situation. He was not at all optimistic at this time about the
prospect of meeting the competitive problem as successfully as it should
be met or about the prospect of obtaining the needed adjustment of items
in the balance of payments outside the trade accounts.
In summary, Mr. Shepardson said, his view on open market policy
for the ensuing three weeks would be to continue along about the same
lines as in the past three weeks, with the aim of bringing about, to the
extent possible, some lesser rate of growth in reserves and the money
supply. With respect to the prospect of a Treasury advance refunding, he
recognized that such an operation, if undertaken, would have some impact
on the course that the Committee should follow. In the present circum
stances, however, he was not certain as to how the current policy directive
might best be phrased. One possibility would be to include a conditional
statement along the lines that if the Treasury should engage in financing
operations during the forthcoming period, any tendency toward lesser ease
should be foregone.

2/13/62 -33
Mr. King said he did not profess to know at this time the
significance of the recent pause in some economic indicators. Nevertheless,
if attention was paid to these indicators when they were moving up, he felt
that attention must also be paid to them when they were declining. As to
policy, he would align himself with the several persons who had spoken in
favor of no basic change at the present time.
Mr. Mitchell commented that the latest information with respect
to the domestic economy seemed to him to have justified the cautious
policy that the Committee had been pursuing. Even before January data
became available, he had had some question about the basic strength of
the upswing that the economy had been experiencing. These questions
related particularly to consumer spending, including home buying, and
business outlays. In this connection, Mr. Mitchell cited certain
statistics which seemed pertinent to the question whether System policy
should become more or less restrictive. First, retail sales had declined
both in December and in January on a seasonally adjusted basis. Second,
industrial production at best was level, with possibly some decline.
Against this backdrop of what had been going on, he felt that there was
reason for considerable pause when dealing with the problem of what the
System's policy ought to be.
Mr. Mitchell said it seemed to him that the Committee was now
in a position where it was going to have to spend more time on the
international situation as a major factor in determining credit policy

2/13/62 -34
in this country. In this connection, he read the following portion of
a paper that had been presented by Mr. Reynolds of the Board's staff
at an economic review presented to the Board yesterday:
Net gold and dollar transfers to the rest of the world
appear to have been substantially smaller in January than in any of
the preceding three months. At this early date, our January data,
which show net transfers of only $50 million, are still very
incomplete and could well be in error by as much as $150 million.
Also, the erratic behavior of the monthly series in the past
argues against over-stressing results for a single month. But
despite these two caveats, we know enough, I think, to feel sure
that the sudden swelling of our over-all balance-of-payments
deficit in the fourth quarter was a temporary phenomenon.
For the fourth quarter, the over-all deficit is now estimated
at $1-1/4 billion, or $1-1/2 billion, seasonally adjusted. This
can, of course, be blown up to an annual rate of $6 billion, and
we are likely to be seeing that figure frequently as fourth quarter
data are published over the next few weeks. The third quarter
annual rate of deficit had been $3-1/2 billion, and I think that
figure gives a better indication of the magnitude of our balance
of-payments problem than does the swollen fourth quarter figure.
The sharp and temporary deterioration from the third to the
fourth quarter had two main causes. First, there was a great
bulge in outflows of U. S. capital. Second, foreign aid payments
increased very sharply.
Foreign economic aid has increased substantially in the last
two years, from a rate of about $2-1/2 billion a year (net of
repayments) in the first half of 1960 to a rate of about $4 billion
a year in the second half of 1961. In the fourth quarter alone,
the rate seems to have gone above $4-1/2 billion. While it is
likely that net aid outlays will stay above the $4 billion level,
it is unlikely that there will be further sharp increases.
Turning to capital outflows, we can see several ways in which
heavy outflows in the fourth quarter were clearly exceptionally
large. Claims on foreigners reported by U. S. banks increased
$700 million in that quarter, compared with only $50 million in
the third quarter. Only about one-third of that change was
seasonal; the rest was not. There were credits of $150 million
to Japan, including $100 million drawn on a $200 million loan
from three New York banks. There were credits of $110 million
to the Philippines. Long-term bank loans were extended to
Norway, Austria, and Belgium. There were increases in bank
acceptance and other short-term credit to a number of Latin
American countries,

2/13/62 -35
Additional capital outflows, not included in these bank
claims figures, included large deposits made by U. S.
corporations with Canadian banks. These deposits were
denominated in U. S, dollars, and placed in Canada to take
advantage of higher Canadian interest rates on time deposits.
None of the increase in the over-all balance-of-payments
deficit from the third to the fourth quarter was explained by
merchandise trade. In fact, the export surplus, seasonally
adjusted, increased to an annual rate of $5 billion from
$4-1/2 billion in the third quarter, as exports rose and
imports were little changed. Neither imports nor exports
changed significantly from November to December.
Continuing, Mr. Mitchell expressed the view that the contribution
monetary policy could make to the balance-of-payments problem, unless the
System was prepared to introduce stagnation in this country in order to
push down prices, probably was limited to the impact on confidence and an
influence on interest rates. At the present time, interest rate develop
ments seemed to him not too unfavorable, and he did not see a need to
make many small changes in domestic interest rates to meet interest
rates abroad. On the question of the confidence factor, it seemed to
him that with unrest and political instability sweeping from one country
to another in Europe, the time might be coming when confidence in
America was about to be restored. The United States might begin to look
like a more stable place and a better place for funds. This would be
particularly true if the domestic economy could be kept strong.
Further, unless the domestic economy was kept strong, there could not
be a balanced budget. If a gross national product of $570 billion could
be attained this year, the budget could be balanced on a conventional

2/13/62 -36
basis, with a surplus on the income and product account basis.
Accordingly, it seemed to him that this country had gotten its house
fairly well in order. With the budget on a balanced basis and inflation
stopped, an environment had been produced that should inspire confidence
among foreigners.
Mr. Mitchell noted that at the January 23 meeting the Committee
had adopted in principle a new technique of operations, namely, dealing
in foreign currencies. He had not been enthusiastic. However, the
action had been taken, and he wanted to see the program work as well as
possible. The Committee ought to give this new tool a vote of confidence
and look for it to help make a contribution to the international problem.
At the same time, it should stop trying to edge up the short-term rate,
which might jeopardize the recovery and growth of the domestic economy.
Mr. Fulton said the economic summary presented by Mr. Noyes
fitted the Fourth District situation quite well. There had been a slow
down in many of the sectors of business. As to unemployment, reductions
had taken place almost wholly in the steel centers, with increased
unemployment in many of the other areas of the District. Department
store sales were holding up quite well; for the year to date they were
5 per cent above a year earlier. Time deposits at banks had risen very
substantially. Construction--in Cleveland and Cincinnati particularly-
had been quite good in terms of heavy engineering projects and some
school building, but this did not extend to the residential sector.

2/13/62 -37
In the steel industry, Mr. Fulton said, operations were being
conducted at a very high rate. There were beginning to be some doubts
about the occurrence of a strike, but a substantial number of users of
steel were proceeding with inventory accruals. A survey among users
indicated that about 85 per cent were putting in greater inventories
than their current needs would require. Also, some suppliers were
requiring parts contractors to stock up against a possible strike. As
a consequence of doubts about a work stoppage, however, new orders had
dropped to less than 1/3 the volume of ten days ago. In this connection,
Mr. Fulton noted that orders can be cancelled without penalty to the
purchaser provided they are not on the schedule for rolling.
After further comments on the likelihood of a strike and various
factors that might influence the terms of a settlement, Mr. Fulton
turned to the current pause in business activity and expressed the view
that one could hardly be guided by happenings of the past in analogous
situations because this country was now in a completely different position
among the industrial nations of the world. Unless this country was ready
to maintain a fully competitive position, the things that happened before
would not necessarily indicate what might happen now. Many businessmen
did not appear to feel that the country was in a situation of real boom.
They were hopeful that the present rate of activity would be fairly well
maintained. However, in nearly every instance they claimed, quite
naturally, that the profits picture was not what they would like from the
standpoint of ability to invest funds in plant modernization.

2/13/62 -38
As to policy, Mr. Fulton indicated that he would favor
maintenance of the present posture. The Desk had done a good job, he
thought, in maintaining the bill rate at about the target that the
Committee had felt was appropriate. He would not want to suggest a
free reserve target, preferring that attention be directed more closely
to the bill rate, but he did feel that the availability of credit should
not be restricted until the economic visibility became more clear. He
would not favor changing the discount rate at this time. As to the
current policy directive, it was not known at this time whether Treasury
financing was in the offing. Except for that question, the existing
directive minus the last sentence would seem to him appropriate.
Mr. Bopp characterized the Third District as recovering mildly
from a mild recession. The troubled areas of the District were still in
trouble, although not in quite as bad shape as a year ago. There were
still many areas with large unemployment; Wilkes-Barre, for example, had
moved up in classification, but only from F to E. The healthier regions
of the District were enjoying a good year, but by no means sensational.
Production and construction were continuing to recover, along with
consumer demand. Nevertheless, the absolute levels of employment, output,
and unemployment left something to be desired. District banks were buying
Federal funds, although not borrowing at the Reserve Bank. They had
holdings of bills and felt that they could handle any increased demands
for credit. They had been disappointed in the failure of loan demand to
pick up.

2/13/62 -39
Mr. Bopp said that the best evidence of business and financial
conditions today was the kind that had been given by Messrs. Noyes and
Thomas. It was not possible to read the future with certainty. There
fore, it seemed appropriate to continue System policy approximately as it
had been. As to the directive, if there was some feeling that Treasury
financing, should it occur, would call for a different policy than if it
did not occur, then the directive should take that factor into account.
In his own view, he would favor no change in policy irrespective of
whether or not Treasury financing was involved.
Mr. Bryan said he found himself in rather complete agreement with
what he sensed to be the majority sentiment around the table. The few
statistics that had become available recently seemed to him to indicate a
rather more modest advance than the statistics of the immediately preceding
months. However, short-term movements of this sort, particularly when they
came on the heels of an accelerated advance, did not alter his general
impression but the business expansion was continuing at a satisfactory
pace, although not of boom proportions. The month of January saw less
vigor in bank loan statistics. Unemployment was still on the high side,
and it would be surprising if the rate declined substantially in the near
future. Industrial prices had remained remarkably stable. In his
opinion, therefore, the time had not yet come for a deliberate tightening,
nor were price pressures in the near future so assured as to suggest that
System policy should anticipate them. This was not to say, on the other

2/13/62 -40
hand, that unlimited supplies of reserves should be provided to the
banking system. For some time, he had thought that the System should
be cautious about allowing an overdose of credit availability. He was
satisfied that the rate of growth of reserves had slowed down during the
past two months; this policy should in his judgment be continued. Thus,
the Committee should not take any large overt move toward a further
restriction in reserves. Instead, he felt that System policy should
continue to allow for some reserve growth. In terms of criteria, he
felt that reserves, rather than interest rates or the interest rate
structure, should guide the Committee. He would continue to advocate
that reserve growth be held to an annual rate of about 2 or 3 per cent.
Mr. Bryan indicated that he would concur in the remarks of
Mr. Mitchell regarding the balance-of-payments problem and the contribu
tion that monetary policy could make to it. If he understood correctly,
Mr. Mitchell was saying--and he thought wisely--that the System could
make no fundamental remedy of that situation without creating economic
stagnation in this country. He believed that on the grounds he had
mentioned, and every other ground he could think of, it would be at
this time a blunder of policy.
Mr. Francis commented that in the Eighth District business
activity and bank credit rose rapidly in the autumn of 1961. In the past
two months, however, the expansion had been less certain and vigorous.
Output of manufacturing firms, employment, department store sales, and

2/13/62 -41
debits were higher in the fourth quarter of 1961 than in the previous
quarter. Each of these series, however, appeared to have been leveling
off in the last month of 1961 and in the first month of this year.
Preliminary January data displayed a mixed picture. Initial claims for
unemployment compensation were averaging somewhat higher than during
corresponding months of recent years. As in the nation, Eighth District
department store sales, seasonally adjusted, were down more than
seasonally in January. However, bank debits in the District rose from
December to January. Cash farm income in the District states had
continued very strong.
Total deposits in Eighth District banks averaged about the same
in January as in December after adjustment for seasonal factors. This
behavior of deposits was in sharp contrast to the rapid increase that
was characteristic of the previous four or five months. Both loans and
investments of District banks rose from December to January. Business
loans, seasonally adjusted, declined moderately, while most other
categories of loans increased. There was a slight increase in District
bank investments.
Summarizing, Mr. Francis said that recent economic developments
in the Eighth District had been similar to those of the rest of the
country, but on the whole had been less strong.
Mr. Balderston said he was impressed by the fact that economic
activity, which seemed to be moving into a phase of further expansion

2/13/62 -42
two months ago, was not progressing as he personally had thought it
would. In his view, the pause that Mr. Noyes had reported could not
be ignored. He was also impressed by the fact that the price situation
during the past year had been more stable than in any comparable period
he could recall during his tenure as a member of the Open Market Committee.
As noted in the staff memorandum on economic and financial developments
that had been distributed prior to this meeting: (1) although the
wholesale commodity price index edged up between November and the end of
January, the total index was estimated at 119.5 (1947-49 = 100) compared
with 119.9 a year earlier; (2) although industrial commodity prices had
risen slightly (about .2 per cent) since November, the level estimated
for the end of January was slightly below January 1961; (3) although the
index of sensitive industrial materials was up 2.0 per cent in January
from the previous February, this index rose 5 to 6 per cent in the
comparable periods of 1954-55 and 1958-59; and (4) although the consumer
price index rose .5 per cent during 1961, retail prices of commodities
in December were about the same as a year earlier and the increase of
1.7 per cent in the average price of consumer services was the smallest
of any postwar year. In summary, the pause in the expansion of industrial
activity plus the stability of prices during the past year argued for a
continuation of some increase in the supply of reserves to the commercial
banking system. On that basis, he would be content to see the 4 per cent
rate of increase in total reserves that had occurred since November

2/13/62 -43
continued for the next three weeks, except for the fact that he felt
less secure about the international situation than Messrs. Mitchell
and Bryan. Thus, he found himself caught in a dilemma of the kind
that the Committee had been facing for many months. Were it not for
international considerations, he would like to see the System continue
to supply reserves at about the rate that had prevailed in recent weeks.
However, the foreign problem is before us. And so, despite the
fact that the dealers are short of bills, he would like to see an
effort made to encourage the bill rate to move above 2-3/4 per cent.
This might require letting free reserves fall somewhat below the level
of around $425 million that had prevailed recently. He would be
satisfied with a free reserve target as low as $350-$400 million if
that were necessary to maintain the bill rate above 2-3/4 per cent.
In a further comment, Mr. Balderston noted that free reserves
had been running around $425 million if one allowed for float. Yet a
year ago, from February through April 1961, free reserves averaged
around $525 million, which was about $100 million higher than at present,
but which has not prevented the System from being able to continue the
increase of reserves behind private deposits at an annual rate of from
4 to 5 per cent. Faced with a choice between the current international
problem and the pause in domestic business expansion, he would chance a
somewhat lower level of free reserves to help bring about a firmer bill
rate.

2/13/62 -44
Chairman Martin said he did not think that the members of the
Committee were very far apart in their thinking this morning. He
would like to make only the personal observation, in respect to the
February doldrums, that he thought there was less urgency today for
tightening than at the time of either the January 23 or the January 9
Committee meetings. He continued to feel that this was not a good
period of the year on which to base longer-term policy. A Treasury
advance refunding was, he thought, more than a possibility. Instead,
there was a fairly clear probability that the Treasury would go ahead,
in which event the Committee should attempt to maintain a steady money
market, unless it felt compelled to tighten at this juncture. In his
view, an advance refunding would be complementary to monetary policy,
and in line with the thinking of those who had indicated that they would
favor some slight diminution of the availability of funds. Therefore,
the System ought to be glad to see the advance refunding take place.
The Chairman went on to say, however, that he thought the
Committee must anticipate the possibility of further gold losses. That
would also be a factor, perhaps, in the market. It might accentuate the
necessity for the System to look at the discount rate at a later stage
as a confidence factor.
To sum up today's meeting, the Chairman said, he thought the
consensus favored maintenance of approximately the status quo for the
next three weeks, whether on the basis of a Treasury advance refunding

2/13/62 -45
or economic policy considerations. Accordingly, he would think that
the existing directive would be acceptable for the next three weeks,
if the Committee followed a suggestion such as that of Mr. Robertson's
and said that in view of the possibility of a Treasury financing,
emphasis should be placed on maintaining a steady money market. A minor
adjustment also could be made in the first paragraph of the directive.
The Chairman then inquired whether such a directive would meet
the views held by the Committee today. The only reservation expressed
was by Mr. Robertson, who said that he would prefer to see the Committee
tie its policy to the question of supplying reserves rather than interest
rate considerations.
Accordingly, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York was authorized and directed,
until otherwise directed by the Committee,
to execute transactions for the System Open
Market Account in accordance with the follow
ing current economic policy directive:
It continues to be the current policy of the Committee to
permit further bank credit and monetary expansion so as to pro
mote fuller utilization of the economy's resources, together
with monetary conditions consistent with the needs of an
expanding domestic economy, taking into account this country's
adverse balance of payments as well as a possible Treasury
financing.
To implement this policy, operations for the System Open
Market Account during the next three weeks shall be conducted
with a view to maintaining a supply of reserves adequate for
further credit expansion, while minimizing downward pressures
on short-term interest rates. In view of the possibility of a
Treasury financing, emphasis shall be placed on maintaining a
steady money market.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,
Balderston, Irons, King, Mills, Mitchell,
Robertson, Shepardson, Swan, Wayne, Fulton,
and Treiber. Votes against this action: None.

2/13/62 -46
The meeting then recessed and reconvened at 1:00 p.m. with the
following attendance:
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Irons
Mr. King
Mr. Mills
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Swan
Mr. Wayne
Mr. Fulton, Alternate
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Ellis and Deming, Alternate Members of the
Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bopp, Bryan, Scanlon, and Clay, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Atlanta, Chicago, and Kansas City, respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. H ackley, General Counsel
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Thomas, Economist
Mr. Noyes, Associate Economist
Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Furth, Adviser, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Francis, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis
Mr. Coombs, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of New York
Chairman Martin noted that the next meeting of the Committee,
scheduled for March 6, 1962, would be the annual organization meeting.

2/13/62 -47
In this connection, he referred to a matter that might come up for
discussion at such time, namely, the Committee's By-laws as they
related to the selection of the Manager of the System Open Market
Account. He then asked Mr. Hackley for a brief background statement,
adding that some documentation would be provided to the Committee
before the next meeting.
Mr. Hackley commented that the law contains no specific provisions
with respect to the selection of an Account Manager or the selection rf a
Reserve Bank to execute transactions for the Open Market Account. The law
requires only that the Open Market Committee meet at least four times each
year and that the Reserve Bank representatives on the Committee shall be
selected for one-year terms beginning on March 1 of each year. The
practice had grown up of regarding the first meeting after March 1 as the
annual organization meeting, and the By-laws provide that at such meeting
the officers of the Committee shall be elected for the coming year.
However, the By-laws do not provide specifically when the Manager of the
Account shall be selected; only that a Reserve Bank shall be selected to
execute transactions for the Open Market Account, and that such Bank
shall select an Account Manager who shall be satisfactory to the Committee,
shall serve at the pleasure of the Committee, and shall attend all of its
meetings. Mr. Hackley also pointed out that the Committee's Rules on
Organization and Information, last amended in 1955 when the executive
committee was abolished, state that one of the Federal Reserve Banks,

2/13/62
selected by the Committee to execute transactions for the Open Market
Account, selects a Manager of the System Open Market Account, satis
factory to the Committee.
Chairman Martin then turned to the subject of Federal Reserve
System operations in foreign currencies, concerning which various
additional documents, as follows, had been distributed to the Committee
since the meeting on January 23, 1962:
1. Proposed instructions regarding open market
transactions in foreign currencies. (Draft dated February
2, 1962; revised draft dated February 9, 1962.)
2. Proposed guidelines for System foreign currency
operations. (Draft dated February 2, 1962.) (Revised
draft dated February 13, 1962, distributed at this meeting.)
3. Outline of initial program for System foreign
currency operations. (Draft dated February 2, 1962.)
This was superseded by:
Memorandum from Messrs. Coombs and Young dated
February 6, 1962, attaching (a) a draft paper of the same date
on scope and character of initial foreign currency operations
of the System, as agreed to by Treasury-Federal Open Market
Committee representatives; and (b) a second draft paper, also
of the same date, submitting a proposal for a short-term
program of coordinated Treasury and System operations consistent
with this understanding.
4. Memorandum on Treasury and Federal Reserve foreign
currency operations and policy -- relationships and coordination.
This memorandum was submitted by Treasury representatives as a
statement of the Treasury's viewpoint on the problem of operating
relationships between the Treasury and the System. It had been
amended by the Treasury representatives under date of February 1,
1962, in accordance with suggestions made by Messrs. Coombs and
Young.
5. Proposed initial directive from the Federal Open Market
Committee to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York on System

2/13/62 -49
foreign currency operations. (Draft dated February 6,
1962.)
6. Letter from Robert H. Knight, General Counsel of
the Treasury, transmitting a confidential Treasury memorandum
on Treasury experience in the foreign exchange markets.
(Letter dated February 9, 1962.)
7. Memorandum from Mr. Hackley, dated February 8, 1962,
on an alternative approach to System foreign currency operations
under which such operations would be regulated, directed, and
supervised by the Board of Governors rather than by the Federal
Open Market Committee.
The Chairman stated that he would first review briefly what had
happened since the January 23 Committee meeting. The day before that
meeting, he recalled, Mr. Hayes had made an address in which he referred
to the possibility of System foreign currency operations. Then, at the
January 23 meeting, he (Chairman Martin) had been authorized to make
reference to the subject in his testimony before the Joint Economic
Committee on January 30 in connection with hearings on the President's
Economic Report. He presumed that the members of the Committee had seen
the testimony. Rather surprisingly, the Chairman said, there had been
little comment, either favorable or adverse, since that time.
The Chairman also recalled that at the meeting on January 23 the
Committee, with two dissenting votes, had approved in principle a program
of System foreign currency operations and had requested Messrs. Young and
Coombs to begin negotiations with the Treasury with a view to drawing
lines of responsibility between the Treasury's Stabilization Fund opera
tions in foreign currencies and Federal Reserve activities. Messrs. Young
and Coombs had since met with Treasury representatives and some progress

2/13/62 -50
had been made, although the difficulties involved in a pioneering
operation of this kind were considerable.
The Chairman stated that he would ask Mr. Young to report on what
had been done to date. He would then ask Mr. Coombs to provide some
orientation on procedures that the New York Bank would have in mind in
connection with foreign exchange operations. This, he thought, would be
helpful to the Committee, and the members should feel free to ask
questions.
Mr. Young said that the persons designated by the Treasury to
consult with Mr. Coombs and himself were Robert H. Knight, General
Counsel, and Alan R. Holmes of the Under Secretary's staff. He and
Mr. Coombs met with Messrs. Knight and Holmes for two days following the
January 23 meeting of the Open Market Committee, and since that time
there had been several further informal conversations. The Treasury
tendered a memorandum setting forth its point of view on the problem of
operating relationships, which memorandum had been reproduced and distrib
uted to the Committee substantially as submitted, although with a few
changes. The Treasury had originally included certain reservations that
related to the longer run, and he and Mr. Coombs had raised the question
whether those were important and necessary. Accordingly, the Treasury
withdrew these points.
Mr. Young said he and Mr. Coombs proceeded by laying on the
table the point of view that had been presented in a memorandum,
distributed previously to the Committee, which had been suggested as a

2/13/62 -51
beginning point for discussions with the Treasury. In the end,
however, it developed that the fact that the System was proposing to
undertake a new program on an experimental basis handicapped trying to
pursue the matter to what might be a fairly definitive allocation of
responsibilities. In the circumstances, it seemed that it would be
desirable to try to reach an agreement on the outline of a beginning
program to which both the Treasury and the Federal Reserve might agree,
and it was understood that Messrs. Coombs and Young would prepare a
memorandum that would propose a more specific program for the beginning
of Federal Reserve operations in this area.
From that point, Mr. Young said, the discussion backtracked into
the documents that had been prepared earlier for the Committee,
particularly the suggested guidelines, in an attempt to work things out
in a way that seemed from Treasury experience and that the Federal
Reserve had in mind to be appropriate for System operations. The Federal
Reserve representatives showed the Treasury representatives the proposed
"action" memorandum and the various implications of that document were
discussed. The memorandum was subsequently revised in the light of that
discussion, and some further suggestions had resulted from discussion
within the Board of Governors. Likewise, there had been some further
discussion within the Federal Reserve regarding the guidelines, and as
a result there were one or two fresh suggestions. Mimeographed copies
of the guidelines in a form reflecting those suggestions were now
available for distribution. (Distribution was made at this meeting.)

2/13/62 -52
Mr. Young also referred to the report that had been furnished
by the Treasury on the operations of the Stabilization Fund in the
exchange markets since March 1961. From the standpoint of the Treasury,
he noted, this was a highly confidential document. The Treasury was
much concerned that it be so regarded within the Federal Reserve System.
Mr. Young then reverted to what had been agreed upon by the
Treasury and Federal Reserve representatives as the appropriate character
and scope of an initial program of foreign currency operations by the
Federal Reserve System. This provided for the System to acquire in the
market or direct from foreign central banks small amounts of authorized
foreign currencies whenever pressure on the dollar relaxed and the rate
of one of those currencies fell from recent high levels. This would be
with the thought of developing a modus operandi. The System would
dispose of this inventory only on such occasions as market conditions
might make sales desirable. Also, to facilitate the breaking into the
business by the Federal Reserve System, the Secretary of the Treasury
would stand ready to sell to the Federal Reserve modest amounts of
currencies already held by the Stabilization Fund. The amounts mentioned
were not necessarily the amounts that the Federal Reserve would be
expected to purchase to get into business; they were arrived at rather
arbitrarily as amounts that it seemed appropriate for the Treasury to
offer at this particular time. The System would be free to take whatever
it wished. The Treasury would be free to continue operations under

2/13/62
existing agreements with four countries (Germany, Switzerland, the
Netherlands, and Italy), but the System, according to the program
described in the paper that had been distributed, would stand prepared
to acquire currencies of those countries from the Treasury, either
outright or under mutually satisfactory resale agreement, in the event
that adverse exchange market developments caused the Stabilization Fund
to exhaust its available resources. The Treasury and the System would
consult before either entered into any agreements with foreign central
banks or governments regarding possible foreign currency operations.
To be in a position to meet any unusual demands for foreign
currencies that might arise, the System would stand ready, within
agreed-upon limitations, to enter into reciprocal currency transactions
with designated foreign central banks, especially those of France and
England, and to purchase from the Stabilization Fund part or all of
foreign currency amounts acquired under Treasury credit arrangements
with major European central banks or governments already negotiated or,
after consultation with the System, to be negotiated. Also, the System
would stand ready to acquire part or all of the foreign currency amounts
drawn by the Treasury from the International Monetary Fund in the event
of a U. S. drawing.
Mr. Young reiterated that the Federal Reserve-Treasury discussions
had developed the thought that, inasmuch as the System operations would
be experimental, a complete understanding as to division of responsibilities

2/13/62 -54
between the Treasury and the Federal Reserve would not be feasible
at this time. However, it was felt that this would be possible on
the basis of experience, and therefore that it might be a good thing
to leave to experience a precise delineation. In the meantime, the
only arrangement that needed to be made would be for the exchange of
information, that is, the establishment of channels for regular
communication and procedures for continuing consultations. The Treasury
memorandum, Mr. Young noted, elaborated on the mechanism for the exchange
of information and general communication at some length. Therefore, he
and Mr. Coombs had not prepared any paper on that. In general, they
felt that the Treasury memorandum was reasonable.
Mr. Young also pointed out that the National Advisory Council on
International Monetary and Financial Problems had some responsibility in
connection with this matter. After some consideration, however, the
Treasury and Federal Reserve representatives had come to the conclusion
that it was only necessary to inform the Council in general language of
the plan that the System had in mind. It was not thought necessary to
get the Council involved in any of the detail. The Council would be
informed by the Chairman of the Board of Governors at one of its meetins,
and the other members of the Council would be given an opportunity to
raise questions. Then there presumably would be an action, for the
records of the Council, showing that the subject had been discussed and whether
any objection was raised to this undertaking.

2/13/62 -55
Chairman Martin commented that a lot of ground had been covered
in the Treasury-Federal Reserve negotiations, and as effectively, he
thought, as the nature of the operation permitted. As Mr. Young had
mentioned, the Treasury was concerned that its memorandum on Stabilization
Fund activities be held in strict confidence.
The Chairman then inquired whether members of the Committee had
questions about foreign exchange operations that they would like to ask
Mr. Coombs, in view of the latter's experience in handling operations
conducted by the New York Bank as fiscal agent of the Treasury.
Reference was made to the extent of operations of the
Stabilization Fund in the forward market, as opposed to spot transactions,
and Mr. Coombs said the basic reason was that the Stabilization Fund was
short of money. Also, those operations had occurred in a period of heavy
attacks on the dollar. It had seemed at the time that the most effective
form of collaboration with the foreign monetary authorities would be in
the forward markets, because such markets tend to be thin and it was
felt that a given amount of intervention might have a greater effect on
confidence and the general standing of the dollar than an equivalent
amount of spot operations. Mr. Coombs then described the general nature
of the forward operations that had been conducted.
In reply to a question as to how the General Fund of the Treasury
came into the picture, Mr. Coombs said that the total resources of the
Stabilization Fund were only about $330 million. Within that total,

2/13/62 -56
moreover, there were commitments to several countries, including Latin
American countries, for stabilization credit, and there was some gold in
the Stabilization Fund. As a rough guess, the availability of Fund
resources for the acquisition of hard currencies was in the order of only
about $125 million. However, by using its General Fund the Treasury could
borrow foreign currencies. Thus the General Fund was in a sense a
reservoir for the Stabilization Fund. As to limitations on the borrowing
of currencies, this would depend on negotiations with particular foreign
countries, but presumably there was no dollar limitation on the use of
the General Fund except the debt ceiling.
Mr. Mitchell asked a series of questions concerning the
responsibility for decision making. He asked whether, for example, the
question of operating in the currency of a particular foreign country
would be a decision of the Federal Reserve or of the Treasury, or a joint
decision.
Mr. Coombs indicated that, since the Treasury was not really in a
position to operate in the currency mentioned because the Stabilization
Fund did not have enough money, he thought the initiation of such an
operation would have to be a Federal Reserve matter. He would assume,
however, that the Federal Reserve would consult closely with the Treasury
in terms of what it planned to do, and obtain any suggestions that the
Treasury might want to make.
Mr. Mitchell asked whether Mr. Coombs would view such a decision
as setting up a continuing relationship with the country in question, and

2/13/62 -57
Mr. Coombs replied that personally he would consider it desirable to
have a continuing relationship. There had been a heavy yield in terms of
cooperation and understanding as the result of Stabilization Fund opera
tions. The Federal Reserve would be throwing away much more than it
accomplished if it entered into one-shot operations.
Mr. Mitchell also inquired about the mechanism of decision making
within the System. He inquired, for example, how the goal would be
determined if there was a question of operating in the currency of a given
country, and Mr. Coombs replied that this would be a decision for the Open
Market Committee.
Further questions by Mr. Mitchell related to the means of estab
lishing a basis for a Committee determination, including a determination
as to how much money should be set aside for a particular venture.
Mr. Coombs suggested that it might be well for the Committee to
set a reasonably high figure to allow room for various unforeseeable
contingencies. However, that would be a decision for the Committee.
Mr. Coombs also described how he would envisage, once a basic decision
had been made, that actual negotiations would be instituted and carried
out with a foreign central bank. As to the need for consultation with
the Committee on a day-to-day basis at that point, Mr. Coombs said he
assumed the Special Manager of the System Open Market Account would be
given some latitude, within the framework of the basic decision, for the
exercise of discretion in working out the most orderly procedure for
accomplishing the directive.

2/13/62 -58-
Mr. Coombs also responded to questions regarding what he would
anticipate might be accomplished through operations up to a certain
amount in a particular foreign currency. In the course of these
comments, he brought out that it would be assumed that central banks
would never be operating at cross purposes. All of the 'tabilization Fund
transactions had been fully discussed with the foreign central banks
concerned, and it had always been possible to achieve full agreement.
Chairman Martin commented at this point that he liked to think
of this type of operation as a kind of lubricating device. These
operations could not effect a fundamental cure for the balance-of-payments
problem, but it should be possible to lubricate the market to a certain
extent. The System's operations should not be so large as to try to
correct a basic deficit, but they should be sufficient to give some
assistance until the more fundamental problems could be corrected.
Mr. Coombs commented that the whole point of these operations
was to gain time until the basic situation changed.
There followed discussion, at the instance of Mr. Mitchell,
regarding the possibility that the judgment of a central bank would be
substituted for the judgment of the market. Mr. Coombs conceded that
on occasion it was possible that there might be some difference of
opinion as to a central bank's appraisal of a given situation. However,
he did not think that a central bank would want to hold up the exchange
rate in its favor artificially if it knew that the tide was running in

2/13/62 -59
the other direction. He had found central banks anxious to have the
exchange rate reflect basic trends.
In reply to a question as to the authority of the Treasury to
borrow abroad, Mr. Coombs cited a statutory reference and said he
understood there was no doubt as to the Treasury's authority. Mr. Hackley
confirmed this conclusion; he also noted that in a general sense the
Federal Reserve Banks may extend credit to foreign banks by the estab
lishment of reciprocal currency arrangements.
At the request of Chairman Martin, Mr. Coombs then described
circumstances that would entail the possibility of loss to the Federal
Reserve System from foreign currency operations. He indicated that the
most basic risk would be involved in the revaluation of a foreign
currency. The solution that had been found in operations for the
Stabilization Fund was to obtain an agreement with the foreign central
bank concerned to give two days' notice of any intention to revalue its
currency upward. This agreement had been more or less readily conceded,
and the two-day notice would allow time to cover.
Returning to the question of decision making, Mr. Mitchell
inquired how much communication between the Committee and the Special
Manager would be needed, assuming that the Special Manager had been
given some substantial latitude in which to operate under a basic
determination by the Open Market Committee. The response of Mr. Coombs
brought out, through examples, that much might depend on the nature of
the instruction given to the Special Manager.

2/13/62 -60
At the suggestion of Chairman Martin, Mr. Coombs then commented
on the existing arrangements at the New York Bank for the conduct of
foreign exchange operations. He also touched briefly on the procedures
followed by the New York Bank in executing transactions on behalf of
foreign central banks.
In further discussion, question was raised as to whether, in the
course of day-to-day operations that would involve consultation with the
Treasury, the Treasury would find it necessary to consult with other
agencies of the Government, including, for example, the State Department.
Mr. Young replied that there would be no day-to-day interest on the part
of anyone except the Treasury. The Chairman of the Board of Governors
might report occasionally at meetings of the National Advisory Council,
and some material of a retrospective nature might be prepared for the
Council's annual reports to the Congress. Most of that information
would already have been published. As to the Treasury, the Federal
Reserve would keep that Department informed from day to day on the basis
of a daily conference telephone call, which would be handled in much the
same manner as the daily call on regular open market operations. Also,
there would be Treasury-Federal Reserve staff discussions from time to
time, in much the same manner as those with regard to regular open
market operations. Questions of policy would be discussed by the
Chairman of the Board with the Secretary of the Treasury, but the
Treasury would not have a veto. Information on the foreign economic

2/13/62 -61
policy of the United States, which falls under the general guidance
and control of the National Advisory Council, would be available to
the System through its association with the Council apparatus at the
staff level.
Mr. King raised a question with respect to the comment made
earlier by Mr. Young that there would be no specific rules at the outset
on relationships between the Treasury and the Federal Reserve, the thought
being that these might evolve out of experience. He asked whether it
would not be better to have such rules, subject to an understanding that
they could be revised in the course of events if necessary. In this
connection, Mr. King indicated tnat he had some concern about the proposed
buying of currencies from the Stabilization Fund and inquired whether it
would not be desirable to have at the outset a specific understanding
that the Federal Reserve would buy from the Stabilization Fund only in
nominal amounts and purely for the purpose of opening accounts.
In response, Mr. Young expressed the view that no general rule
was needed; the Federal Reserve simply would not buy currencies from the
Stabilization Fund unless it wanted to make such purchases. He did not
think that the Treasury would be apt to come to the System with the idea
of selling from the Stabilization Fund unless something happened in the
development of the over-all program of foreign currency operations that
would make it seem desirable, from the Treasury's standpoint, to get
unloaded. There could always be that kind of development. For example,

2/13/62 -62
an underdeveloped country might need temporary help and there would be
no way to arrange it except to give a commitment from the Stabilization
Fund. In that event, the Treasury might need to convert some of its
resources.
Mr. Robertson inquired as to the advantages seen--aside from the
Federal Reserve's "unlimited pocketbook"--in having two agencies operating
in this field instead of one, and Mr. Coombs replied that he did not
think there were any. It just so happened by circumstance that there
were two agencies that were interested in the field.
With respect to the possibility that had been mentioned of
purchasing currencies from the Stabilization Fund, Mr. Swan inquired
whether it was reasonable to think that the disposal of such currencies,
if acquired, would be up to the Federal Reserve. He asked whether it was
not possible that the Federal Reserve would just be in the role of
supplying funds to the Treasury rather than conducting foreign currency
operations. Mr. Coombs replied that he thought that the Treasury would
relinquish any further claim to the currencies.
Mr. King again expressed the view that it would be a mistake not
to have any clearly drawn rules setting out the lines according to which
the Treasury and the Federal Reserve would conduct their respective
operations.
In the ensuing discussion of this point, Chairman Martin expressed
the view that Messrs. Young and Coombs had negotiated well with the

2/13/62 -63
Treasury and in tones of firmness. There should be an effort to
establish principles. However, he considered it difficult to sit down
and attempt to draw up such principles while the Federal Reserve was in
the process of learning.
After further comments, Chairman Martin turned to the question
that had been raised in a memorandum from Mr. Hackley dated February 8,
1962, concerning the possibility of making System operations in foreign
currencies subject to supervision by the Board of Governors rather than
the Open Market Committee. He pointed out that the consideration of this
subject had started with the assumption that such operations would be
under the supervision of the Committee, and the discussions thus far had
been on that basis. However, the question discussed in Mr. Hackley's
memorandum had been raised recently, and it seemed well to throw the
matter open for full consideration. The Chairman said he had talked
with Mr. Hayes at some length last Saturday and that Mr. Treiber would
express himself at this meeting on behalf of the New York Reserve Bank.
The Chairman then turned to Mr. Hackley, who said that his
memorandum was in no sense intended as a proposal, recommendation, or
endorsement of the alternative approach as against the approach heretofore
considered. The question had come up during Board discussions last week,
and his memorandum was in the nature of observations on the legal aspects
of the alternative possibility without intent to recommend it as a more
desirable approach. He did feel that in at least some respects this

2/13/62 -64
approach might be more defensible from a legal standpoint. The so-called
alternative approach, however, would not in any way affect the basic
legal question of the System's authority to engage in foreign currency
operations. There were certain arguments that would seem to support
placing authority in the Board of Governors, with certain complementary
actions by the Open Market Committee so far as open market operations
were involved, but his memorandum was not intended to indicate that the
approach heretofore considered would not be legally supportable.
Mr. Wayne inquired whether Mr. Hackley meant that the law was
sufficiently uncertain so that either approach would be legal.
Mr. Hackley replied that, as indicated in his memorandum of
November 22, 1961, any operations in this field would necessarily involve
activities with respect to which both the Board and the Committee would
have statutory responsibilities, the Committee with respect to open
market transactions, including the purchase and sale of cable transfers,
and the Board with respect to the opening of accounts and supervisory
authority over all foreign relationships.
Mr. Wayne then inquired whether the law appeared to be sufficiently
clear that a discussion by the Open Market Committee would not be in order,
to which Mr. Hackley replied that the law was not that clear. He
reiterated that the memorandum was not intended to express any recommenda
tion on his part.

2/13/62 -65
Chairman Martin said that he thought this matter deserved full
discussion around the table. In one sense, it could be said that the
authority was in the Board to use the New York Bank as agent in somewhat
the same manner as the Bank was used by the Treasury. As fiscal agent of
the Treasury, however, the New York Bank was removed to that extent from
the System as a whole, and in his judgment this was a defect and a matter
of concern. Also, there was the question of an officer of the New York
Bank operating for the Stabilization Fund and also for the System. This
was all part of a broad problem, involving difficult questions of relation
ships within the System as a whole.
In further discussion, Mr. Mills inquired whether he was correct in
thinking that whatever arrangements might be entered into would be regarded
as experimental and subject to amendment or revocation. Chairman Martin
replied that he thought there was no question. The matter had to be on
that basis.
Chairman Martin then turned to Mr. Treiber, who presented
substantially the following comments:
After reading Mr. Hackley's memorandum of February 8, 1962,
outlining an alternative approach with respect to the conduct of
foreign currency operations, I re-read that portion (pp. 23-33)
of Mr. Hackley's memorandum of November 22, 1961, dealing with
the respective jurisdictions of the Board of Governors and the
Federal Open Market Committee.
Certainly the statute is not crystal clear in setting forth
the line of demarcation between the authority and responsibility
of the Board and the authority and responsibility of the Committee.
It does seem clear that the statute places in the Board the author
ity and responsibility for regulating the opening and maintenance
of accounts with foreign central banks. On the other hand, it

2/13/62 -66
appears to be the intent of the statute that the Committee
direct open market operations, and transactions in cable
transfers, bankers' acceptances, and bills of exchange are
open market transactions.
I thought that Mr. Hackley very neatly and quite properly
distinguished in his memorandum of November 22, 1961, those
activities that basically seem to be within the purview of the
Board and those that seem to be within the purview of the
Committee.
It seems to me that the basic reason why the Federal Reserve
would undertake transactions in foreign currencies is to influence
the market relationship of such currencies to the dollar; the
primary concern is with the market and transactions in the market.
At times the Federal Reserve would buy foreign currencies in the
market; at other times it would sell them in the market. At the
present, our attention is focused on the selling of foreign
currencies, In order to be able to sell them, it is recessary
to acquire them, as for example throuh reciprocal accounts.
But the reason for the reciprocal accounts is to enable the
Federal Reserve to conduct transactions in the market.
To say that the sale of foreign currency is an incident to
the maintenance of the foreign account and the reciprocal credits
is, it seems to me, a misdirection of emphasis--a blurr n, of
objectives. No new account has been opened by a Reserve Bank in
a foreign central bank for decades. The reason for opening such
an account at this time is to facilitate the basic purpose of
engaging in market transactions in a foreign currency in order to
defend the international position of the dollar.
I submit that the reconciliation of the respective responsi
bilities of the Board and the Committee, as outlined in
Mr. Hackley's memorandum of November 22, 1961, is appropriate.
The Federal Open Market Committee has become the forum for
the formulation of national credit policy. It is a manifestation
of the strength of the Federal Reserve System--a blending of
national and regional elements, bringing forth the greatest
contribution of the various parts of the System. It seems to me
that it is highly desirable that the Reserve Bank Presidents, as
well as the members of the Board, join together through the Open
Market Committee in directing over-all policy with respect to
Federal Reserve operations in foreign currencies.
Mr. Ellis stated that he subscribed generally to the position
Mr. Treiber had expressed, with this additional observation. He was
impressed by the memorandum relating operations in foreign currencies to

2/13/62 -67
operations in domestic markets. He thought there was a similarity of
approach and of technique that deserved consideration on the part of
the Committee. With respect to administrative techniques and operational
routines, it seemed necessary to go through a smaller group to a larger
group, whether that be the Board of Governors or the Open Market
Committee. In either event, there would apparently have to be a
delegation of responsibility to a small group that would turn for policy
direction to a larger group, and he could see no reason why the larger
group might not be the Open Market Committee as effectively as the Board
of Governors. On balance, therefore, while the question was a close one,
he would favor the use of the Open Market Committee.
Mr. Irons said he had come to the same conclusion as Messrs.
Treiber and Ellis. He was inclined to regard the purchase and sale of
foreign currencies as much more than an incident to the opening and
maintenance of accounts with foreign central banks, and from that stand
point the earlier view would prevail. Also, there was much to be said
in support of that position from the standpoint of the Open Market
Committee having developed into a kind of central forum with regard to
System policy matters. He did not think that the international and
domestic aspects of this problem could be divorced. Also, the participa
tion of the Open Market Committee would provide education and information
in an area where there was a need for everyone to obtain a much broader
knowledge. One could see the difference since the abolishment of the

2/13/62 -68
executive committee of the Open Market Committee in terms of the
broadened knowledge and participation of people throughout the System
who should be expected to contribute to the formulation of monetary
policy. If the balance was reasonably equal from a legal standpoint,
he would favor having the responsibility for System operations in foreign
currencies placed with the Open Market Committee.
Mr. Swan expressed agreement with Mr. Irons. He felt that the
question had serious implications in the longer run, apart from the
specific question of foreign exchange operations, from the point of view
of the structure of the Federal Reserve System and what was considered to
be its strength, Many of the Committee members were admittedly not
experts in the field of foreign exchange operations, but he thought
everyone could become sufficiently versed in the subject to discharge the
necessary responsibilities. To shift from the Committee to the Board
might give support to those who would like to change rather basically the
fundamental structure of the System.
Mr. Deming said he had nothing to add to what already had been
said by Mr. Irons and the others who had spoken.
Mr. Scanlon said he had had the same questions with respect to
Mr. Hackley's memorandum as were raised by Mr. Wayne. It was not clear
to him which approach was preferable legally. He was not sure he under
stood the intent of the last sentence in the memorandum, which stated
that the alternative approach would probably have certain practical and
operating advantages.

2/13/62 -69
Mr. Hackley made the comment that perhaps this sentence should
not have been included in a strictly legal memorandum. However, he had
been thinking, for example, of the almost daily meetings of the Board
of Governors as opposed to the less frequent meetings of the Open Market
Committee.
Mr. Clay said he was rather inclined to agree with Messrs. Ellis
and Irons, and the others who had spoken in like vein. At the present
moment, however, he was not sure just what the Open Market Committee
was likely to be called upon to decide and whether it would be in a
position to add a great deal, if operations in foreign currencies were
included among its responsibilities. There would be some benefit to the
System, perhaps, in having the Open Market Committee involved, for in
time there would no doubt be a big job of interpretation to the public
and the banking system. Thus, there would be some advantage if the
Reserve Bank Presidents were involved to such an extent that they could
at least have an opportunity for learning. At the present time, however,
he had some doubt whether his own contributions to decisions in this area
would be of great value.
Mr. Wayne said he was still disturbed about the question of legal
uncertainty that was revived in Mr. Hackley's memorandum. He had thought
that the last sentence in the memorandum, referred to previously by
Mr. Scanlon, was not just an inadvertent expression. It seemed to him
that in some ways it was true. Mr. Mitchell had been discussing earlier

2/13/62 -70
the matter of decision making, and Mr. Coombs' replies had clarified
his (Mr. Wayne's) thinking to some extent. He had been thinking that
the matter of dealing with foreign central banks, and their preference
for limited groups, might make it difficult for the Open Market
Committee to function in this area; that perhaps there could not be
real freedom of discussion. However, he gathered from Mr. Coombs that
the necessary element of confidentiality would not be inconsistent with
the making of policy decisions by the Committee. The problem seemed
more analogous to domestic System operations than he had thought before
this afternoon. If this was true, then he would feel that the placing
of the responsibility in the Open Market Committee would be advantageous
from the standpoint of having a broader group discuss matters of policy
in this area. He was impressed by the relationships between foreign
exchange operations and domestic open market operations; they would
suggest that both types of operations should be considered in the same
forum. It would not be too long, he felt, before someone would have to
do some explaining, and he would like to have the opportunity to become
familiar with the System's activities in foreign currencies if he was
going to attempt an explanation.
Mr. Mills said he would prefer the original concept of operating
through the Open Market Committee as it would provide an opportunity for
the Committee to review, ratify, and confirm the actions taken by a
smaller management group. He would hope that such reviews could be

2/13/62 -71
accomplished on a constructive basis. However, the injection of the
Committee would bring a rather unwieldy body into the decisions; as
time passed, it might prove difficult to handle matters in this way.
If so, then he would feel that in the interest of more direct and prompt
action it might be advisable to turn to the alternative approach and
glace the direction of foreign currency operations in the Board of
Governors.
Mr. Robertson recalled that he had opposed the whole program of
operations in foreign currencies on legal, practical, and policy grounds
because it had seemed to him that the only basis for the entrance of the
Federal Reserve into this field would be to supplement the resources of
the Stabilization Fund and because the program was being undertaken
without specific Congressional approval. It involved putting two agencies
of Government into the same field, with the possibility of differing
judgments and operations that were at cross purposes. Consequently, he
felt that it would be preferable if there was just one agency in the
field. He felt that if the size of the Stabilization Fund was inadequate,
the Treasury should seek to augment it by a request to Congress for
additional appropriated funds, or possibly seek Congressional authority
to freely utilize the unlimited funds of the Federal Reserve System.
From a legal point of view, Mr. Robertson said, he did not think
it made much difference whether Federal Reserve foreign currency
operations were under the direction of the Open Market Committee or the

2/13/62 -72
Board. In his opinion, there would be a stretching of the statute in
either case. However, the statute does specifically authorize the Board
to exercise special supervision over foreign relationships. Therefore,
it probably would come closer to meeting the statute to conduct opera
tions through the Board rather than through the Open Market Committee.
Also, the Board came closer to being purely a Governmental unit; it was
composed entirely of publicly-appointed representatives. Accordingly,
he felt that the Board should bear the responsibility and the burden of
this operation. From a practical point of view, moreover, the Board
was in a position to act more promptly in this field because it could
meet not only daily but hourly if necessary. No matter which alternative
was followed, however, the function should be discussed fully within the
Open Market Committee so that everyone could have a complete understanding
of the problem.
Mr. Shepardson said that from Mr. Hackley's memorandum it seemed
possible that on a fine reading of the law there might be some weight of
argument in favor of placing the responsibility in the Board of Governors.
However, either approach involved an interpretation of the law that was
rather nebulous in some respects. On the assumption that the original
proposal would be legally supportable, he thought that it would contain
advantages from the standpoint of the System as a whole, even granting
the possible mechanical advantages of a Board operation. Participation
of the entire Open Market Committee would be desirable from the standpoint

2/13/62 -73
of System unity and understanding, as well as from the standpoint of
the close interrelationship of foreign and domestic operations.
Accordingly, he felt that the original proposal would be preferable in
the longer run.
Mr. King said that if the Open Market Committee was going to take
direct charge of these operations, perhaps that approach would be better.
In practice, however, it would seem that any group of men who met
practically every day would be in a better position to make prompt
decisions. The real question, as he saw it, therefore, was whether the
Open Market Committee would be able to assume full responsibility and
discharge it. If it delegated responsibility to a few members, he
thought that would be a mistake, and under the proposed plan of organization
he believed that was what the Committee would be doing. For that reason,
he thought the Board would be preferable because it could meet every day
and make what decisions had to be made. Perhaps he was magnifying in
his mind the number of decisions that would have to be made, but he felt
that the Open Market Committee would have to act largely after the fact.
Also, he saw merit in Mr. Robertson's point that the Board consisted of
persons publicly appointed. He favored the present mechanism for the
conduct of System open market operations and felt that a ,reat deal was
gained by having the full Open Market Committee and other Presidents meet
together every three weeks. In this particular field, however, because of
the lesser frequency of meetings, he doubted whether the Open Market
Committee would be able to discharge its responsibility effectively.

2/13/62 -74-
Mr. Mitchell stated that his philosophy was quite close to that
expressed by Mr. Wayne. He went on to say that as a practical matter
there seemed to be three possibilities for conducting a program of
operations in foreign currencies: through the Open Market Committee,
through the Board of Governors, or through a subcommittee of the Open
Market Committee. As between a subcommittee of the Open Market Committee
and the Board of Governors, he would prefer to place the program in the
hands of the Board. If it appeared that the full Open Market Committee
would be able to do the job, then he would have a slight preference for
that approach. However, he was not sure that what would be involved was
entirely clear. If the Open Market Committee was going to consider
international and domestic factors together, the members would have to
become as conversant with the international considerations as the
domestic. Also, the problem of confidentiality in foreign exchange
operations was involved, and the conduct of operations through the Open
Market Committee would bring in a substantially larger number of
principals along with advisers. Finally, there was the question involved
in the lesser frequency of meetings of the Open Market Committee. Putting
all of these factors together, much would seem to depend on the nature of
the decisions that would have to be made, including how often decisions
would have to be made and what they would be like. If they could be made at
three-week intervals, his thinking would run in the direction of proceeding
through the Open Market Committee; if frequent decisions would be required,

2/13/62 -75
however, then he would be inclined to place the responsibility in the
Board.
Mr. Fulton said that he concurred almost completely in the views
expressed by Mr. Robertson. He went on to say that he doubted whether
all of the background information that would be necessary in making
decisions on foreign currency operations could be made available to the
full Open Market Committee. Further, while the international situation
was of significance to the Committee, in his opinion the Committee should
direct its attention primarily to the domestic economy and to supplying
the reserves to the banking system that were necessary to romote the
domestic economy. He felt, also, that the responsibility for foreign
currency operations should be lodged in a public body, and the Board of
Governors met that description. From the practical standpoint, he noted
that the Board is able to meet at any time and that it is more available
for conference than the Committee. If the responsibility were in the
Open Market Committee, it might be necessary to delegate substantial
powers to a subcommittee, and he doubted that the full Committee would
actually have control of the operations except in terms of broad
principles. For these reasons, he felt that it would oe preferable to
place the responsibility in the Board of Governors.
Mr. Bopp commented that he was somewhat disturbed by the implication
that the Board was a public body while the Open Market Committee was not.
Further, if this line of thinking was pursued, he doubted whether one

2/13/62 -76
could avoid the conclusion that both domestic and international facets
of monetary policy should be handled by that same public body. He would
not favor such an approach. As to the foreign currency operations, on
the grounds developed by Mr. Irons, including the nature of the Federal
Reserve System and the fact that problems arising out of such operations
would have to be defended by the System as a whole, he would favor
placing the responsibility in the hands of the Open Market Committee.
Mr. Bryan said he could see a number of loner-run arguments of
a rather tneoretical nature for having the responsibility placed in the
Open Market Committee. However, he was persuaded that for a considerable
time, at least, the responsibility should preferably be with the Board
and the New York Bank on the grounds that such an approach would be more
practical. In his opinion, it was questionable whether a body as large
as the Open Market Committee could deal with the subject properly, at
least in the experimental and developmental stages. He felt that a lot
of decisions were likely to be required, that such decisions would have
to be made quickly, and that they might have to be of an ad hoc nature.
Accordingly, he would prefer that the Board of Governors deal with those
matters, with the Open Market Committee kept informed as a matter of
information and education.
Mr. Balderston said he had the feeling that the System's domestic
and international goals were so closely interrelated that it would be a
mistake to divorce the new program from the operations of the Open Market
Committee. Also, he was impressed with the point that the System

2/13/62 -77
community might be endangered if the new program were administered by
the Board and the New York Bank without the other Reserve Banks
participating. The funds employed would be System funds, he noted,
adding that he felt that five or ten years from now it would seem to
have been a mistake if, merely because of certain practical advantages
in getting the new operation started, a plan had been initiated that
involved divisionary tendencies. While there might be a practical
problem--in view of the confidentiality of the operations--if the
responsibility were vested in a body as large as the Open Market
Committee, it seemed to him that a solution was easy to visualize. If
the Committee met at three-week intervals, what had transpired in the
field of foreign currency operations could be reported to the Committee
and the actions made known to all of the members. The Special Manager
would be expected to operate under general guides furnished by the
Committee in much the same manner that the Account Manager had operated
during the past year under the special authorization to conduct
transactions in intermediate- and longer-term U. S. Government securities.
The Manager knew in general terms how the Committee expected him to
operate. Then, each time the Committee met, the Manager had advised it
of what he had done and the operations were approved, ratified, and
confirmed. The reporting on foreign currency operations ought to be as
complete as confidentiality would permit. In terms of immediate guidance,
if the Special Manager should feel that his guidelines in this new and
unexplored area were not sufficiently clear, he should have an opportunity

2/13/62 -78
to call upon a small group, such as the subcommittee that had been
suggested, in order to be able to act quickly and decisively. Therefore,
Mr. Balderston said, he would see the subcommittee serving not as a
substitute for the full Committee in the sense of corraling secrets of
the trade, but rather serving in times of need to provide a means whereby
the Special Manager would be able to get on with his job.
Chairman Martin said that this was also his general position. He
added that he had one or two observations. First, he did not believe it
was possible, with the world developing as it was, to separate domestic
and international considerations. This might be false thinking on his
part. But he had heard some people try to rank economic goals such as
employment, growth, and other factors, and in his opinion they were all
interrelated. Second, he did not feel that the Committee members and other
Reserve Bank Presidents would necessarily have to become foreign exchange
experts. To become an expert, a person would have to devote his entire
energy to the problem of foreign exchange alone. The Committee members
would have to understand the broad principles, but they would not have to
become foreign exchange experts. Therefore, he did not think there ought
to be a tendency to exaggerate the burden that would be involved.
The Chairman also made the comment that the world was changing
quite a bit today. He was inclined to feel that ten years from now
operations in foreign currencies probably would be just as much a part
of the System as open market operations in Government securities.

2/13/62 -79-
Chairman Martin commented that he thought the System was
proceeding along the right lines. There were those, he noted, who
felt that the law was not sufficiently clear. It might be desirable to
seek legislation in this area at some time, but at the moment he doubted
whether it would be feasible, with so little experience, to determine
exactly what kind of legislation was needed. Rather, it seemed to him
that the best move would be first to gain some experience. If it was
clear from the law that the Federal Reserve did not have the authority
to enter into foreign currency operations, that would be different, but
opinions were available from the Committee's General Counsel and from the
General Counsel of the Treasury, and the Attorney General had concurred.
The availability of those decisions, along with lack of System experience
in foreign currency operations, would handicap the System if it tried to
get legislation. The System would be asked what kind of additional
legislation it needed, and the Congress probably would not want to put
itself in the position of approving something if the Federal Reserve was
not clear about its wishes in the matter.
Where he came out, the Chairman said, was that the System was
confronted with a pioneering operation. The System would be feeling its
way for a period of time and, as pointed up by Mr. Mills' earlier comment,
the Committee would not be doing anything irrevocable. There should
continue to be full discussion of the matter. It was desirable to have
full expressions of opinion, and time should be spent on the subject at
every opportunity.

2/13/62 -80
At the same time, the Chairman continued, the Committee had
made a decision in principle to move forward. There was a commitment
at this juncture to move forward, in the absence of compelling reasons to
the contrary, and this would require the acceptance of some kind of
framework. Such a framework had been proposed in the documents hereto
fore distributed to the Committee. From the standpoint of practical
operations, it was his feeling that the establishment of a subcommittee
of the full Open Market Committee, on the basis outlined in the staff
proposal, would be an acceptable procedure at the outset.
Mr. Mitchell commented that the latest draft would authorize the
subcommittee to operate only when there was not time for the full Open
Market Committee to act, except in the matter of consultation with the
Treasury. This was different from the previous draft.
Mr. Young confirmed this point, but noted that the Open Market
Committee could delegate to the subcommittee at any time.
Mr. Robertson said he understood the use of the subcommittee
would be contemplated in meeting an emergency situation if the circumstances
called for quick action.
Mr. Young agreed, adding however that he supposed the Committee
would not object if the Special Manager consulted with the subcommittee
in getting operations started.
Chairman Martin then proposed that the documents placed before the
Committee be accepted as a starting basis, with the understanding that
the Committee could review in three weeks what had transpired.

2/13/62 -81
Mr. Treiber inquired whether this would mean going forward with
the acquisition of foreign currencies, and the Chairman replied in the
affirmative.
Attention was directed at this point to section XI of the
February 6, 1962, draft of proposed action regarding open market
transactions in foreign currencies. Under this section all profits from
System foreign currency transactions would be set aside in a special
reserve against losses from such transactions until the reserve reached 15
per cent of the established maximum of System holdings of foreign
currencies.
Question was raised as to the necessity for the establishment of
such a reserve fund, and several views were expressed to the effect that
this would not seem necessary. (Mr. Deming expressed some reservation,
saying that in this kind of new operation questions were likely to be raised
concerning the results from the standpoint of profits and losses. In this
framework, he thought there was something to be said for establishing a
reserve fund for a time.)
After discussion, Chairman Martin inquired whether there were
strong views within the Committee, and there was no indication of a strong
feeling that such a reserve fund should be established. Accordingly, it
was agreed that this section of the draft document should be stricken.
Chairman Martin then turned to Mr. Hackley, who commented that any
activities in this field would require actions by both the Open Market

2/13/62 -82
Committee and the Board of Governors. The proposed actions of the Open
Market Committee were partially premised on action by the Board. There
fore, if the Committee was proposing to act on the authorization and on
the guidelines, there should be simultaneous action on the part of the
Board amending Regulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers,
along with action on the part of the Board designating specific countries
with the central banks of which accounts were authorized to be opened and
maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Accordingly, the meeting of the Open Market Committee recessed at
this point and at a meeting of the Board of Governors the actions
described previously by Mr. Hackley were taken by the Board.
The meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee then reconvened.
Upon motion duly made an seconded, the
Federal Open Market Committee then approved,
effective immediately, the following Authori
zation regarding Open Market Transactions in
Foreign Currencies:
AUTHORIZATTION REGARDING OPEN MARKET TRANSACTIONS
IN FOREIGN CURRENCIES
Pursuant to Section 12A of the Federal Reserve Act in
accordance with Section 214.5 of Regulation N (as amended)
of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the
Federal Open Market Committee takes the following action
governing open market operations incident to the opening and
maintenance by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (hereafter
sometimes referred to as the New York Bank) of accounts with
foreign central banks.

2/13/62 -83
I. Role of Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The New York Bank shall execute all transactions pursuant
to this authorization (hereafter sometimes referred to as
transactions in foreign currencies) for the system Open Market
Account, as defined in the Regulation of the Federal Open Market
Committee,
II. Basic Purposes of Operations.
The basic purposes of System operations in and holdings of
foreign currencies are:
(1) To help safeguard the value of the dollar in
international exchange markets;
(2) To aid in making the existing system of international
payments more efficient and in avoiding disorderly
conditions in exchange markets;
(3) To further monetary cooperation with central banks
of other countries maintaining convertible currencies,
with the International Monetary Fund, and with other
international payments institutions;
(4) Together with these banks and institutions, to help
moderate temporary imbalances in international pay
ments that may adversely affect monetary reserve
positions; and
(5) In the long run, to make possible growth in the liquid
assets available to international money markets in
accordance with the needs of an expanding world
economy.
III. Specific Aims of Operations.
Within the basic purposes set forth in Section II, the
transactions shall be conducted with a view to the following
specific aims:
(1) To offset or compensate, when appropriate, the effects
on U. S. gold reserves or dollar liabilities of those
fluctuations in the international flow of payments to
or from the United States that are deemed to reflect
temporary disequilibrating forces or transitional
market unsettlement;

2/13/62 -84
(2) To temper and smooth out abrupt changes in spot
exchange rates and moderate forward premiums and
discounts judged to be disequilibrating;
(3) To supplement international exchange arrangements
such as those made through the International
Monetary Fund; and
(4) In the long run, to provide a means whereby reciproral
holdings of foreign currencies may contribute to meet
ing needs for international liquidity as required in
terms of an expanding world economy.
IV. Arrangements with Foreign Central Banks.
In making operating arrangements with foreign central banks
on System holdings of foreign currencies, the New York Bank shall
not commit itself to maintain any specific balance, unless
authorized by the Federal Open Market Committee.
The Bank shall instruct foreign central banks regarding the
investment of such holdings in excess of minimum working balances
in accordance with Section 14(e) of the Federal Reserve Act.
The Bank shall consult with foreign central banks on
coordination of exchange operations.
Any agreements or understandings concerning the administra
tion of the accounts maintained by the New York Bank with the
central banks designated by the Board of Governors under Section
214.5 of Regulation N (as amended) are to be referred for review
and approval to the Committee, subject to the provision of
Section VIII., paragraph 1, below.
V. Authorized Currencies.
The New York Bank is authorized to conduct transactions for
System Account in the currencies and within the limits that the
Federal Open Market Committee may from time to time specify.
VI. Methods of Acquiring and Selling Foreign Currencies.
The New York Bank is authorized to purchase and sell foreign
currencies in the form of cable transfers through spot or forward
transactions on the open market at home and abroad, including

2/13/62 -85
transactions with the Stabilization Fund of the Secretary of
the Treasury established by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act
of 1934 and with foreign monetary authorities.
Unless the Bank is otherwise authorized, all transactions
shall be at prevailing market rates.
VII. Participation of Federal Reserve Banks.
All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the foreign
currency operations for System Account in accordance with paragraph
3 G (1) of the Board of Governors' Statement of Procedure with
Respect to Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated
January 1, 1944.
VIII. Administrative Procedures.
The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes a Subcommittee
consisting of the Chairman and the Vice Chairman of the Committee
and the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors (or in the absence
of the Chairman or of the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors
the members of the Board designated by the Chairman as alternates,
and in the absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee his
alternate) to give instructions to the Special Manager, within the
guidelines issued by the Committee, in cases in which it is necessary
to reach a decision on operations before the Committee can be con
sulted.
All actions authorized under the preceding paragraph shall be
promptly reported to the Committee.
The Committee authorizes the Chairman, and in his absence the
Vice Chairman of the Committee, and in the absence of both, the
Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors:
(1) With the approval of the Committee, to enter into
any needed agreement or understanding with the
Secretary of the Treasury about the division of
responsibility for foreign currency operations
between the System and the Secretary;
(2) To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully advised
concerning System foreign currency operations, and
to consult with the Secretary on such policy matters
as may relate to the Secretary's responsibilities;

2/13/62 -86
(3) From time to time, to transmit appropriate reports
and information to the National Advisory Council
on International Monetary and Financial Problems.
IX. Special Manager of System Open Market Account.
A Special Manager of the Open Market Account for foreign
currency operations shall be selected in accordance with the
established procedures of the Federal Open Market Committee for
the selection of the Manager of the System Onen Market Account.
The Special Manager shall direct that all transactions in
foreign currencies and the amounts of all holdings in each author
ized foreign currency be reported daily to designated staff
officials of the Committee, and shall regularly consult with the
designated staff officials of the Committee on current tendencies
in the flow of international payments and on current developments
in foreign exchange markets.
The Special Manager and the designated staff officials of the
Committee shall arrange for the prompt transmittal to the Committee
of all statistical and other information relating to the transactions
in and the amounts of holdings of foreign currencies for review by
the Committee as to conformity with its instructions.
The Special Manager shall include in his reports to the Committee
a statement of bank balances and investments payable in foreign
currencies, a statement of net profit or loss on transactions to date,
and a summary of outstanding unmatured contracts in foreign currencies,
X. Transmittal of Information to Treasury Department.
The staff officials of the Federal Open Market Committee shall
transmit all pertinent information on System foreign currency
transactions to designated officials of the Treasury Department.
XI. Amendment of Authorization.
The Federal Open Market Committee may at any time amend or
rescind this authorization.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,
Balderston, Irons, King, Mills, Mitchell
Robertson, Shepardson, Swan, Wayne, Fulton,
and Treiber. Votes against this action:
none.

2/13/62 -87
Consideration next was given to the February 13, 1962, draft
of proposed guidelines for System foreign currency operations, which had
been distributed at this meeting, and Mr. Young explained the changes
from the preceding draft. These were accepted, and certain minor changes
in the February 13 draft also were agreed upon.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Federal Open Market Committee
approved, effective immediately, the follow
ing Guidelines for System Foreign Currency
Operations:
GUIDELINES FOR SYSTEM FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS
1. Holdings of Foreign Currencies
Until otherwise authorized, the System will limit its
holdings of foreign currencies to that amount necessary to
enable its operations to exert a market influence. Holdings
of larger amounts will be authorized only when the U. S.
balance of international payments attains a sufficient surplus
to permit the ready accumulation of holdings of major convertible
currencies.
Holdings of a currency shall generally be kept sufficient to
meet forward contracts in that currency (exclusive of contracts
made under parallel arrangements with foreign monetary authorities
which provide their own cover) expected to mature in the following
three-week period.
Foreign currency holdings above a certain minimum shall be
invested as far as practicable in conformity with Section 14(e) of
the Federal Reserve Act.
2. Exchange Transactions
System exchange transactions shall mainly be geared to
pressures of payments flows so as to cushion or moderate
disequilibrating movements of volatile funds and their destabiliz
ing effects on U. S. and foreign official reserves and on exchange
markets.

2/13/62 -88
The New York Bank shall, as a usual practice, purchase
and sell authorized currencies at prevailing market rates
without trying to establish rates that appear to be out of
line with underlying market forces.
If market offers to sell or buy intensify as System holdings
increase or decline, this shall be regarded as a clear signal for
a review of the System's evaluation of international payments flows.
This review might suggest a temporary change in System holdings of
a particular convertible currency and possibly direct exchange
transactions with the foreign central bank involved to be able to
accommodate a larger demand or supply.
Starting operations at a time when the United States is not
experiencing a net inflow of any eligible foreign currency may
require that initial System holdings (apart from sums that might
be acquired from the Stabilization Fund) be purchased directly
from foreign central banks.
It shall be the practice to arrange with foreign central
banks for the coordination of foreign currency transactions in
order that System transactions do not conflict with those being
undertaken by foreign monetary authorities.
3. Transactions in Spot Exchange
The guiding principle for transactions in spot exchange shall
be that, in general, market movements in exchange rates, within
the limits established in the International Monetary Fund Agreement
or by central bank practices, index affirmatively the interaction
of underlying economic forces and thus serve as efficient guides to
current financial decisions, private and public.
Temporary or transitional fluctuations in payments flows may
be cushioned or moderated whenever they occasion market anxieties,
or undesirable speculative activity in foreign exchange transac
tions, or excessive leads and lags in international payments.
Special factors making for exchange market instabilities
include (i) responses to short-run increases in international
political tension, (ii) differences in phasing of international
economic activity that give rise to unusually large interest rate
differentials between major markets, or (iii) market rumors of a
character likely to stimulate speculative transactions.

2/13/62 -89
Whenever exchange market instability threatens to produce
disorderly conditions, System transactions are appropriate if
the Special Manager, in consultation with the Federal Open Market
Committee, or in an emergency the members of te Committee
designated for that purpose, reaches a judgment that they may
help to re-establish supply and demand balance at a level more
consistent with the prevailing flow of underlying payments.
Whenever supply or demand persists in influencing exchange rates
in one direction, System transactions should be modified,
curtailed, or eventually discontinued pending a re-assessment by
the Committee of supply and demand forces.
4. Transactions in Forward Exchange
Occasion to engage in forward transactions will arise mainly
when forward premiums or discounts are inconsistent with interest
rate differentials and are giving rise to a disequilibrating
movement of short-term funds, or when it is deemed appropriate to
supplement existing market facilities for forward cover as a means
of encouraging the retention or accumulation of dollar holdings
abroad.
Proposals of the Special Manager to initiate forward operations
shall be submitted to the Committee for advance approval.
For such operations, the New York Bank may, where authorized,
take over from the Stabilization Fund outstanding contracts for
forward sales or purchases of authorized currencies.
5. Exchange Rates
Insofar as practicable, the New York Bank shall purchase a
currency through spot transactions at or below its par value, and
should lower the rate at which it is prepared to purchase a
currency as its holdings of that currency approach the established
maximum.
The Bank shall also, where practicable, sell a currency through
spot transactions at rates at or above its par value, and should
raise the rate at which it is prepared to sell a currency as its
holdings of that currency approach zero.
Spot transactions at rates other than those set forth in the
preceding paragraphs shall be specially authorized by the members
of the Committee designated in Section VIII of the Authorization
for Open Market Transactions in Foreign Currencies.

2/13/62 -90
Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,
Balderston, Irons, King, Mills, Mitchell,
Robertson, Shepardson, Swan, Wayne, ulton,
and Treiber. Votes against this action: none.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, the
Federal Open Market Committee then approved,
effective immediately, the following continu
ing authority directive to the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York on System foreign currency
operations:
CONTINUING AUTHORITY DIRECTIVE ON SYSTEM
FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS
The New York Bank is authorized and directed to purchase
and sell through spot transactions any or all of the following
currencies in accordance with the Guidelines on System Foreign
Currency Operations issued by the Federal Open Market Committee
on February 13, 1962:
Pounds sterling
French francs
German marks
Italian lire
Netherlands guilders
Swiss francs
Total foreign currencies held at any one time shall not
exceed $500 million.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,
Balderston, Irons, King, Mills, Mitchell,
Robertson, Shepardson, Swan, Wayne, Fulton,
and Treiber. Votes against this action: none.
The authorization that had been adopted regarding open market
transactions provided that a Special Manager of the System Open Market
Account for foreign currency operations would be selected in accordance
with the established procedures of the Federal Open Market Committee for
the selection of the Manager of the System Open Market Account. The

2/13/62 -91
By-laws and Rules of Organization of the Committee provided that the
Reserve Bank selected to execute transactions for the Open Market Account
should select a Manager of the System Open Market Account who would be
satisfactory to the Committee.
Chairman Martin inquired whether the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York would wish to select Charles A. Coombs, Vice President, as Special
Manager of the System Open Market Account for foreign currency operations,
and Mr. Treiber replied in the affirmative.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the selec
tion by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
of Charles A. Coombs as Special Manager of the
System Open Market Account for foreign currency
operations was approved, effective immediately.
Chairman Martin then turned to Mr. Hackley, who said he knew of
no other actions that should be taken by the Open Market Committee at
this time. He noted, however, that the amendment to Regulation N
approved today by the Board of Governors would be published in the
Federal Register. In this connection, he raised the question whether
the actions taken by the Open Market Committee should be published in any
form, to which he added that he saw no legal necessity for publication.
From a brief discussion that ensued, it developed to be the
consensus that such actions need not be published.
With reference to the continuing authority directive on System
foreign currency operations, question was directed to Mr. Coombs whether
in his opinion the provision that total foreign currencies held at any

2/13/62 -92
one time should not exceed $00 million would be adequate. In reply,
Mr. Coombs said he would assume that the $500 million limitation would
be adequate for some time to come, particularly considering the shifts
that might take place between holdings of various currencies. There
followed some further discussion of this point in light of the amounts
of individual currencies that might be held at any one time. Reference
also was made to a letter that would be sent by the Board of Governors
to the Federal Reserve Banks concerning the manner and timing of
publication of total System holdings of foreign currencies.
Reference then was made to the draft document that had been
distributed under date of February 6, 1962, concerning the scope and
character of initial foreign currency operations of the System, as agreed
upon by Treasury-Federal Open Market Committee representatives, This
document, reviewed earlier during this meeting by Mr. Young, had been
distributed to the Committee in company with a memorandum presenting a
proposed short-term program for coordinated Treasury and System operations
in foreign currencies that would be consistent with the understanding set
forth in the first paper.
After discussion, during which Mr. Mitchell commented that he
would like the record to show that the early stages of the Federal Reserve
program, as set forth in the draft documents, involved questions of
relations with the Treasury concerning which he had some reservations, the
memorandum on the scope and character of initial System foreign currency

2/13/62 -93-
operations was accepted as the basis of understanding concerning an
initial program of System foreign currency operations. The document
read as follows:
SCOPE AND CHARACTER OF INITIAL FOREIGN CURRENCY
OPERATIONS OF THE SYSTEM
I. The System would acquire in the market or directly
from foreign central banks small amounts of authorized foreign
currencies whenever pressure on the dollar relaxes and the rate
of one of these currencies falls from recent high levels.
Holdings thus acquired would constitute a modest inventory to
be used for sales in the market if market pressures or
instability clearly warranted. Initially then, the System would
enter the market only as an occasional buyer; barring unusual
market conditions, the System would aim to defer any program of
currency sales until minimum balances had been accumulated.
II. In order to facilitate the early stages of the Federal
Reserve program, the Secretary of the Treasury would stand ready
to sell to the Federal Reserve modest amounts of German marks
(approximately ;7 million equivalent), Swiss francs, Netherlands
guilders, and Italian lire (approximately $1 million equivalent
of each) at market rates of exchange on the day of the sale.
The Federal Reserve already has accounts with the Bank of
England and the Bank of France. These currency take-overs from
the Treasury would permit the System to open accounts at once
with four of the other central banks, to establish appropriate
bookkeeping procedures for transactions through them, and to be
come familiar with procedures and techniques for administering
and investing the accounts.
III. The Treasury would continue to conduct foreign currency
operations under existing agreements with Germany, Switzerland,
the Netherlands, and Italy. The System, however, would stand
prepared to purchase currencies of these countries from the
Treasury, either outright or under mutually satisfactory resale
agreement, in the event that exchange market developments obliged
the Fund to exhaust available resources. The Treasury and the
System would consult before either entered into any agreements
with foreign central banks or governments regarding possible
foreign currency operations.

2/13/62 -94
IV. With a view to being in immediate position to meet
any unusual demands for foreign currencies, the System would
stand ready, within agreed limits:
(a) to enter into reciprocal currency transactions with
designated foreign central banks, especially the
Bank of England and the Bank of France;
(b) to supplement any arrangement that the Swiss National
Bank might make with the IMF or the Treasury;
(c) to purchase from the Treasury part or all of Foreign
currency amounts acquired under Treasury credit
arrangements with major European central banks or
governments already negotiated or, after consultation
with the System, to be negotiated; and
(d) to purchase from the Treasury part or all of foreign
currency amounts that may be drawn from the Inter
national Monetary Fund.
V. Since the System's foreign currency operations are to be
on an experimental and trial basis, the Treasury and the Federal
Reserve agree that a specific understanding as to a division of
operations between them can be delayed until experience has made
clear the way in which such a delineation can be most effectively
achieved. Initially, there need only be arrangements for the
exchange of Information about currency operations, channels for
regular communication, and procedures for continuing consultations.
VI. The National Advisory Council will be informed of the
general plan for System foreign currency operations on an experi
mental and trial basis.
A question was raised with respect to the accompanying document
containing a proposal for a short-term program of coordinated Treasury
and System operations in foreign currencies, and in the ensuing
discussion Chairman Martin made the comment that it might be well not to
attempt to be more specific at this time than to proceed on the basis
that initial System operations in foreign currencies would be generally

2/13/62 -95
along the lines discussed at this meeting, and within the scope of the
understanding contained in the document that had been accepted by the
Committee.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, March 6, 1962.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary