A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, May 7, 1963, at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bopp
Mr. Clay
Mr. Irons
Mr. King
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Scanlon
Mr. Shepardson
Messrs. Treiber, Hickman, Shuford, and Swan,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Ellis, Bryan, and Deming, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta,
and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Baughman, Brill, Eastburn, Furth,
Garvy, Green, Holland, Koch, and Tow,
Associate Economists
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open
Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors

5/7/63 -2
Mr. Heflin, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond
Messrs. Mann, Ratchford, Rawlings, and Jones,
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, and St. Louis,
respectively
Messrs. Litterer and Lynn, Assistant Vice Presi
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Minneapolis and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Willis, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston
Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Secretary's Note: Mr. Hickman, who became
President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland on May 1, 1963, following the re
tirement of Mr. Fulton, executed on the same
date his oath of office as Alternate Member
of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meet
ings of the Federal Open Market Committee
held on March 26 and April 16, 1963, were
approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the Committee a
report from the Special Manager of the System Open Market Account on
foreign exchange market conditions and on Open Market Account and Treasury
operations in foreign currencies for the period April 16 through May 1,
1963, together with a supplementary report covering the period May 2
through May 6, 1963. Copies of these reports have been placed in the files
of the Committee.
In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs reviewed
current and prospective developments with respect to the U. S. gold stock
and summarized developments in the London gold market, including the

5/7/63 -3
results of gold pool operations. He noted that the U. S. dollar had re
cently been under pressure against a widening group of European currencies.
Discussing the Netherlands guilder situation, Mr. Coombs said
that the Federal Reserve had begun to intervene in the market on April 11
in anticipation of an early easing of the tight Netherlands money market
and had since sold approximately $15 million equivalent of guilders in
the Amsterdam and New York markets. Rather than easing, however, the
Netherlands money market had remained tight, and a forthcoming Dutch
Government bond issue might add to the pressure. Accordingly, the System
was continuing to supply guilders and thus restrain a rise in official
dollar holdings of the Netherlands Bank. Had the System operations not
taken place, the Netherlands Bank would have already reached the point of
converting additional dollar holdings into gold. If the current pressure
should continue, it would probably be desirable for the System to draw
the remaining $25 million equivalent of guilders available under its swap
arrangement with the Netherlands Bank, but at some point it might also be
necessary for the U. S. Treasury to come into the picture. The New York
Bank hoped shortly, through consultation with a visiting official from the
Netherlands Bank, to be able to obtain a clearer understanding of the
basic reasons for the inflow of dollars into the Netherlands, including
the extent to which the inflow was associated with money market tightness,
along with some indication of the possibility of action by the Netherlands
Bank to relieve the current market tightness.

5/7/63
Mr. Coombs noted that the foregoing comments outlined the kind of
situation that the System was likely to run into from time to time in the
future, involving the reaction on the exchange rate of a tightening of
money markets in various European countries. He was not entirely sure as
to the appropriate role for System swap arrangements in such circum
stances, but was inclined to think that there was a good case for using
swap arrangements to offset some temporary tightening in money markets
abroad.
Mr. Coombs went on to say that the German mark problem was
somewhat similar to the guilder situation. The Federal Reserve began
intervening in the market on April 9 in anticipation that the inflow of
dollars into Germany would be of a temporary nature, selling marks both
for its own account and for the account of the Treasury. The inflow had
continued, however, despite strike and other developments in Germany that
might have been expected to check it. Accordingly, after conversations
with the German Federal Bank, the System drew $25 million equivalent of
marks yesterday under its swap arrangement with the Bank and subsequently
sold $1.8 million equivalent of marks from the proceeds of the drawing.
The New York Bank had also given the German Federal Bank authorization to
intervene today in Frankfurt on behalf of the System up to $10 million
equivalent, and it was expected that the German Federal Bank might supple
ment this action, if necessary, through use of its own resources. While
efforts were continuing to obtain a clearer picture of the reasons for
persistent inflow of dollars, it was difficult for both the Germans and

5/7/63 -5
ourselves to ascertain precisely why money was moving.
Turning to the Swiss franc, Mr. Coombs said that efforts to pay
off the System's Swiss franc drawings had been disappointing. Since
February the System had been able to acquire only $27 million equivalent,
this during a period of seasonal weakness for the Swiss franc. He felt
increasing concern, therefore, that the drawings of Swiss francs might
remain outstanding for an unduly lengthy period of time. In this connec
tion, he noted that the U. S. Treasury would shortly be issuing a S23
million bond to the Swiss Confederation to provide an investment outlet
for the continuing budget surplus of the Confederation, and the Treasury
would utilize the proceeds to repay all but $6.5 million of its outstand
ing Swiss franc forward contracts. This would reduce the Treasury's
cash balance requirements in Swiss francs and it might be possible for
the System to purchase $7 or $8 million of Swiss francs from the
Treasury, which it could apply against its drawings under the swap
arrangement with the Bank for International Settlements. Beyond that,
the System could pay off its Swiss franc drawings only to the extent
that the market situation permitted the acquisition of francs. If it
did not, the System might be up against a troublesome problem. In view
of the desirability of limiting swap operations to short-term credit
needs, it might be desirable within the near future to pay off the
System drawings, in the process placing more dollars in the hands of the
Swiss National Bank that would be convertible into gold. The Treasury

5/7/63 -6
could then either settle in gold or undertake to issue bonds or
certificates denominated in Swiss francs.
As to the pound sterling, Mr. Coombs said its position seemed
basically strong; the British had recouped in April part of the reserve
losses sustained in the first quarter of this year. Last Friday and
yesterday, however, sterling was under some pressure. Apparently, this
was not because of speculative maneuvering but instead was attributable
principally to some fairly sizable borrowing by Continental commercial
banks in the Euro-dollar market. In these circumstances, the Account
Management concluded that it would be useful, to purchase for Federal
Reserve account a moderate ammount of pounds sterling at the rate c
$2.7988. Part of the sterling thus purchased would be placed in a cash
account and the remainder in a "money employed" account. There had been
some exploration of the possibility of buying commercial bills in London
with System sterling holdings, but the prospect was not encouraging due
to the limited over-all supply of such bills and the strong demand for
them.
In reply to a question, Mr. Coombs also commented on possible
effects of the reduction yesterday by the Bank of Canada of its discount
rate from 4 per cent to 3-1/2 per cent.
Chairman Martin inquired as to the extent of System transac:ions
with the Treasury Stabilization Fund, and Mr. Coombs recalled that at the
start of the program of Federal Reserve foreign currency operations the

5/7/63 -7
System had acquired token amounts of four different currencies from the
Stabilization Fund. Later it also purchased some German marks from the
Stabilization Fund and then resold German marks to the Fund. All trans
actions had been at market rates. He hoped that the Committee would not
object to the possible purchase of Swiss francs from the Stabilization
Fund, as previously suggested, for he considered it important to make
further progress in reducing the System's Swiss franc drawings. After
further comments by Mr. Coombs on the mechanics of the proposed trans
action, Chairman Martin indicated that he would have no objection. He
considered it important, however, for the System to keep its records
carefully on operations of this kind. Mr. Coombs repeated that all
System-Treasury transactions had been at market rates and said there
would be no deviation from this rule.
Mr. Balderston suggested that the staff prepare for the Committee
a memorandum dealing with the questions involved in the event of
continuation of drawings under swap arrangements beyond periods longer
than normally associated with the reversal of seasonal or speculative
influences, including the mechanics of repaying such drawings. There
was general agreement with this suggestion, and Mr. Coombs indicated
that such a memorandum would be prepared.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the System
Open Market Account transactions in foreign
currencies during the period April 16
through May 6, 1963, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.

5/7/63 -8
Mr. Coombs pointed out that the $50 million swap arrangemert
with the Bank of England would mature May 28, 1963, and recommended
its renewal for another three months,
After discussion, renewal of the swap
arrangement, as recommended by Mr. Coombs,
was authorized by unanimous vote.
This concluded the discussion of System foreign currency
operations,
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report covering open market operations in U. S. Govern
ment securities and bankers acceptances for the period April 16 through
May 1, 1963, and a supplementary report covering the period May 2 through
May 6, 1963. Copies of these reports have been placed in the files of
the Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone commented
as follows:
The money market has been steadily firm during the period
since the last meeting. The Federal funds rate was typically
3 per cent with occasional trading at 2-7/8 per cent and, early
in the period, a very temporary softening to around the 2 per
cent level. System operations during the period first absorbed
and then supplied reserves. The absorption was achieved largely
through outright sales of Treasury bills in the market and to
foreign accounts. Later, reserves were provided through re
purchase agreements and through outright acquisitions of both
bills and coupon-bearing issues--the latter being the first
purchases of coupon issues in a month.
Net reserve availability fluctuated rather widely during
the period as the location and intensity of use of reserves
responded to various market forces--particularly the heavy
Treasury redeposits with the "C" banks starting about the
middle of the period and only now beginning to be reversed. As

5/7/63
a result of these redeposits, which tended to funnel an
unusually heavy proportion of Treasury cash holdings
into the money centers, the money market was if anything
slightly more comfortable in the statement week ended May 1
compared with the previous week--even though free reserves
were estimated to be about $100 million lower. Starting
yesterday the Treasury began to call back some of the $1.3
billion of special redeposits made between April 25 and
May 1. As this process continues it may tend to produce a
reverse effect on the money market and it may require
somewhat higher levels of net reserve availability to
maintain a steady tone in the money market.
Treasury bill rates have continued to move in a
narrow range during the past three weeks--with the three
month rate remaining between 2.88 and 2.92 per cent and the
six-month rate between 2.98 and 3.02 per cent. The average
issuing rates in yesterday's auction--,bout 2.90 and 2.99
per cent for the three- and six-mont. issues, respectively-
were within 1 or 2 basis points of the rates three weeks
earlier. This stability has grown ot of a rough counter
balancing of opposite forces in the market. On the one hand
there has been a continuing good demand from investors
(particularly some State funds in the recent period), while
on the other hand the Treasury has been enlarging its weekly
offerings by $100 million, rounding cat the cycle that began
in late March. With next Monday's action, however, the
Treasury will reach the end of these $100 million additions
to the weekly bill offerings and accordingly the weight may
be shifted in the recent balance of forces that has tended
to hold bill rates steady.
In the bond markets the atmosphere has improved during
the past few days, although it still remains somewhat
cautious. The current Treasury refunding has proceeded in
a very smooth fashion, with trading activity in the rights
and when-issued securities lighter than normal but still
quite substantial. The conversion into the reopened 3-5/8
per cent notes of February 1966 somewhat exceeded market
expectations, but the larger amount is being taken perfectly
well in stride. The $550 million of attrition was a bit more
than some observers had expected, but it was certainly not
high by past standards. Meanwhile, there has been continuing
interest in the distribution of the new $300 million issue of
4-1/8 per cent Treasury bonds of 1989-94 which were still in
syndicate at. the time of the last meeting. The syndicate
marketing these bonds terminated on Friday morning, April 26.
Although half of the bonds were still apparently unsold at

5/7/63 -10-
that time, only a small fraction of the unsold bonds (perhaps
$30-$40 million) were placed for immediate disposal These
were absorbed by the market at prices of around 100-3/8--or
3/8 point below the syndicate reoffering price, which repre
sented a change of only 2 basis points in yield. Following
this initial movement of bonds, trading in the 4-1/8's turned
very quiet until the last few days of the period when some
moderate buying interest reappeared and dealer quotations
edged up a few 32nds. The issue was quoted at 100-15/32 bid,
17/32 offered at the close yesterday, about the level the
syndicate paid for them.
In the corporate market better progress has been made in
the past few days in distributing some recent slow-moving
issues--particularly following the rather aggressive pricing
of the $25 million A-rated General Telephone of California
issue, which was reoffered to yield 4.39 per cent. While this
issue itself moved slowly, it tended to strengthen investor
interest in some other recent offerings. Currently the market
is focusing attention on today's offering of $250 million
Aaa-rated American Telephone and Telegraph bonds designed to
refund a 5 per cent issue put out several years ago. A week
ago it was expected that this issue might be reoffered in the
neighborhood of 4.45 per cent, but with the recent improvement
in market tone there is now some feeling that it might go below
4.40 per cent and indeed some of the more ebullient people in
the market are talking in terms of 4.35 or 4.36 per cent. If
this issue moves out well, it could give a lift to the entire
market, possibly stimulating also some greater interest in the
Treasury's 4-1/8's
Current Treasury financing plans are highly indefinite
because of the uncertainties surrounding the debt limit. We
understand that if the current proposals for a $307 billion
limit through the end of June are approved by the Congress,
the Treasury may seek to borrow about $1 billion in the early
part of June--although it will not need the funds until July-
in order to make a start on the heavy borrowing that will be
necessary to meet the cash needs of the second half of the year.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the open
market transactions in Government securi
ties and bankers'acceptances during the
period April 16 through May 6, 1963, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.

5/7/63 -11-
The Chairman then called for the usual staff economic and
financial reports, and Mr. Noyes presented the following statement
on economic developments:
The problem this morning seems to be to try to
determine whether the dramatic improvement in business
sentiment and expectations in the last few weeks has
just caught up with, or has overrun, the improvement
in economic activity that has actually occurred. The
history of this cycle thus far is one of undulating
and moderate expansion, upon which rather wide shifts
in confidence have been superimposed--up in late '61,
down in mid '62, up again in late '62, down in early
'63, and now up once more. Certainly recent history
would counsel caution in projecting, even a few months
into the future, either rapid increases or declines in
the pace of expansion. On the other hand, it is
obvious that both booms and busts have to start small
and build on themselves. Is there anything in the
facts available that would help to tell us whether
this is the beginning of an upward surge of major pro
portions, or just another zag in the gentle uptrend
that has prevailed for some time?
First of all, we can say with some certainty-
although the data for the month are fragmentary--that
April did not show the same widespread improvement
that occurred in March. On the basis of weekly data.
we are estimating that seasonally adjusted retail trade
was down a little, despite the continued strength in
auto sales. In the case of department stores, where we
have had more experience in estimating monthly changes
from weekly figures, it seems fairly certain that there
was a modest drop.
The small rise in unemployment is not large enough
to be statistically significant, but it is fair to say
that there was no further improvement.
On the other hand, the production index, boosted by
a half point gain attributable to increased steel output,
will certainly be up--and may well register a two-point
gain over the rounded index of 120 in March. But even
this favorable development must be discounted to some
extent because it is due in part to inventory building
in anticipation of a steel strike.

5/7/63 -12-
Also, the more optimistic estimates of capital
expenditure plans reported in the McGraw-Hill survey
must be qualified to some extent--in that the improve
ment over the Commerce-SEC survey taken about two months
earlier is probably somewhat less than the raw figures
would suggest, because of differences in sample design.
These and other qualifications--such as a slight
upturn in unemployment compensation claims toward the end
of April--argue that it would be prema:ure to assume that
the current strong performance of the economy will produce
an upward spiral of problem proportions.
But if one thinks in terms of monetary policy, as we
must here, there is also little question that the economy
is now in a better position, both in terms of basic
strength and business psychology, to absorb any negative
impact that might flow from a moderately less easy mone
tary policy. In fact, a shift in the direction of lesser
ease may have already been discounted in financial markets,
and some of the more optimistic business forecasts that
have been widely circulated make explicit mention of the
fact that they "allow for" less ready credit availability.
Obviously, the mere fact that the economy could probably
take a moderately less easy policy in its stride at this
point is not in itself a reason to change, and a positive
case for change still seems to me to be hard to find in
the domestic scene. Sensitive material prices have
remained unchanged at below year-ago levels. Further
study of the details confirms the generalization reported
at the last meeting that the actual effects of the mid
April steel price actions are not large. They amcunt to
about a 1 per cent increase in the BLS index for all steel
mill products, which had actually been drifting down since
1958. Whether there will be significant secondary effects
from .he changes remains to be seen, but the general
atmosphere in the markets remains highly competitive.
Our measures are not sufficiently accurate to gauge
month-to-month shifts in the relation of output to capacity,
but there can be little doubt that the recent advances in
production have made up most, if not all, of the widening
in the gap that had been occurring since early last fall.
Speaking very roughly, as one must with these broad
aggregate measures, in terms of the percentage of the labor
force employed, the use of our industrial capacity, and
prices of goods generally, we are just about where we were
a year ago. If these were the only factors to be considered,

5/7/63 -13-
they would not seem to suggest the need for any action
to retard the rate of advance, for we have made no sig
nificant inroads, as yet, into our unutilized resources,
nor are we confronted with a generalized upward pressure
on prices.
Mr. Holland presented the following statement with respect
to financial developments:
There seems to me to be a certain tendency emerging,
at least temporarily, in a rather wide variety of recent
statistical readings and individual reports. I refer to
a note of moderation that has crept into numerous banking
and financial flows. It is not, to be sure, an all-pervasive
development. The equity market deserves to be excluded
from this generalization, although even there stock prices
have been climbing more slowly as they have closed in on
their December 1961 peak. I must also stop my generaliza
tion short of the question of the quality of credit, That
subject remains a moot area for judgment; centralized
factual evidence is painfully inadequate regarding the
underlying question of the quality of new credits being
put on the books. But in the markets for debt securities,
and particularly in the banking system, the flow of
statistics now gives a rather more moderate cast to a
number of trends--including some that might previously
have been regarded as a bit on the immoderate side.
To begin with, interest rates have reacted quite
moderately to the substantial improvement in the business
forecasts of recent weeks. Looking back on the year to
date, and taking into account realignments in connection
with Treasury debt lengthening operations, one can observe
a gradual upward drift in yields on U. S. and municipal
government obligations, and also some upward adjustment of
yields on corporate new issues. These rate movements could
be judged, in retrospect, to have already involved a good
deal of discounting, by dealers and investors, of the
business improvement to date, and also a discounting of
some further lessening of monetary ease as well. While we
have heard some stories of long-term investment funds being
withheld for a time, we have seen few evidences of antici
patory borrowing, and as a consequence markets have not
found it hard to handle 1963 demands, or to work out of the
consequences of occasionally over-aggressive professional
actions.

5/7/63 -14-
Changes in the banking system appear rather striking
when one views April figures in isolation, but upon closer
examination the more extreme of these changes appear as an
unwinding of earlier departures from usual borrowing patterns,
rather than as major new developments. Thus, the concentration
of Treasury cash borrowing in the first quarter of this year
led to a $2-1/2 billion seasonally adjusted build-up of Govern
ment securities in bank hands, but this was entirely wiped out
with the passage of April, as banks redistributed previous
acquisitions and new Treasury financing was atypically low.
Total bank holdings of municipal securities jumped sharply in
April, but chiefly because of a heavy purchase of special New
York State tax anticipation obligations by New York banks;
apart from that, bank net acquisitions of municipals were of
more moderate dimensions than earlier this year or last.
Business loans rose $400 million in commercial banks in April,
according to the new seasonally adjusted statistics, but this
chiefly reflected the modest size of loan paydowns following
the smaller than usual tax date borrowing in March. Averaged
together, March-April business loan increases about equalled
January-February 1963, and were about half the average for the
fourth quarter of 1962. There was no visible sign in the April
loan figures of any resort to bank financing by businesses that
might be building steel inventory.
Bank lending to consumers slowed in March and April. And
security loans at banks declined enough, seasonally adjusted,
to offset the run-up in such credit that occurred during the
heavy financing schedule in February and March. Of all the
major bank loan categories, only real estate loans appeared to
continue to grow at a pace commensurate with that of last fall.
Even in this credit sector, net first-quarter expansion is
estimated to have been slower than last year, but the slowdown
appears to have been concentrated among nonbank lenders,
Adding all these bank earning asset trends together, total
bank credit growth in the first four months of this year averaged
about a $13.5 billion annual rate, one-fourth less than last year
(+$18.5 billion).
On the deposit side, there are also some signs of greater
moderation in the trend of time deposits. Total time and savings
deposits at commercial banks increased only about half as much
in April (10.3 per cent annual rate) as would have been projected
by the 18 per cent annual rate of growth characteristic of the
first quarter of 1963. The slowdown appeared to extend to both
savings deposits and certificates of deposit, reflecting partly
increased tax date withdrawals, but also, as detailed data from

5/7/63 -15-
the Chicago District suggest, some slowing in the rate of new
deposit inflows. Data for other savings institutions are not
yet available beyond the first quarter, when inflows were very
strong, and so we cannot judge whether this easing trend has
since spread or been offset outside the commercial bank sector.
We do hear, however, of a number of bank management decisions
to go slow on further solicitation of savings deposits and
certificates of deposit. Pressures to reduce rates paid are
evident in the savings and loan field, and may also be sub
stantial if less well advertised among commercial banks.
In the meantime the money supply moved up again in April,
continuing its see-saw upward course of recent months. This
latest advance appeared to draw a bit more support than did the
preceding increases from a rundown of Government deposits and
a reducec diversion of deposits into time form. But this may
also reflect the public's desire for a somewhat greater amount
of money to handle its flow of transactions. At its April level
the money supply was only 2-1/4 per cent above a year earlier,
compared with a first-quarter to first-quarter GNP increase of
5 per cent. With the total of money balances having been under
downward pressure in recent years because of the attractive
interest returns available on near-moneys, it should not be
surprising if substantial further advances in business bring
demands for additional money stock which are more commensurate
with the percentage increases in GNP than they have been in
some past phases of economic expansion.
Given the variety of places in the financial system in which
signs of some moderation are appearing, one is tempted to look
for a general source or sources of tranquilizing influence.
Indeed, a good many tranquilizers may be at work, and I would
not pretend to be able to identify all of them. Some credit
may need to go to the slightly less easy monetary policy pursued
since last December, with its slightly lower free reserves and
slightly higher bank borrowings and short-term rates. Growing
internal funds of business, not yet utilized to finance inventory
additions or prospective capital investment, are also undoubtedly
moderating current loan pressures on the banking system. But a
substantial measure of the credit for the tendency to moderate
some of the more extreme banking trends of the last year or so
may belong to the ultimate common sense of bankers themselves,
who are finding in their balance sheet ratios, earnings and
expense statements, and credit quality changes some concrete
reasons for reconsidering their previous policies, particularly
with respect to the aggressive bidding for time and savings
deposits, consumer credit, and municipals. Whether such a trend
inside parts of the banking system can persist, and can spread

5/7/63 -16-
to other areas of credit extension, only time will tell. An
observer is entitled to a certain degree of skepticism in these
respects. But the Committee will want to have these current
moderating tendencies in mind, along with the other consider
ations which press in upon it, in reaching its conclusion as to
an appropriate posture for policy at this juncture.
Mr. Furth presented the following statement with regard to the
U.S. balance of payments and related matters:
Transfers of gold, foreign convertible currencies, and
dollars to foreigners in April may be guessed at $500 million,
on the basis of the fragmentary and preliminary weekly data.
This would be twice as much as the monthly average for the
first quarter, and would bring the annual rate for the first
four months of the year back to the 1962 level of $3.6 billion.
Analysis of the increase in the deficit in April must wait for
more complete data. Tentatively, however, it may be assumed that,
apart from some adverse seasonal shifts, the U.S. trade surplus
declined from the high February-March levels which reflected the
settlement of the dock strike; that cessation of the pressure
on sterling put an end to inflows of funds from London; and that
market confidence in the new Canadian government led to increased
outflows of funds to Canada.
U.S. gold holdings declined slightly, with the usual
monthly gold sales to Austria, France, and Spain partly offset
by purchases from Brazil and Turkey. For the first four months,
the annual rate of the decline, $450 million, was much lower
than the annual figures for the last five years. Gold sales
have been kept down, first, by special Treasury borrowing abroad
of $480 million; second, by the pressure on sterling, which
induced the Bank of England not only to sell gold to the U.S.
Treasury but also to refrain from converting into gold the
dollars it received as aid from European central banks; third,
by the current practice of the Bank of France of converting
only a fraction of its dollar accruals into gold, while using
as much as possible of the remainder for paying off dollar
debts (e.g., last month $60 million to the World Bank); and
perhaps fourth, by a possible increase in Euro-dollar trans
actions, which might explain a sharp rise in non-official
British dollar assets. These factors, however, cannot be expected
to remain effective throughout the rest of the year.
Economic developments abroad continue to favor U.S. export
prospects. Europe has resumed its economic upswing, the inter
ruption of which during the winter was apparently caused mainly

5/7/63
by the unusually harsh weather. Moreover, European wages
continue to rise, as shown by today's settlement of the
German metal workers' strike. Some European governments,
including the French, seem to be resolved to take more
severe measures against the threat of inflation; but these
measures will hardly be fully effective before the end of
the year. Moreover, some others, and especially the
United Kingdom, remain firmly committed to expansionary
policies. Thus, if only U.S. export industries managed
to avoid price increases, the competitiveness of U.S.
industry in world markets should continue to improve.
At the same time, however, further European expansion
will continue to make investment in Europe more attractive
to international capital. Under these circumstances, there
is little hope of further reductions in European interest
and yield levels, or of an increased flow of European
private funds to foreign countries, which would relieve
foreign demands on the U.S. capital market; and the outlook
for the long-term capital balance, both in the fixed-interest
and the equity sector, remains unfavorable. For the first
four months of the year, foreign security issues in New York,
overwhelmingly representing Canadian borrowing, have con
tinued at an annual rate of $1.5 billion.
Recorded outflows of short-term capital seem so far to
have remained modest. Yesterday's reduction in Canada's
discount rate promises a curtailment of flows to Montreal.
But the disappearance of the covered interest-rate advan
tage for U.S. Treasury bills over U.K. Treasury bills may
give impetus to flows to London, Unfortunately, the
United Kingdom seems to welcome such inflows for the sake
of its own payments balance.
At this point the Chairman turned to Mr. Hayes, who commented
informally on his recent trip to Europe during which he visited in
London, Paris, and Rome and attended a monthly meeting of the Bank for
International Settlements in Basle.
With respect to his visit to London, Mr. Hayes observed that
the budget message, which he heard delivered by the Chancellor of the
Exchequer, was well received. It seemed to be generally agreed that

5/7/63 -18
the United Kingdom was in need of expansionary measures and that the
proposed budget was in the right direction. There appeared to be no
particular concern from the standpoint of deficit financing or adverse
effect on the British balance of payments. It was the general view
that the expansionary effects of the budget would be moderate and
gradual, so that there would not be too much effect on imports this
year. The outlook for the pound sterling was regarded as reasonably
good; invisibles in the balance of payments seemed to be showing
marked improvement. The talk of devaluation had now died down.
There was a rather general feeling that the British might have to
resort to a drawing from the International Monetary Fund to fund the
temporary borrowings from Continental central banks earlier this year.
However, although it was too early to judge whether the flow of funds
out of Britain that had occasioned those borrowings was going to be
reversed, there was some hope that the British could avoid funding
them. There was an undercurrent of discussion about possible
liberalization of certain banking practices in England, with some
disposition to favor more flexible rate policies, but this was still
in the talking stage.
In France, Mr. Hayes said, there was much official concern
about wage pressures. One difficulty lay in nationalized industries,
where productivity was not increasing, being forced to follow the kind
of wage trend being followed in the more productive industries.

5/7/63 -19
Attempts were being made to stimulate the capital market, with the
general objective of promoting long-term lending activity and also
freeing the Treasury bill market. As to the balance of payments, it
was expected that the surplus in 1963 would be below 1962, but still
quite substantial. Gold continued to occupy quite an important place
in private investment decisions; some investment trusts were carrying
substantial quantities of gold. There had apparently not been any
real tightening up on permission for Americans to invest in France,
although there may have been a little increase in the time lag
involved. There was still a general feeling that American investment
was appropriate, provided it did not result in domination of a major
industry. There seemed to be a growing awareness of the competitive
ability of American industry, with some concern also about competi
tion from Germany and Britain.
In Italy wage pressures were a popular topic of conversation.
The increase last year averaged 16 per cent, and the figure could go
as high this year. Retail prices were up about 9 per cent in the past
year. However, there was no disposition to check credit expansion. If
anything was going to be done about the wage-price spiral, apparently
it would have to come primarily from restraint on the part of labor
and management, with Government backing. The balance of payments had
been in basic deficit in recent months, but this was offset by short
term capital inflows. This was a season when revenues from tourism

5/7/63 -20
were not running as heavy as in the summer, and the payments position
seemed fairly close to equilibrium. Strong efforts were being made
to improve the capital market, with monetary measures aimed at reduc
ing short-term rates in the hope that this would stimulate lower long
term rates. To some extent, this had been effective in recent months;
the capital market was now better than last fall.
The April meeting of the Bank for International Settlements
at Basle was quiet, with no problems of great concern evident at the
moment. Views on the U.S. dollar seemed to reflect confidence as far
as the immediate outlook was concerned, and this applied also to
general discussion of the dollar on the Continent. At the same time,
some observers were quite concerned about the continuing U.S. balance
of payments deficit, as evidenced by the Annual Report of the Nether
lands Bank. Uneasiness was sensed on the part of a number of central
bankers about the position of the dollar in the longer run, a concern
as to whether this country was really getting the balance of payments
problem under control or whether there was a persistent, underlying
problem that had not been dealt with adequately. Some potential risk
also was indicated of temporary measures being strained too far.
There was always the danger that countries would consult among them
selves and then become less amenable to bilateral arrangements with
the United States unless they saw greater assurance that this country
was making the kind of progress it should be making on its balance

5/7/63 -21-
of payments problem. In Mr. Hayes' judgment, monetary policy had an
important part to play in this effort.
Chairman Martin then turned to Mr. Young for a report on the
most recent meeting of Working Party 3 of the Economic Policy Committee
of the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development, and Mr.
Young commented as follows:
At the most recent Working Party 3 meeting, held in
Paris last week, a review of U.S balance of payments
pclicy was again the principal item of the agenda. We
had been advised in advance that we would confront a
European view that the U.S. had not as yet presented to
the group a comprehensive program for the correction of
its payments deficit. In the light of this advice, the
main task of the U.S. delegation was considered to be a
full explanation of the longer range and shorter term
elements of an integrated U.S. program, together with a
broad indication of the pace at which it was expected to
be achieved. This was done effectively and, we thought,
persuasively by the head of our delegation.
For the longer run, he emphasized adjustment through
the work-out of fundamental competitive forces, supple
mented by redistribution of aid and defense burdens and
by gradual reduction of the capital outflow through
reciprocal credit and capital market adaptation. For the
shorter run, he stressed some further tying of aid, more
stringent control of Governmental expenditures abroad,
additional debt prepayment and defense expenditure offsets,
some intermediate-term borrowing by the Treasury in secu
rities denominated in foreign currencies, some increase in
U.S. liabilities to willing dollar holders, and some
settlement in gold.
This presentation received adverse comment on four
grounds:
(1) The length of the projected period--two to
three years or even longer--to achieve
equilibrium;
(2) the size of the U.S. deficit considered
possible for 1963--$3 billion;
(3) the failure to assign a larger and more

5/7/63 -22-
active role--short-term and longer-term--to
monetary policy: and because of
(4) the inflationary burden that the U.S.
deficit was placing on surplus countries.
The U.S. delegation Has subjected to special question
ing regarding the bilateral use of the new special Treasury
issues denominated in foreign currencies. It was said that
the specific issue raised by resort to this instrument was
whether the U.S. in fact eas not circumventing the
multilateral disciplinary mechanism of the international
payments system which the International Monetary Fund was
established to provide. And if the U.S. felt that,
because of its special reserve currency status, it could
not draw from the Fund to bridge over a persisting
disequilibrium, was it not then the duty of Working Party
3 to exercise a special srveillance and disciplinary
function with respect to the U.S. payments deficit?
The U.S. response to this line of logic and
questioning was that these special Treasury issues were
merely intended to provide the U.S. a means of encouraging
additional dollar holdings, without exchange risk, by
countries desiring to hold them during a period in which
the U.S. was striving to improve its payments position
without actions that would disturb financial markets or
distort patterns of world trade. It was also pointed cut
that this new type of Treasury security filled a gap in
available international monetary instruments in that it
provided an instrument, free of exchange risk, falling
between the short-term swap and the longer-term (3-to-5 year)
IMF drawing, and therefore constituted a modest but signi
ficant supplement to the media for international liquidity.
As regards the issue of the use of the new instrument as
a device for circumventing established procedures for
preserving international monetary discipline, it was pointed
out that the U.S. was in no way avoiding these procedures;
that the U.S. was, as other IMF members, subject to regular,
searching review as to its balance of payments policies;
and that the terms of reference of Working Party 3 did not
include the exercise of any special disciplinary function
with regard to any country.
In the Chairman's concluding remarks he noted that,
while U.S. expansion and prosperity were essential to a
strong U.S. payments position, Working Party 3 agreed that
there was urgent need to supplement such expansion by an
active monetary policy to reduce excessive internal liqidity.
He further stated that the group had agreed that U.S. monetary

5/7/63 -23-
action to raise domestic interest rates should not be
nullified by increases in interest rate levels of the
surplus countries. With regard to U.S. use of special
Treasury issues denominated in foreign currencies, he
said the provisional Working Party 3 view was that their
employment was appropriate only if there were definite
indications of improvement in the U.S. payments position.
Finally, he expressed for the European membership of the
Working Party strong reservations as to the U.S. policy
of tying its foreign aid, saying that this militated
against rather than helped restoration of U.S. competitive
ness.
The Chairman's summary seemed to the entire Working
Party group to carry much further than had its discussion
and to convey explicit agreement among the Europeans on
points not fully or extensively discussed in the meeting,
Since the meeting had at that juncture extended beyond
its scheduled termination, it was agreed that the Chairman
would expcse his summary for group reaction and comment at
the opening of the next meeting of the Working Party to be
held on the 19th and 20th of June. Since time had not
been available for an exposure and discussion of U.S.
domestic liquidity and monetary developments, such a
presentation was placed, as a priority item, on the next
meeting's agenda.
Another part of this last meeting's agenda was a
general discussion of French capital market organization.
This organization contrasts sharply with the free market
type with which U.S, students are familiar since it is
geared to channeling a large part of national savings
through the French Treasury at interest rates that are
determined by Treasury policy rather than by the market.
An official commission has recently been engaged in a
searching examination of the French market's structure,
but the commission's report was not available for this
meeting's discussion. And there were no hints as to
whether the report would include recommendations looking
toward a freer French capital market.
A final section of the meeting was given over to a
round table report of recent economic and balance of pay
ments developments in the major European countries. This
review produced no information with which the Open Market
Committee is not already familiar. However, both the
French and German delegations were mildly chastised in the
discussion for pursuing monetary policies mainly oriented
to their domestic problems but at variance with the

5/7/63 -24-
payments surpluses of their respective countries.
After a brief discussion during which Mr. Young expanded on
certain aspects of his report, Chairman Martin called for the usual
go-around of comments and views on economic conditions and monetary
policy beginning with Mr. Treiber, who presented the following state
ment:
The business atmosphere and business outlook have
improved in recent weeks. Consumer buying has been a
continuing element of strength, and consumer confidence
appears to be high. Housing starts have risen sharply
following the winter slump. The recent McGraw-Hill sur
vey of capital spending plans reinforces earlier
indications that capital spending would move up after
the first quarter. Apparently the new depreciation
schedules and the 7 per cent tax credit are having a
favorable effect on plant and equipment spending.
Because, however, of the part played by temporary
factors, such as the buying stimulus associated with
fears of a steel strike, the magnitude of the prospective
rise in business activity is uncertain.
Prices generally continue to be stable, but there
are some indications of a firming of raw material prices
for both immediate and future delivery. It is too soon
to tell the effect of the recent selective increases in
steel prices.
Employment has risen, but there is little change in
unemployment. Indeed, the problen of unemployment is of
about the same magnitude as it was a year ago.
A reduction in commercial bank credit in April
reflected contraseasonal reductions in bank holdings of
Government securities and in total loans, primarily
security loans. In addition, there was a contraction of
loans to sales finance companies. On the other hand,
there was strength in business loans, with modest advances
rather widely based. There was a $1/2 billion rise in the
daily average money supply in April. While bank liquidity
is at about the level of early 1961, it is still adequate.
There continues to be plenty of nonbank liquidity.
Preliminary statistics for April indicate a worsening
of our balance of payments deficit. The deterioration

5/7/63 -25-
occurred despite a temporary decline in foreign bond issues
in our capital markets and reports of an increase in
purchases of United States corporate stocks by foreign
investors. Imports in March continued at a relatively
high level; it is not clear to what extent this reflects
the deferment of foreign shipments to this country because
of the dock strike. There is no indication of any prospec
tive improvement in our balance of payments. On the
contrary, large foreign borrowings in our capital markets
are in prospect, and the rise in business activity may
stimulate greater imports. Although our monetary gold
stock has remained unchanged since the last meeting of
the Committee, it is clear that there will be substantial
gold losses as the year progresses, and perhaps fairly soon.
Our balance of payments, both actual and prospective, is bad.
The Treasury is in the midst of a refunding operation.
The new issues are to be paid for by the surrender of the
maturing issues a week from tomorrow. Thus, "even keel"
considerations would rule out any major change in Federal
Reserve policy in the next week or so, but "even keel"
considerations should not preclude some moderate movement
toward a firmer money market sometime during the statement
week beginning May 16.
It seems to me that our bad balance of payments calls
for Federal Reserve action, While an immediate rise in
the discount rate would seem premature, a further modest
move through open market operations toward somewhat less
ease would seem advisable. It should be possible to
initiate such a move a few days after May 15 when the
Treasury refunding operation will have been completed.
The objective of such a move would be a Federal funds rate
consistently at the 3 per cent discount rate, and a three
month Treasury bill rate at nearly 3 per cent; such a move
would probably involve a modest reduction in free reserves
and a modest increase in member bank borrowing. Such a
cautious movement toward a bit less ease would call for a
change in the directive to show such a change in policy.
The change in the directive should recognize the improved
domestic outlook, indicate that greater weight is being
placed on balance of payments considerations, and make clear
that no action would be contemplated until the Treasury's
refunding is concluded.
Mr. Ellis said that economic activity in New England continued
at a high level, but without significant signs of appreciable expansion.

5/7/63 -26
Manufacturing output in March was at virtually the same level as in
January of this year and in March 1962, although within the category
of manufacturing there were, of course, various shifts and counter
balancing movements. In the electronic field, competition from Japan
was a factor in pulling the employment level down 2 per cent below a
year ago. Shoe and cotton goods manufacturers also blamed declines
on imports. Shoe production in the first quarter of this year was 6
per cent under the first quarter in 1962. Total unemployment rose
slightly in March, on a seasonally adjusted basis, to a level virtually
identical with the national average, although insured unemployment
figures were a little less favorable than for the nation. Retail
demands continued strong, and bank debits had risen to a new peak.
Businessmen reported an increasing volume of new orders.
Figures for First District weekly reporting banks reflected a
seasonal leveling off of business loans since the March tax date,
There was a continued shifting from short-term Government securities
to other securities, primarily municipals.
Turning to the national picture, Mr. Ellis expressed agreement
with the view that it was rather difficult to make a positive case for
a shift to less monetary ease based solely on an analysis of the
domestic economy, On the other hand, the economy seemed better able
at present to stand a lesser degree of ease; such action may have
already been discounted to some extent. Therefore, in the formulation

5/7/63 -27
of policy the Committee seemed to have more freedom of choice than
in past months. On the international side, there had been a worsen
ing of the balance of payments position in April, due partly to
capital flows. Looking at the impact of credit policy in the past
month, the staff memorandum indicated that free reserves had averaged
a little higher, member bank borrowings a little lower, and the
Federal funds rate a little lower on average.
As Mr. Ellis saw it, the choice between no change in policy
and a shift to slightly less monetary ease involved a matter of
closely balanced alternatives. He did not feel sufficiently confident
of the strength of the business situation and the future trend to
suggest at this time a definite shift of policy to less ease. What
did seem feasiole to him was experimentation with short periods of
less ease, allowing some additional firmness in money markets to
develop from market factors that he thought might appear this spring.
If this experimentation should demonstrate the feasibility of a lesser
degree of ease, with the economy continuing to expand, the Committee
could then decide to consolidate its position. For this experimenta
tion he would suggest moving toward $250 million as an initial target
for free reserves, with less trading in Federal funds below 3 per cent.
He would expect some modest increase in member bank borrowing and a
tendency for the short-term rate to rise toward the discount rate, but
he would not recommend changing the discount rate at this time. If a

5/7/63 -28
course such as he had outlined should be decided upon, it would be
necessary to revise the policy directive accordingly.
Mr. Irons said there had been no significant changes in the
Eleventh District in the past three weeks. It would probably be
accurate to say that there had not been quite as much recent improve
ment in economic activity in the District as seemed to be reflected
nationally. It was more a matter of moving along on a high plateau,
with some indicators up slightly and some down. Industrial production
was holding at the March level, which was down a point, reflecting
largely petroleum production. Construction activity continued at a
very high level and established a record during the first four months
of the year. Employment continued to rise slightly, and unemployment
had declined to 5.0 per cent of the labor force on an unadjusted basis.
Department store sales were running about 5 per cent ahead of a year
ago and the agricultural situation looked promising, with rainfall in
a large part of the District improving expectations.
Loans and investments of District reporting banks were both up
in the most recent period, with an increase in investments in both
Government and other securities, while demand deposits were down a bit.
Time and savings deposits growth lagged somewhat during the past three
week period. The banks seemed to be adequately liquid. They were
about on balance as to Federal funds for the past three weeks, and few
banks were borrowing from the Reserve Bank.

5/7/63 -29
Mr. Irons noted that the national picture reflected continuing
improvement, with increased confidence in the business outlook. General
attitudes seemed much more favorable, judging from views expressed both
by Government spokesmen and businessmen. If one could eliminate the
unemployment figure, most of the economic indicators appeared quite
good. The balance of payments situation continued to be a problem,
apparently of about the same degree of difficulty that had prevailed
for some time.
Mr. Irons went on to say that he was beginning to wonder
whether a problem might not be developing on the domestic side in the
form of deterioration in the quality of credit. He seemed to be hear
ing more comments about heavily indebted borrowers having difficulty
in maintaining their positions, the tendency toward more questionable
mortgage coverages, the extension of maturities, and about inflation
ary tendencies and speculative movements that were beginning to show
up in noncommodity areas, rather than in the price of goods being sold.
He wondered whether monetary ease might not have reached the stage
where it was stimulating sectors other than basic production, employ
ment, and the distribution of goods.
In the light of developments that raised warning flags, Mr.
Irons raised the question whether it might not be appropriate to move
in the direction of slightly less ease, The critical point seemed to
be the matter of timing, but in view of some of the warnings that he

5/7/63 -30
thought he saw in the domestic picture he felt it might be appropriate
to move in that direction. Accordingly, while he was not firm in his
convictions, he would support a moderate move toward more firmness if
that should be the Committee consensus. This would contemplate,
according to his analysis, free reserves in the area of $200-$250
million, a Federal funds rate more firmly at 3 per cent, and the bill
rate at or close to 3 per cent, and he would expect some increase in
member bank borrowing. He would not, however, change the discount
rate at this time. If a policy such as he had outlined should be
decided upon by the Committee, it would be necessary to modify the
policy directive.
Mr. Swan reported that the improvement in business conditions
in the Twelfth District appeared to be a little less strong than in
the nation generally, in contrast to the situatin during most of 1962.
The number of nonfarm wage and salary employees was virtually unchanged
in March on a seasonally adjusted basis. In fact, from January to March
the gains in distribution and service industries were just about offset
by losses in commodity-producing industries. During the period April 3
to April 24 the loan increase at weekly reporting banks was considerably
less than in the comparable period of 1962, and withdrawals from savings
deposits--primarily for tax payments--were about twice as large. This
implied that a significant amount of the growth in savings accounts
since the increase in interest rates may have reflected accumulation for

5/7/63 -31
substantial periodic expenditures. The growth in time and savings
deposits at weekly reporting banks had been somewhat slower this year
than in 1962. From the first of the year through April 24 the rate
of increase of savings deposits was only about half as large as in
1962.
Mr. Swan agreed that a shift in monetary policy seemed to be
getting closer and closer to the point of decision. However, he
believed that the improvement in the business situation did not yet
warrant any change in policy. Steel production and orders were
affected by hedge buying against the possibility of a strike. Looking
at over-all measures of unemployment, retail sales, and industrial
production, along with the moderation in financial developments
referred to by Mr. Holland, he did not find indications that a strong
upward surge of economic activity was imminent. Certainly the month
of April showed no cumulating of the March advances.
Accordingly, Mr. Swan said, he would continue for the next
three weeks the same policy that had prevailed during the past three
weeks. The economic upturn was still at an early stage, and he would
prefer to give it a good chance to continue. If credit demands began
to increase substantially in May, and if it were found that the supply
of additional savings had slowed down, some market tightening would
seem probable. It seemed preferable to him to await such a develop
ment, if it was going to occur, rather than to take deliberate policy

5/7/63 -32
steps in anticipation. The balance of payments, of course, still
presented a serious problem, but he did not think it was overriding
in importance compared with the domestic situation. He would
recommend that there be no change in the discount rate at this time,
and no change in the policy directive except for a possible technical
amendment.
Mr. Deming said that the general feeling in the Ninth District
was one of optimism, which to some degree seemed justified. Crop
prospects were excellent in terms of moisture and an early season.
Retail sales were good, particularly auto sales, and farm implements
were moving very well. On the other hand, some developments indicated
nothing better than an even keel, and some others were even less
encouraging. Nonagricultural employment and industrial production
statistics showed at best level activity through March. The broadest
measure, personal income, showed a declining trend on a seasonally
adjusted basis from the first of the year and no net gain since early
last fall. Relative to a year ago, however, March personal income in
the District was up more than for the country as a whole, and the wage
and salary and nonfarm proprietor sectors showed more strength than
the total. The iron ore shipping season opened late on Lake Superior
because of the heavy ice, but ore stocks at steel mills were quite
high and the outlook for ore shipments was not particularly optimistic.
Cattle feeders had been hard hit by recent livestock price declines,

5/7/63 -33
and many had delayed marketings. Some feeders might well be badly
hurt. Some decline was seen in mortgage loan quality, with lower
down payments and longer maturities evident since the first of this
year. Delinquencies, defaults, and foreclosures were still quite
low but showed some tendency to rise. In sum, the statistical evi
dence indicated no strong upward thrust in activity such as seemed
to be evident at the national level.
Ninth District banking developments continued to show mixed
trends between city and country banks. Following a very strong
performance in bank credit, loans, and deposits at both classes of
banks in the fourth quarter of 1962, the first quarter of 1963 showed
total bank credit and bank loan growth of greater than seasonal
proportions but weaker than in the fourth quarter of 1962 at both
classes of banks, with relatively stronger expansion at country than
at city banks. The change in total deposits in the first quarter at
country banks was just as strong as in the fourth quarter of 1962,
but at city banks deposits fell about seasonally in contrast to more
than seasonal growth in the latter part of 1962. City bank loans,
investments, and deposits exhibited weakness in April after seasonal
adjustment, as did country bank investments and deposits, but the
latter banks continued to show above-average loan strength. This
atypical behavior in country bank loans probably reflected in large
part the financing of cattle feeders, who had withheld stock from

5/7/63 -34
the market because of price drops. If the paper losses of the cattle
feeders became real, country bank loans might be expected to stay up,
partly because of the losses and partly because they would have to
carry heavier lines of production credit during the crop-growing
season.
Turning to credit policy, Mr. Deming observed that Mr. Koch's
comment at the April 16 meeting that the emphasis in speaking of
"slightly less ease" should be put on the word "slightly" rather
than on "less ease" seemed appropriate. Any difference between the
posture of the System just prior to December 18, 1962, and at present
was not observable to the naked eye, although it probably was true
that the tone of the market was a shade firmer. In the three weeks
ended December 19, excess reserves averaged $445 million; in the four
weeks ended May 1, they averaged $441 million. Member bank borrowings
averaged $121 million in the three weeks ended December 19; they
averaged $124 million in the four weeks ended May 1. Free reserves
averaged $324 million in the three weeks ended December 19; they
averaged $317 million in the four weeks ended May 1. The three-month
bill rate was not significantly different. Dealer loan rates were a
bit higher, and Federal funds hit 3 per cent somewhat more often, but
not much more often.
Mr. Deming also observed that the balance of payments problem
loomed about as large as it did six months ago, although comment on it

5/7/63 -35
seemed to have moderated somewhat. Of course, if the Canadians could
not have borrowed in the U.S. capital market, the U.S. payments posi
tion would have been much closer to balance. They did borrow,
however, and apparently were going to continue to do so.
Mr. Deming went on to say that he had done some analytical
work on U.S. bank foreign lending. In brief, this study showed what
everyone knew: a strong uptrend in both long- and short-term bank
lending to foreigners since 1953 and a sort of plateau series in such
loans, with successive plateaus at progressively higher levels. When
loans to foreigners were plotted as percentages of weekly reporting
bank total loans, and particularly as percentages of New York City
bank loans, the steps were very apparent. And when these in turn
were plotted against free reserves, there seemed to be a rough kind
of relationship, lagged a bit to be sure, between high free reserves
and a higher plateau of bank lending to foreigners.
It was Mr. Deming's feeling that a bit too much liquidity may
have been pumped into the banking system and that there had been some
"spillover effect" on foreign lending. It might be significant that
the slightly lower level of free reserves in the latter part of 1962
was accompanied by a slightly lower level of foreign loans relative
to total loans,
Mr. Deming expressed the view that it might be useful for the
Committee to move a bit toward lesser ease. While this would not cure

5/7/63 -36
the balance of payments problem, it might be of some assistance. It
might also curb gently any tendency of the banks to push speculative
and unsound credit extension, if any such tendency existed. With a
relatively weak private sector demand for loans, it should not choke
off needed and sound credit. He would take this step via reduced
reserve availability without any particular emphasis on rate harden
ing. It might be that rates would not advance by any appreciable
amount; if there really was spillover, they should not advance very
much. In any event, he would suggest the use of a lower level of
free reserves as a guide rather than the short-term rate--perhaps a
level of $200 to $250 million of free reserves. He would not resist
an upward rate movement, but he would not seek it as an end. This
policy could be begun without much in the way of an overt move--if
the reserve estimates are reasonably accurate--merely by letting
market factors absorb reserves in the next two weeks. If there should
be an economic upswing on the way, that should help over the longer
period. He thought this would be worth doing, and that it could be
done without harm to the domestic economy. If it was decided upon,
there should be an appropriate change in the policy directive, but
he saw no reason to change the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Scanlon reported that Seventh District business activity
continued to improve in April. Manufacturers' new orders, especially
for capital equipment and steel, continued strong. Employment in all

5/7/63
District States was appreciably above last year in March, and reports
from local employment service offices indicated that increases in the
second quarter would be more than seasonal.
Steel orders continued very strong, but local experts believed
that demand would taper off later in the month. While most types of
steel products other than structurals had participated in the order
surge, delivery times for sheets and strip had stretched out from
three-four weeks to seven-eight weeks. It seemed that a reaction in
steel production was inevitable. The highest estimates for the year
as a whole were around 110 million tons, compared with a current
operating rate of 133 million tons.
Producers of capital goods reported further increases in orders,
with construction machinery especially strong. Orders for farm
machinery continued excellent despite the prospective drop in net farm
income in the Midwest.
The higher level of new orders had ercouraged many manufac
turers to test their markets by announcing price increases. This was
true not only in steel and aluminum but also in such varied lines as
electrical equipment, bearings, paper products, and glass. A stronger
tendency in this direction was thought to be noted than at any time
since the current expansion began two years ago, As to the auto market,
deliveries to customers in April were the largest on record,
Savings continued to flow to financial institutions at a high

5/7/63 -38
rate, Mr. Scanlon said, somewhat less rapidly than a year ago at Seventh
District banks and somewhat more rapidly at savings and loan associations.
The volume of time certificates issued by banks was rising much less
rapidly than last year. Many banks had de-emphasized savings promotions
and apparently would like to cut rates paid on savings if competition
would permit them to do so. Tabulations of new mortgage loans showed
a further easing of terms and interest rates for March. Moreover,
significant cuts in mortgage rates reportedly had occurred in April in
some areas of the District.
While total credit outstanding at weekly reporting banks rose
strongly in March, both in the nation and in the District, this per
formance did not continue in April. Some Seventh District bankers
reported business loan demand to be relatively strong, but most of
them indicated that they were vigorously seeking additional outlets for
funds, including greater emphasis on accounts receivable financing and
auto loans. According to a recent survey, most country bankers expected
the demand for farm loans to be as strong or stronger than a year ago.
Mr. Scanlon said he was worried about some of the things Mr.
Irons had mentioned so far as deterioration of the quality of credit
was concerned. Like Mr. Irons, he felt that the matter of timing was
important in considering a possible change in monetary policy. Although
a close question was involved, he would recommend a continuation of
current policy for the next three weeks. He would construe continuation

5/7/63 -39
of the current posture to imply achievement of moderate reserve
expansion while maintaining, so far as possible, a stable money
market as reflected primarily in short-term interest rates. Although
business had strengthened further and expectations were more optimis
tic, he saw a distinct possibility of an inventory turn-around that
would have a dampening effect beginning around midyear. In the mean
time, the inventory buildup appeared to be beyond the reach of any
moderate adjustment of monetary policy. He was disturbed by the
increasing evidence that prices were being marked up on a lengthening
list of items, and he expected that the System might soon be confronted
with a gradual rise in prices while there were still sizable amounts o
unused resources.
After commenting that he would not change the discount rate
at this time, Mr. Scanlon noted that if the Committee should decide
to move in the direction of lesser ease, it would be necessary to
change the policy directive. If the directive were changed for any
reason, he would favor deletion from the first paragraph of several
phrases so as to omit the references to recent increases in bank credit,
money supply, and the reserve base, the limited progress of the economy,
and absence of inflationary pressures.
Mr. Clay expressed the view that it would be appropriate to
continue essentially the same monetary policy in view of recent
domestic and international developments. In fact, it could be said,

5/7/63 -40
he thought, that apart from Treasury financing the reasons for that
policy remained much the same as earlier. While the international
balance of payments problem continued to be intractable, it was
clear that the domestic economy was in no sense operating under
forced draft with strong demand pressures on resources, capacity to
produce, and prices Hence, the economy was not generating the strong
internal pressures normally associated with a balance of payments
deficit problem.
While economic activity was showing some advancement, it had
not given evidence of making much inroad on the economy's resource
utilization problem. To be sure, the steel industry was operating at
a much higher rate of capacity than earlier, but that development
rested to an important degree on steel strike hedging. Moreover,
there was the difficult question as to the extent to which the improve
ment in aggregate economic indicators might grow out of the same
factor.
All in all, Mr. Clay concluded that monetary policy should
continue to be a moderately stimulating one. The degree of improve
ment shown in domestic economic activity thus far was not sufficient,
in his judgment, to warrant any lessening of the expansionary role of
monetary policy. The discount rate should remain unchanged, and except
for the reference to Treasury financing the substance of the current
directive was in line with the monetary policy that in his opinion

5/7/63 -41
should be pursued.
Mr. Heflin reported that Fifth District business had continued
to advance following gains in March that lifted the area economy above
its former plateau. The initial upward movement was particularly
strong in manufacturing, and the March rise in seasonally adjusted fac
tory man-hours was stronger in the District than in the nation as a
whole. Insured unemployment had decreased since the middle of March at
a distinctly better than seasonal rate, and the Reserve Bank's latest
survey suggested that the decline was continuing. The survey also
showed business sentiment still buoyant; two-thirds of the panel
expected further gains and most of the others foresaw continuation at
present levels. On balance, the respondents rated nonfarm employment,
bituminous coal mining, construction, and retail trade stronger than
three weeks earlier, Manufacturers in general continued to report
rising levels of new orders and shipments as well as increased employ
ment and longer workweeks Textile firms, however, were still hampered
by fluctuations in demand stemming from widespread uncertainty as t
how cotton prices would behave if action was taken to alter the two
price system. Business, consumer, and real estate loans at weekly
reporting banks continued to show somewhat greater strength in the
District than in th nation as a whole.
Turning to national conditions, Mr. Heflin noted that the
resurgence in economic activity had now continued long enough to

5/7/63 -42
indicate that, even after discounting the effects of inventory
accumulation in steel and other temporary factors, there had been a
definite, even though modest, improvement in the economy. The
improvement seemed to be quite general, and no major decline or
unfavorable development had been announced for more than a month.
In addition to the strength in automobile sales and other retail sales,
which had been evident for several months, personal income had con
tinued to rise slowly, and industrial production had broken out of the
narrow range within which it fluctuated during most of 1962. There was
evidence also that business investment was moving up, including the
most recent estimate that outlays for plant and equipment this year
would be 7 per cent above last year's figure, in contrast with an
estimate of 3 per cent made last fall. While manufacturers' new orders
showed no significant change in March, the total of unfilled orders
increased nearly a billion dollars, and the increase for the first
quarter was almost two billion dollars, which offset about two-thirds
of last year's decline. While it was too early to be sure, these
gains plus the improvement in business sentiment might mean that the
recovery which began in February 1961 had its second wind after last
year's pause.
Mr. Robertson presented the following statement:
The evidence of improving business that is being
reported around this table is certainly welcome news. I
hope, as all of us must, that the pickup will continue,
firmly but gradually. If it does, then at some point it

5/7/63 -43-
would be necessary to shift to a substantially less easy
monetary policy.
But, in my judgment, that point has not yet been
reached. Strengthening business expectations and investment
plans strike me as still too tender to accept with impunity
any increase in interest rates or restraint upon liquidity
or credit availability. Moreover, current activity is
certainly being bolstered, and third-quarter activity will
probably be dampened, by the effects of anticipatory pur
chases of steel in the current quarter. It would seem wise
to wait to see how well the economy withstands this possible
third-quarter snapback in steel before trying to test its
ability to grow under tighter monetary conditions.
I say this partly because I think that any movement to
a policy of less ease would have to be a fairly substantial
one in order to be useful to us in the international arena.
In this connection, let me point out that we have apparently
obtained precious little gain in the way of international
financial confidence from the three very modest tightening
or "probing" actions that we have already undertaken in the
past two years. Some might argue that such changes in policy
have a constructive role to play when sizable capital out
flows are occurring of a type that is responsive to a few
basis points' differential in interest rates. But such flows
have not bulked large for a number of months.
All this means to me that the appropriate policy prescrip
tion for the next three weeks is to wa t: watch and wait with
policy targets unchanged for a little while longer, until-
hopefully--domestic business expansion and the balance of
payments could both justify and respond constructively to a
move toward a less easy policy. We have waited this long;
a few more months may now be all it will take to prove the
essential wisdom of the course that we have followed.
Mr. Shepardson noted, with reference to the reports of hedge
buying of steel, that this factor was hardly going to be affected one
way or the other by monetary policy. In general, he added, the reports
on economic activity were encouraging. The lack of significant change
in the rate of unemployment was a problem that had persisted for a
long time. Here again was a factor that involved elements beyond the

5/7/63 -44
direct impact of monetary policy.
Mr. Shepardson agreed with the view that it was time to begin
experimenting in the direction of slightly lesser ease. As he had
mentioned at previous Committee meetings, in his opinion there were
evidences of inflationary pressures outside the normal gauge of price
movements. Also, according to the material furnished by the staff on
reserves, it appeared to him that required reserves against private
deposits were continuing to increase at an annual rate of better than
4 per cent, as against the growth guideline of 3 per cent that had
been discussed for some time.
For all of these reasons, Mr. Shepardson said, he concurred
with the view that a target of somewhat less ease was indicated. If
this should be the decision of the Committee, a corresponding change
in the policy directive would be required.
Mr. King commented that it was apparent that the domestic
economy was continuing to make some progress. So far as monetary
policy was concerned, he felt that this was probably a good time to
squeeze some water out of the brakes, although not until the middle
of this month for reasons that had been mentioned earlier during this
meeting. A very modest move toward less ease would be generally in
accord with the views he had expressed at the April 16 meeting of the
Committee, and he would envisage basic target figures such as outlined
by Mr. Irons. As to the policy directive, it seemed to him that a

5/7/63 -45
directive somewhat along the lines of the one he had suggested at
the previous Committee meeting would be appropriate for the next
three weeks. He would not change the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Mitchell suggested that the Committee should consider the
matter fully before any decision was reached to move in the direction
of less monetary ease. If such a step was taken, he felt that the
Committee should act in no uncertain fashion; action in an unobtrusive
way would not get any benefit from the reaction of foreigners who
presumably would be interested in knowing that the Committee had shifted
policy. He believed there had been a disposition on the part of
Committee members to watch the domestic economy very closely with the
thought of moving toward a firmer monetary policy as soon as there
were signs of definite improvement. The economy was now showing
some signs of improvement, but in his opinion it should be given a
chance to move further ahead before there was any shift away from the
present posture.
Mr. Mitchell expressed agreement with the view that in the area
of credit extension there had been some deterioration in terms and
quality. However, he did not feel that a deterioration in the quality
of credit was necessarily bad if the price was right. An insurance
company was willing to insure a man against death if the price was
right, and the same principle would seem to hold true in the field of

5/7/63 -46
credit. If the price was right, the credit was good.
There was a flood of savings to be dealt with, Mr. Mitchell
pointed out, and he did not believe that monetary policy could move
strongly, vigorously, and effectively against this flood of savings,
which had been engendered to some degree by rate competition for
savings funds but basically reflected other factors, including chang
ing aspirations on the part of consumers. In 1962 total savings in
financial form, including bank deposits, share accounts at savings
and loan associations, and amounts placed with insurance companies,
amounted to $41 billion; meanwhile, direct savings still increased.
The increase of $41 billion compared with a figure of $35 billion in
1961 and an average of $22 billion in the previous five years. This
was what had put real pressure on capital markets, with a great deal
of focus on the mortgage market where liberalization of terms had
occurred in many places. In his opinion, the free market remedy was
not higher but lower interest rates Liberalization of terms occurred
because lenders did not want to break the rate; but if the rate had
declined there would not have been the need to liberalize terms in
order to clear the market. Accordingly, before a deterioration in the
quality of credit was used as a reason for the Committee to tighten the
monetary screws, he felt that one should think twice. In his view a
different course of action was indicated.
In conclusion, Mr. Mitchell expressed the view that this was a

5/7/63 -47
a good time not to make any move, and instead just to stand fast.
Mr. Hickman stated that developments in the Fourth District
confirmed the improved tone of business activity reported rather
generally around the table this morning. The insured unemployment
rate in the Fourth District at the end of April, after seasonal
adjustment, stood at its lowest point in the current recovery, and
for the first time in this recovery did not exceed the national
average.
Steel production had advanced to high levels both locally and
nationally, although the advance had moderated in recent weeks. Indi
cations from the District suggested some leveling in production and
orders, while shipments were still rising, Regardless of whether the
labor contract was reopened, industry sources expected a decline in
output in the third quarter, reflecting hedge-buying that had already
taken place.
Countrywide, the average daily rate of new car sales in April
exceeded the 1955 rate for the first time since January, and new car
inventories were in good control. Auto production was expected to
continue to increase moderately and to approximate 2 million cars for
the second quarter.
Fourth District banks had been under little reserve pressure,
and had expanded earning assets more this year than in other recent
years. The banks were competing vigorously for the less liquid types

5/7/63 -48
of assets, including consumer loans, mortgage loans, municipal
securities, and longer term Governments and business loans. They
seemed to be surrendering liquidity to obtain higher yields.
There was increasing evidence of deterioration in the quality
of credit. Reports from large national life insurance companies and
the results of a recent survey of mortgage lending in the Fourth
District revealed that loanable funds were in plentiful supply, that
lenders were having difficulty in employing them, that maturities were
being lengthened and downpayments being reduced, and that quality was
being sacrificed, with loans in excess of market values in some cases.
Moreover, the quality of directly placed corporate securities was
reported to be deteriorating. Rates were being maintained at the
expense of lower quality.
These developments suggested to Mr. Hickman that the deteriora
tion in the quality of credit should be placed alongside the adverse
balance of payments as a major factor to be considered in formulating
monetary policy. The balance of payments figures for April and the
recent behavior of the foreign exchange markets were disturbing.
Recent monetary ease had encouraged foreign borrowers to enter U.S.
capital markets, with a resulting outflow of long-term funds, and had
also encouraged short-term funds to flow out of this country. In
particular, financial institutions in the U.S, were placing large
amounts of funds in Canadian long-term issues. Canadian borrowers,

5/7/63 -49
anticipating these flows, were putting pressure on forward rates,
thus further encouraging the flow of short-term funds to Canada. The
lowering of the Canadian discount rate yesterday might help to check
the short-term flow, but hardly the long-term flow.
Unemployment remained high after many months of monetary ease,
Mr. Hickman continued, suggesting that further ease was not the solution
to this problem. It seemed to him appropriate to face up to the possi
bility that further ease might induce structural imbalances, which in
turn could bring about an economic reversal and higher unemployment.
Thus, it was his recommendation that Federal Reserve policy should work
toward reducing monetary ease. Such a shift, in his opinion, should be
reflected in higher interest rates across the maturity spectrum. The
Committee should work over the next four to six weeks toward a 91-day
bill rate in the 3-1/4 per cent to 3-1/2 per cent range, permitting
other rates to move to higher levels in response to market forces,
after which the discount rate could be adjusted upward.
Mr. Hickman believed that a change in the current economic
policy directive would be appropriate at this time. He suggested that
it be revised to indicate that open market operations during the next
three weeks should be conducted with a view to providing progressively
less ease in the money and capital markets.
Mr. Bopp reported that economic activity had increased
moderately in the Third District in recent weeks, but that the improve
ments were gradual and far from universal. Department store sales in

5/7/63 -50
the District had turned in the worst performance in the nation so far
in 1963, having actually dropped below the 1962 totals for the first
third of the year. Manufacturing output and construction awards had
increased a bit, and unemployment rates had moved down in almost every
labor market. Manufacturing employment had not yet recovered, however.
During the month of April, loans at reporting banks in the
District increased by about the same amount as in the comparable period
last year. Investments fell, whereas they had risen during the compa
rable period last year, and total bank credit increased by only a little
over one-half of last year's expansion. Liquidity positions of the
larger banks appeared to be weakening somewhat. There was little
evidence, however, of any increase in pressure on reserve positions.
In Mr. Bopp's view, the improvement in business had not been so
vigorous as to warrant any less ease in policy. Recent developments
did not support the views of the more optimistic observers, but even if
these more favorable expectations proved to be right the expansion in
the economy was likely to fall quite short of producing a satisfactory
rate of resource utilization. Accordingly, he would continue to push
ease as far as it could safely go in order to stimulate the domestic
economy.
The balance of payments still provided a limit to the degree
of ease, Mr. Bopp added, and in view of this continuing problem he
would go no further than to maintain existing policy. He was glad to

5/7/63 -51
see that the recent congestion in capital markets had been corrected,
and he would hope that such a development could be prevented in the
future by open market purchases in the longer sector of the market. He
would not change the discount rate, and he would not change the direc
tive except for technical correction.
Mr. Bryan reported that most recent economic indicators in the
Sixth District were favorable. Although he could not offer statistical
proof, he sensed a tendency for the economic improvement to accelerate.
The national situation presented a picture of increased underlying
general strength, with improved business prospects and greater confi
dence on the part of the business community.
In the meantime, Mr. Bryan noted, there had been a gradual
trend toward a reduced level of free reserves, on average, but a rising
trend in the active money supply, the total money supply, and other
liquid assets, both in absolute terms and as a ratio of gross national
product. The growth of required reserves against private deposits had
quickened in the period from December 19 through April 24. While the
general price level was stable, there had been a mild restlessness in
some prices. There was an inventory situation that presented some
problem, a prospective large Government deficit, and a serious balance
of payments problem. Also, there was a good deal of evidence of specu
lation in noncommodity areas. It did not seem to him that more monetary
ease was called for; if anything, he believed that a policy of somewhat

5/7/63 -52
less ease would be appropriate.
Mr. Bryan suggested that at this juncture one should be
careful in following guidelines. He did not feel that the free
reserve guideline was of much use at this particular time, and he was
not sure that the total reserve guideline was a great deal more useful.
In these circumstances, he found some difficulty in making a sugges
tion in terms of policy. Nevertheless, required reserves against
private time and demand deposits were well above the so-called 3 per
cent growth guideline, and total reserves were above the long-term
trendline. Therefore, he saw little choice but to cut back on the
amount of reserves being supplied. He would propose adjusting for
seasonal movements--insofar as they could be determined--and placing
a limit of 2 per cent, annual rate on the growth factor in required
reserves. He would not change the discount rate at this time.
In a further comment relating to the balance of payments problem,
Mr. Bryan recalled having made the point several times that he did not
think this problem had been caused by monetary policy. He had recently
examined the rates of monetary expansion for recent years in various
countries of the world. Leaving aside certain countries that had
experienced spectacular rates of increase, he found annual rates of
expansion, from 1948 through 1962, such as 54.9 per cent for Japan,
35.2 per cent for France, 27.6 per cent for Germany, 25.5 per cent for
Italy, and 9.9 per cent for Switzerland. The United States was at the
b ottom of the list with an annual rate of 2.5 per cent. While this

5/7/63 -53
did not settle the question by any means, it did give some hint that
perhaps the monetary policy pursued in this country had not been the
cause of the balance of payments problem. It also suggested that the
remedy probably should not be sought fundamentally through monetary
policy.
Mr. Shuford reported that during the first quarter of this
year Eighth District. economic activity showed some improvement over
the fourth quarter of 1962, and according to preliminary indications
there was some further gain during April. Employment had been increas
ing somewhat since December and was slightly higher in the first
quarter of this year than in the fourth quarter of 1962. Industrial
use of electric power had been increasing since November and registered
a quarter-to-quarter gain. Department store sales and bank debits,
however, had changed little since the fourth quarter of 1962, and
business loans had declined slightly since late last year.
Turning to the national picture, Mr. Shuford noted that the
strengthening of the economy appeared to have continued since the April
16 meeting of the Committee. Production, employment, and incomes
appeared to be rising. Despite these favorable signs, however, the
evidence was not yet conclusive that the upturn would continue. The
economy had not yet moved to rates of resource utilization higher than
prevailed during most of 1962. In several respects the events of recent
months resembled those that had occurred in the early part of 1962, at

5/7/63 -54
which time there was a moderate rise in most of the measures of
business activity. A portion of the improvement early this year and
early last year could be attributed to the situation in the steel
industry. The improvement in the early part of 1962 was followed by
a plateau for the remainder of the year, and it seemed that the pattern
thus far this year was quite similar.
Mr. Shuford said that he would not favor any change in monetary
policy at this time. There had been some moderate increase in reserves.
However, if one measured from December the increases in reserves and in
the money supply both had been in the neighborhood of about 3 per cent,
which perhaps was moderate and desirable. Personally, he felt that it
would be well if increases continued at about this rate. The balance
of payments presented a problem, one that had been worked with and
lived with for some time. Monetary policy, of course, had a role to
play, and under all the circumstances he felt it had played a rather
significant role, If the Committee should conclude to move toward a
firmer monetary policy out of consideration of the balance of payments
problem, he would be inclined to feel that the move, at such time as it
was made, should be a rather significant one. The time might come when
it would be necessary to do this.
It did appear, Mr. Shuford added, that in several noncommodity
areas there had been a deterioration in the quality of credit extended.
However, he wondered what effect a firming of monetary policy aimed at

5/7/63 -55
those specific areas might have on the general economic improvement for
which the System had been hoping. It seemed possible to him that such
a move might have a generally depressing effect. For the time being,
therefore, he believed the Committee should continue its current policy,
which would call for no substantive change in the directive and no
change in the discount rate.
Mr. Balderston commented that he liked to act decisively in
terms of monetary policy. However, he did not see grounds clear enough
to justify going further than modest action at this time. It seemed
necessary to him to study the results of such action for clarity that
he lacked at the present time. As to timing, he felt that with the
large Treasury needs for funds this fall the Committee should not pass
up any opportunity for experimentation, and one such opportunity would
be available in about a week.
Mr. Balderston said he had also been considering another point
referred to during today's discussion, namely, how the volume of savings
might best be put to work. In 1959 the net amount of funds used by
nonfinancial irstitutions was around $53 billion, of which bank credit
accounted for only around $5 or $6 billion. In 1962 the corresponding
figures were $58 billion and $19 billion. He was unable to disassociate
from the total the portion that represented bank-created credit in
excess of the real needs of the economy.
Mr. Balderston went on to say that, with the assistance of

5/7/63 -56-
members of the staff who, incidentally, might not necessarily share
his philosophy, he had prepared a statement in order to reduce his
thinking to a form containing some identifiable benchmarks. He then
read the following statement:
This statement setting forth my position deals with
two main points:
(1) A national economic policy appropriate to the
moment calls for "holding the line" on costs
and prices.
(2) The contribution of monetary policy to holding
the line is to insure that excess liquidity
does not lead to:
(a) Leakage abroad,
(b) Speculative excesses,
(c) Imprudent decision making.
What is the case for a national hold-the-line policy?
Clearly the greater the ability of American firms to compete
in foreign markets, the greater will be their exports; the
greater their ability to compete in domestic markets, the
smaller will be imports into this country. This process will
tend to make U.S. firms more competitive and to increase the
foreign exchange available to our country to pay for its
spending, lending, and investing beyond its borders.
The same hold-the-line philosophy is needed to provide
job opportunities. The very mechanization that has permitted
our American firms to remain competitive with respect to
manufactured goods has reduced the number of manufacturing
workers by two million. These, together with the inexperienced
and unskilled, must seek jobs in distribution and other ser
vice industries. But rising salaries have induced both
mechanization and the self-service evident in super markets and
automats. In consequence, it is increasingly difficult for
youngsters to get employment. A hold-the-line policy comes
none too soon to provide jobs in construction, retailing, and
other service industries for the 1-1/3 million for whom
additional jobs must be provided each year.
To help implement a national policy of holding the line
on costs and prices, monetary policy should take into account
the marginal impact of such policy upon liquidity. The System
cannot do the entire national job alone, but such contribution
as it can make is its responsibility alone.
While recognizing the need for liquidity to be sufficient

5/7/63 -57-
to lubricate expansion, and for commercial banks to be
able to meet constructive loan demand (with some of our
resources still unused), there are hidden pitfalls to
which this Committee should be alert. These seem to be
of three kinds:
(1) Liquidity outside the commercial banks so
plentiful as to induce the exporting abroad
of capital funds, whether short or long.
(2) Liquidity so abetted by the creation of
bank credit as to induce speculation in
stocks, land, or inventories rather than
use for constructive purposes.
(3) The creation of bank credit of such an amount
that, when added to savings, it will induce
lending institutions to make imprudent loans
or investments.
The question is: how much liquidity is appropriate
at present?
This leads to the subordinate question: what bench
marks can be found to indicate when liquidity is becoming
too little or too great?
The clearest analogy I can think of is the task of
regulating the depth of water when irrigating a field.
Without enough, the crop will not be nourished; with too
much, the field will be overly wet ard excess water may
be lost to neighboring farms.
What benchmarks are usable, even if precise indicators
be unavailable? We need a range with identifiable lower
and upper limits that will signal when policy should be
modified. However important it is, at certain times, to
identify a lower limit, I shall confine myself today to an
effort to define, even crudely, the upper limit of the
liquidity that is now appropriate.
Clearly there is no sharp line of demarcation and so,
as other members of the Committee have done, I propose
experimental action in an effort to identify how much is
too much. The reason for experimentation is to use the
responses of the member banks and of the market place to
assist us in identifying the upper limit.
As soon as appropriate after the conclusion of the
present Treasury financing, I would favor a policy of
somewhat less ease and would reflect it in today's direc
tive. I would implement this policy by a reduction in free
reserves to a level under $200 million.
If the projections in the staff memorandum prove to
be correct, few if any reserves are likely to be needed until

5/7/63 -58-
the week ending May 29. In assessing from week to week
the impact of the policy I propose, the following indi
cators are relevant:
(a) A 90-day bill rate and a Federal funds rate
around the discount rate. At times, the bill rate
might well exceed the discount rate.
(b) Total bank deposits expanding at a more
moderate rate than at present so that banks will compete
less aggressively for short-term funds to be invested at
longer term. I would prefer, however, not to bring about
a contraction of the active money supply, nor a sharp
increase in the rate of deposit turnover. Under my pro
posal, the total of required reserves supporting private
deposits, currently projected to expand at a 3 per cent
annual rate, would increase at some lesser rate than at
present, but not at a rate so low as to cause the
reserves behind private demand deposits to decline. These
reserve indicators can be watched conveniently by reference
to the two charts regularly appended to the reserve projec
tion memorandum.
(c) Expansion of bank earning assets at a more
moderate rate without forcing the net disinvestment by
banks of their securities in order to accommodate legitimate
loan demand but with less incentive to seek out marginal
speculative risks or longer term risks. The expansion rate
would permit a further increase in bank holdings of securities
to the extent that banks acquire real savings and also permit
money supply growth in keeping with the transactions needs
of the economy.
Chairman Martin commented that at a certain point the formulation
of monetary policy necessarily becomes a matter of judgment. One must
weigh all of the available statistics and then reach conclusions on a
judgment basis. Over the past several months, he noted, the Committee
had been divided in the area of judgment, and there were evidences in
today's discussion of the part that this factor must play. It should
also be borne in mind, in appraising the interrelationship of monetary
policy and economic forces, that although at times monetary policy may

5/7/63 -59
be of crucial importance, it is normally a residual factor.
The Chairman also mentioned that from the time of the Treasury
Federal Reserve accord to the period when the dollar became no longer
invulnerable to outside pressure, which he would place in 1957 or 1958,
there had been a movement toward greater stability of interest rates,
to the benefit of everyone. Slight movements in either direction had
come to have more impact, and he hoped it would be possible to keep
interest rate moves within a relatively small range.
He happened to think, Chairman Martin continued, that the move
made by the Committee last December toward slightly less ease had been
quite important from the standpoint of the balance of payments and also
the domestic economy. He knew, for example, that several large
investment trusts bought securities following the Committee action in
December that they would not have touched before that time because
they were apprehensive that the Federal Reserve was going to follow a
policy of ease compounded on ease in attempting to stimulate the
domestic economy. There is a point, the Chairman observed, at which
further ease will not work toward economic stimulation. There is also
the practical problem that in a free economy lower interest rates may
help in picking up unsound credits, and in his opinion there had been
a steady deterioration in the quality of credit. He would be willing
to accept that development if it were necessary in order to foster
economic growth, but in his opinion the point at which easy money would

5/7/63 -60
further stimulate the economy had long since passed. This was the
critical question: Whether easy money was now working in reverse.
At the risk of being repetitious, the Chairman continued, he
remained of the belief that the balance of payments problem and the
domestic economic problem were not separable. It seemed to him, also,
that it should be recognized that the Federal Reserve was not going to
make the domestic economy--or break it--by taking certain actions.
The System should accept the indicators, as it saw them, and pursue a
flexible course of action. For a time he had felt that the Open Market
Committee was tending to get frozen into a pattern, although on the
whole he thought monetary policy had been operating well. Monetary
policy probably could take some credit--how much he did not pretend to
know--for developments during the past several months.
As he saw it, Chairman Martin said, the balance of payments
problem was growing worse. He had referred frequently to the possi
bility of a crisis, and he still felt that way. He did not think the
situation was yet at a crisis juncture, but rather that it was tending
in that direction, and in such circumstances the posture of the Federal
Reserve System was most important. As indicated by Mr. Young's remarks
and recent reports from other sources, monetary policy was under fire
from observers abroad. There were criticisms that nothing significant
was being done out of regard to the balance of payments. From that
standpoint, it would perhaps be desirable if the Committee could make
some decisive move. In his opinion, however, such a move was not

5/7/63 -61
feasible unless monetary policy had been trending for some time in a
particular direction.
Chairman Martin then said that on the basis of today's discus
sion it appeared that the period following the conclusion of the
current Treasury activity in the market would be as good a time as any
to move toward slightly less easy monetary conditions. Here he was
talking just about pulling a little on a rope that was already very
loose. He was not talking about anything very dramatic. It might be,
of course, that the Committee would decide later that this was not the
direction in which it should have moved, and it might want to pull back.
If the Committee waited too long, however, it might have to deal with
an active problem of inflationary pressures. In his opinion, there
was already a good bit of pressure in some areas that could build up
rapidly. If one waited until after the resulting price movements
actually occurred, he might wonder why he had not done something about
it before. It would be too late at that juncture. Far from stimulating
the economy, such inflationary pressures might well undermine the exist
ing level of activity and lead to a decline in employment.
Personally, the Chairman continued, he would like to see the
Committee move in the direction of slightly less ease, beginning about
May 15. It was difficult for him to believe that experimentation in
such direction could affect the economy adversely unless the current
improvement that had been discussed at this meeting was so fragile that

5/7/63 -62-
it could not continue in any event. If this was the case, he doubted
whether monetary policy could turn the tide.
Chairman Martin then proposed placing before the Committee as
a basis for decision a current economic policy directive that would
call for operations with a view to achieving slightly less easy monetary
conditions following the conclusion of the current Treasury refinancing.
There followed certain suggestions as to how such a directive
might appropriately be worded, and it was noted that a draft of direc
tive had been prepared by the staff for the Committee's consideration
in the event the discussion at this meeting suggested the possibility
of a decision to move in the direction of slightly less ease. The
draft directive was read to the Committee and copies were distributed,
following which certain minor modifications of the language were
suggested.
It was pointed out, in this connection, that the draft directive
was phrased in terms of achieving a slightly greater degree of firmness
in the money market than had prevailed in recent weeks, and question
was raised whether it might not be preferable to refer to a slightly
lesser degree of ease since current monetary policy was characterized
by a condition of ease. The discussion of this question brought out,
however, that the policy directives issued at recent meetings had
referred to a degree of firmness, as related to the money market,
which suggested that in the interest of consistency and for comparative

5/7/63 -63-
purposes there was something to be said for continuing the same terms
of reference. It was the consensus that the theory of consistency
recommended itself.
Chairman Martin then suggested that a vote be taken on the
proposed policy directive, in form reflecting the minor modifications
that had been mentioned.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York was authorized and directed, until
otherwise directed by the Committee, to
execute transactions in the System Open
Market Account in accordance with the
following current economic policy direc
tive:
It is the Committee's current policy to accommodate
moderate growth in bank credit, while putting increased
emphasis on money market conditions that would contribute
to an improvement in the capital account of the U.S. bal
ance of payments. This policy takes into consideration
the continuing adverse balance of payments position and
its cumulative effects and the improved domestic business
outlook, as well as the increases in bank credit, money
supply, and the reserve base in recent months. At the
same time, however, it recognizes the continuing under
utilization of resources.
To implement this policy, System open market operations
following the conclusion of the Treasury refunding operation
shall be conducted with a view to achieving a slightly
greater degree of firmness in the money market than has
prevailed in recent weeks, while accommodating moderate
reserve expansion.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,
Hayes, Balderston, Irons, King, and Shepardson.
Votes against this action: Messrs. Bopp, Clay,
Mitchell, Robertson, and Scanlon.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Open Market Committee

5/7/63 -64
would be held on Tuesday, May 28, 1963.
Mr. Hayes noted, as a matter of information, that plans were
under way, at the request of the Chairman of the House Banking and
Currency Committee, for a visit to the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York by the members of the Committee in the latter part of June. The
visit was to include, among other things, an explanation of the type
of operations conducted by the Trading Desk.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary