A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Goovefr nors the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, July 9, 1963, at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bopp
Mr. Clay
Mr. Irons
Mr. King
Mr. Mills
Mr. M itchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Scanlon
Mr. Shepardson
Messrs. Hickman, Wayne, ard Shuford, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Ellis, Bryan, and Deming, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta,
and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Baughman, Eastburn, Furth, Garvy,
Green, Holland, Koch, and Tow, Associate
Economists
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market
Account
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager System Open
Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors

7/9/63
-2
Mr. Hemmings, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Messrs. Mann, Black, Rawlings, Parsons, and
Grove, Vice Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Richmond,
Atlanta, Minneapolis, and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Willis, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston
Mr. Sternlight, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Bowsher, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the Committee
a report from the Special Manager of the System Open Market Account on
foreign exchange market conditions and on Open Market Account and
Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the period June 18 through
July 3, 1963, together with a supplementary report covering the period
July 5 through July 8, 1963. Copies of these reports have been placed
in the files of the Committee.
In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs
discussed current and prospective developmerts with respect to the U. S..
gold stock and the situation in the London gold market. As to the
exchanges, he noted that there was currently a brief breathing spell
following the termination of midyear window-dressing operations by
foreign banks. However, the dollar was generally weak across the board.
Mr. Coombs then described System operations in support of the
dollar against the German mark, for the purpose of which the System had
now drawn to the full extent of $150 million under its swap arrangement

7/9/63 -3
with the German Federal Bank. He also noted prospective Treasury
operations in this area.. Turning to the guilder, Mr. Coombs noted a
pending development that might provide more scope for purchases of
guilders on the market by the Federal Reserve, possibly enabling some
progress in repaying System drawings under the swap arrangement with
the Netherlands Bank.
Mr. Coombs reported that the central bankers in attendance at
the latest monthly meeting of the Bank for International Settlements
seemed encouraged by the recent moderate rise in U. S. short-term rates.
In all cases, they seemed to feel that a further rise would have
beneficial effects from the standpoint of tLe exchange markets. Nearly
all of the central banks represented at the meeting were strongly
tempted to employ credit restraint to deal with inflationary trends at
home, but were holding back out of deference to the U. S. balance of
payments position. The exception was France, where tight money
conditions seemed to be pulling in a great deal of short-term money,
mainly through the Euro-dollar market.
More generally speaking, Mr. Coombs said, central bank
resistance to financing of the U. S. balance of payments deficit seemed
to be stiffening, and in this respect he reviewed the situation in
several countries.. If firm central bank resistance should materialize,
U. S. gold losses no doubt would rise rapidly in the second half of
this year. In concluding his comments, Mr. Coombs expressed the view
that the dollar had become seriously vulnerable.

7/19/63 -4-
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the System Open Market Account trans
actions in foreign currencies during
the period June 18 through .July 8, 1963,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Coombs noted that the $50 million swap arrangement with
Austrian National Bank would mature July 24, 1963, while the swap
arrangements with the Bank of France and the German Federal Bank, in
the amounts of $100 million and $150 million, respectively, would mature
August 6, 1963. He recommended renewal in each instance for a further
period of three months.
Renewal of the three swap arrange
ments, as recommended by Mr. Coombs, was
approved unanimously.
Mr. Ccombs also noted that a $25 million equivalent drawing of
marks under the swap arrangement with the German Federal Bank would
mature August 6, 1963, and he recommended renewal for a period of three
months unless the System was able to effect repayment in the meanwhile.
Renewal of the drawing, if necessary,
was noted without objection.
This concluded the consideration of System foreign currency
operations.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report covering open market operations in U. S.
Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period June 18
through July 3, 1963, and a supplementary report covering the period

7/9/63
July 5 through July 8, 1963. Copies of these reports have been placed
in the files of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone commented
as follows:
The past three weeks have been particularly active ones.
At the outset of the period it was clear that very substantial
amounts of reserves would have to be provided in order to
offset heavy seasonal drains of funds from the banking system.
Our problem, as we then saw it, was how to put perhaps a
billion dollars into the market without exerting significant
downward pressure on short-term rates. Through June 28, a
week ago Friday, we had supplied about $750 million of reserves
with very little impact on prices and rates. Treasury bill
rates were virtually unchanged, while a few intermediate issues
were up two or three thirty-seconds, Interest rate expecta
tions were also little changed from those that emerged around
mid-Jun, after the System's policy move of May had been
digested by the market; that is, the market was anticipating
that rate levels would tend gradually upward over the months
ahead with an expected further improvement in business activity.
The possibility of an increase in the discount rate was
discussed and evaluated, but that possibility was regarded as
rather remote, and there was no significant body of opinion
that such a move might come soon.
On Monday, July 1, however, both of the market letters
that came out that day asserted with some emphasis that an
early increase in the rate, to 3-1/2 per cent, was by no means
a remote possibility, and indeed one of the letters ventured
the view that the rate would be raised before the end of this
month. This was followed the next day by a press article to
the same effect by the same authcr. The round of rate
discussion set off by these articles gathered force against the
background of the $65 million gold loss of the preceding week
and particularly against the background of the statements on
monetary matters made by the President on his European trip--
statements that were apparently construed by many as hints that
the Administration was planning to take more forceful measures
to deal with the balance of payments.
Rates began to adjust, and by the close last Friday three
month bill rates had moved up to the neighborhood of 3.10 per
cent. After the close that day, the market learned that

7/9/63 -6-
the free reserve figure for last week had fallen to below
$100 million--although it was generally understood that the
low level was associated with the large downward revision
of the previous week's free reserves. Yesterday morning
the market once again read market letters that, particularly
in one case, pointed to an early increase in the discount
rate. And throughout the day yesterda; the market read
ticker reports of Secretary Dillon's testimony before the
Joint Economic Committee, in which he spoke of the possibil
ity of a rise in short-term rates.
It was in this expectational setting that the market
approached yesterday's bill auction. While there was not a
great deal of selling by investos, there was very little
buying interest since it was almost universally felt.that
more attractive rates would soon be available. Rates thus
moved upward to close to 3.20 per cent in the auction itself,
and immediately following the auction outstanding bills
moved up to the neighborhood of 3.20 per cent also. In
conversations with the market late yesterday, I was informed
that dealers will very likely approach today's auction of
one-year bills with a view to bidding a rate that will give
them an equivalent bond yield of at least 3.50 per cent or
higher, thus protecting themselves against what many consider
the likelihood of a 3-1/2 per cent discount rate in the near
future.
While bill rates were moving up, yields in the inter
mediate and longer sectors were rising also. In the
intermediate market, the increases amounted to 10-15 basis
points for most issues, while in the longer end the increases
generally amounted to 4 or 5 basis points. Thus far, I
should add, yields on corporate and municipal obligations
have been little affected by the rise in yields on Treasury
issues.
Turning briefly to future Treasury financing, about the
only thing that is certain is the forthcoming refunding of
the August 15 maturities, the terms of which are scheduled to
be announced on July 24 or 25. The Treasury had tentatively
planned to do some cash financing in late July, as well as to
raise additional cash in today's one-year bill auction; but
its cash position is unexpectedly large, and it may decide to
defer any new cash financing until August, either as a part
of the refinancing or in a separate operation later that.
month.
I should like to return briefly to the free reserve
statistics published last week. Last Friday morning our
calculatLons showed that the free reserve figure for the week
ended Wednesday was $177 million. Shortly after 11 o'clock

7/9/63 -7-
on Friday we discovered that $85 million of that figure had
been cut away by a revision in country bank required
reserves dating back to the week ended June 26. I should
like to note that if we had available daily reserve data
from country banks--or from a significant sample of such
banks--we could quickly catch the kind of bad estimate that
led to so large a revision in the figures last week. I
would hope that the study now going forward on this matter
could be accelerated.
I suggest that the leeway for changes in the Account be
continued at $1.5 billion for another three weeks to allow
for the reversal of the seasonal factors that gave rise to
the recent heavy purchases--which, as you know, exceeded $1
billion.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the open
market transactions in Government securi
ties and bankers' acceptances during the
period June 18 through July 8, 1963, were
aproved, ratified, ard confirmed.
Chairman Martin then called for the usual staff economic and
financial reports beginning with Mr. Koch, who presented the following
statement on economic developments:
The economic information that has become available since
the last meeting of the Committee seems to me to support the
general view expressed then, namely, that economic expansion
has slackened somewhat, whether it be due to the usual summer
doldrums, the cutback in steel inventory buying, or some
other reasons, Business continues good, but does not appear
to be moving up very rapidly; and sentiment, which still is
quite cheerful, is a little less buoyant than it was in the
spring.
I reach this conclusion regarding the current economic
situation even though new data on a number of key areas are
encouraging.. Construction activity, for example, increased
further in June, sparked by another record high in residential
building. Apparently the President's anti-segregation actions
in the housing area have not yet dampened home construction.
The rate of unemployment was down slightly in June. It
continues, however, within the narrow, high range where it has
been fluctuating now for a year and a half. Our industrial

7/9/63
production index for June is likely to be up a little, or
at least unchanged, with the effects of a decline in steel
output on the index being about offset by those of a
temporary rise in auto assemblies.
Over-all accumulation of business inventories slackened
in April and May despite the accelerated stockpiling of
steel. With new orders for steel having receded sharply for
well over a month now, however, appreciable reduction in the
rate of steel inventory accumulation is in prospect, if it
has not already begun. It is still uncertain how much steel
inventory will be liquidated, how long the adjustment will
last, and how it will affect the general economy. On balance,
however, the liquidation is not likely to be a major disrupt
ing force in the economy. Users have apparently not built .up
as large inventories as last year, and the consumption of
steel has risen markedly. As a result, even with the recent
build-up in stocks, inventory/sales ratios in steel fabricat
ing industries are still rather Low by historical standards,
although in evaluating the adequacy of the current level of
these inventory/sales ratios one must allow for their longer
run general downdrift.
Incidentally, the fact that the recent steel settlement
involved smaller relative cost increases for the companies
than settlements in earlier years increases the possibility of
avoiding price pressures from the cost side in this, and
possibly in other durable goods industries. The steel wage
settleme it removed one uncertainty in the labor area, but
another important one remains with the continuing lack of
progress in the important rail negotiations.
In contrast to those of steel producers, new orders of
other durable goods manufacturers rose a little further in
May. New orders as a whole continued well above sales, and
as a result, unfilled order backlogs increased further. At
the end of May, the durable order backlog was almost 10 per
cent above the recent low reached last December.
New domestic auto sales also slackened a little in June
and were at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 6.9 million
cars as compared with the 7.3 million rate that had been
characteristic of the earlier months of the current model year
that began last October. Total retail sales were disappointing
again in June, and have changed little now for four months.
The latest consumer attitude surveys, those taken by the
Survey Research Center at the University of Michigan in May,
and by the Sindlinger Service more recently, are reasonably
consistent with the lagging retail sales figures. They show
some slackening in buying plans for durable goods from earlier

7/9/63
advanced levels, as well as reduced consumer confidence about
economic prospects. The surveys suggest that consumer buying
of durable goods may not soon resume its earlier brisk advance
unless income expands more rapidly. Other evidence supporting
this conclusion includes the recent above-average relationship
between consumer spending and disposable income and the
increased share of personal income needed in recent months to
repay instalment debt.
Announcements of price rises, which had been fairly
numerous in April and May, have been relatively few recently.
The weekly index for industrial commodity prices was little
changed in June, but its coverage of fabricated materials and
finished goods is small.
As to the relevance of recent economic developments taken
as a whole to the likely future course of the economy, most
observers still expect further econonic expansion later this
year and on into 1964, but some of the bloom may be off the
forecasts. In the first place, progress on the tax cut has
been slow. Although some cut is still widely anticipated, its
effective date is not expected before the beginning of 1964,
and its magnitude is likely to be less rather than more than
that proposed by the Administration.
Second, the recent slackened rise in consumer and Govern
ment spending means the greater likely dependence of further
economic expansion on business expenditures for plant and
equipment, an area of spending particularly difficult to
predict. Business capital spending actually declined in the
first quarter, but most observers stilllook for increases
throughout the rest of this year and into 1964, in part as a
result of the lagged effects of the new depreciation guidelines
and the investment tax credit. New capital appropriations of
Large manufacturing companies in the first quarter of the year,
th latest data of this kind available, were down sharply from
the fourth quarter of last year, but that quarter was unusually
high. Appropriations generally precede spending by from six
to nine months. Thus, evidence to date, taken as a whole,
suggests that the further rise in business capital expenditures
is likely to be moderate and gradual.
Mr. Holland presented the following statement on financial develop
ments:
It is obvious that market events of recent days have
created a special problem for the Committee in its delibera
tions today. A sizable proportion of financial market

7/9/63
participants are probably now operating under the assumption
that Federal Reserve policy is in the process of becoming
more restrictive. A variety of reasons have contributed to
this construction, as Mr. Stone has outlined in some detail.
This was undoubtedly one of those time. when the whole was
greater than the sum of its parts; that is, the seemingly
corroborative nature of several separate occurrences
produced a combined impact on market attitudes a good deal
sharper than they would have generated in isolation. Events
culminated yesterday in the sharpest rise in 3-month bill
yields in three years. The frequency of daily rate changes of
this size in the years before 1961, however, is a reminder of
the money market's innate ability to generate such fluctua
tions--and to weather them. Long-term rates, meanwhile, have
moved up relatively little. The resul: has been to create a
quite artificial current yield curve--(one so flat as to be of
doubtful viability, in the absence of strong official action
to prop up this short rate level, and perhaps also to hold
down long rates.
The consequences of these recent cevelopments are already
spreading beyond the money market proper. As midyear
approached, we began to hear of apparently sizable bank sales
of Government securities--including bills--to raise cash to
meet reserve requirements. In New York and Chicago city
banks alone, such sales totaled $316 million in the week
ending July 3. In the face of the sharp bill market drops on
Friday and Monday, however, we have since heard that some of
these selling programs may have been temporarily shelved.
In a sense, some bank divestment of Governments should
be regarded as appropriate at this stage, although the
abruptness of the latest developments in this respect can
give one pause. Up until the last few days, the banking sys
tem had shown remarkably little response to the modest
lessening of ease introduced by the System after mid-May.
Indeed, total bank credit, seasonally adjusted, jumped $4.6
billion in June, up from its more moderate pace of expansion
earlier in the spring. Little of this pick-up occurred in
the types of loans most directly associated with production
and consumption; the combined total of business loans, real
estate loans, farm loans, and consumer loans continued to
grow more or less at the same rate as before. The June bulge
rather reflected a big addition to Government securities
holdings, partly associated with subscriptions to the 4 per
cent bonds of 1970, and substantial acquisitions of municipals.
Along with these operations in the market came a sizable but
presumably party temporary demand for securities loans,
which banks also accommodated. Banks sustained this asset

7/9/63 -1-
increase and accompanying deposit expansion for a time by
paring teir excess reserves and by borrowing somewhat
more from the Reserve Banks. The public, for its part,
also held bank deposits high, partly by acting to
replenish demand balances drawn upon to make net payments
to the Treasury. Consequently, as our staff memorandum
shows, required reserves against private deposits held
close to the guideline throughout the past month. On
average during June, both money supply and time deposits
rose moderately further, capping a second quarter advance
that amounted to annual rates of growth of 2.4 per cent and
10.6 per cent, respectively.
The big bank deposit accruals during June, of course,
centered in Treasury accounts. They were fed chiefly by a
combination of smaller than expected budgetary expenditures
and bigger than expected proceeds fron the sales of the 4
per cent bonds. The $11 billion cash balance with which
the Treasury finished 1963 is so large, and its advance
refunding of late 1963 maturities has already proceeded so
far, that the debt managers face one of the lightest dollar
totals of July-December financing needs in recent years.
Two implications for monetary policy should be pointed out.
The Treasury will be putting less upward pressure on interest
rates and providing less expansive impetus to the banking
system in the months ahead--considerably less than was
thought likely even a few short weeks ago. As a corollary,
the Treasury will also be in a position to adapt its
policies to provide somewhat more room for monetary policy
maneuver than we are ordinarily accustomed to in the second
half of the year. As a concrete example, after the one
year bill roll-over today the Treasury has no need, from a
cash point of view, for approaching the market until its
end-of-July arrangements for the usual August refinancing.
If in fact the Treasury sells another bill strip in the
interim, it will be for its interest rate effect; and such
a sale can more easily be adjusted to make room for a
Federal Reserve policy change.
Whatever course of action the Treasury chooses, it is
likely to run down its cash balance considerably more than
seasonally during July. This should have the effect of
bolstering private deposits. Such a result may well turn
out to be a fortunate one, because it can provide some offset
to the contractive effect on private deposits and liquidity
that may well result from recent and prospective bank sales
of assets for adjustment purposes.

7/9/63 -12-
A part of this indicated bank asset: disposition is in
reaction to the higher level of borrowings that materialized
in the past six weeks. Reports indicate the higher average
level of Federal Reserve advances has involved a sub
stantially larger number of banks, and some for larger
amounts than before. There are thus far no more than the
beginnings of signs of repetitive borrowing by banks, of the
type that might in time call for a rise in the discount rate
to reinforce the discipline of administrative standards.
The key question that arises outof all these domestic
financial developments is whether or not policy should
permit a market move back to something like the status quo
ante, or whether it should now be made an additional notch
less easy, taking advantage of current developments in order
to render more permanent the greater tension that has
inadvertently come into the money market and the banking
system in recent days.. This latter tactic, you will recall,
was used with considerable success in the policy change last
December. On that occasion, however, the tightening
influence grew essentially out of a natural market tendency
toward accelerated credit expansion. The present situation,
in contrast, has developed in important part from market
expectations of a marked change in policy. With rate
relationships in the debt markets more vulnerable, and the
barking system appearing already to be in the throes of some
adjustment of its asset alignment, the immediate concern
would seem to be to guard against a cumulative reaction
developing in either area.
Even if the situation in the banking system itself were
not calling for lessened monetary ease. one might find
developments in the nonbank financial structure of a type
that could constructively be offset by greater pressure on
the banking system proper. But the latest round of
statistical reports on other financial sectors do not sug
gest this. The latest adjustments of credit conditions in
these sectors seem to be taking more the form of lower money
costs, or more widespread customer acccmmodation at con
ventional ceiling maturities and other terms, rather than
much further liberalization of maturity and loan-to-value
ceilings.
There is a still wider horizon of considerations, of
course, that must affect the ultimate choice of a current
monetary policy. But I think it is fair to say that the
situation within the domestic financial sphere would benefit
from a steady central bank hand on the tiller at this juncture.

7/9/63 -13-
Mr. Furth presented the following statement with respect to the
balance of payments:
On the basis of the fragmentary weekly data, the payments
deficit for June is tentatively estimated at less than $200
million. This would be about 40 per cent lower than the April
May average; but the decline was partly seasonal, and it still
leaves the second quarter total in the neighborhood of an
annual rate of $3-1/2 billion, about the same as the seasonally
adjusted first quarter rate and as the total for 1962. Net
gold sales still remained unusually small; even if Friday's
gold sale to France were put into the second quarter figure
(where it belongs for purposes of economic analysis), total
sales for that quarter would barely exceed $200 million. But
in assessing this figure it should be remembered that the net
short foreign-exchange position under System swaps was enlarged
in that quarter by $100 million, and that the Treasury borrowed
another $100 million in foreign currencies; in the absence of
these System and Treasury operations, a significant portion of
those amounts would presumably have been financed by larger
gold sales.
On a seasonally unadjusted basis, the payments deficit
apparently rose about $100 million between the first and the
second quarters. Our trade surplus (for which only figures
through May are available) increased by perhaps $500 million,
and the outflow on long-term security ,.ransactions was reduced
by $150 million; thus, there must have been a deterioration on
all other accounts of about $750 million. Net government
expenditures abroad, which were relatively modest in the first
quarter, probably rose somewhat, but this rise at most accounted
for a small fraction of the difference. There is no reason to
ass me a significant reduction in our surplus on service
transactions or a significant rise in our outflow on direct
investments; the bulk of the difference must, therefore, be
found in bank lending to foreigners, other outflows of short
term capital, and "errors and omissions."
Actually, bank-reported claims on foreigners rose in April
and May by a quarterly rate in excess of $500 million, in
contrast to a reduction of nearly $100 million-in the first
quarter. This would leave a balance of $100-$200 million
attributable to other short-term flows, including unreported
movements reflected in the "errors and omissions" item of the
balance of payments.
Part of the change from the first quarter reflected the
cessation of inflows rather than an increase in outflows. The

7/9/63 -14-
U. S. payments position no longer profited from the reversal
of year-end window-dressing, the repayment of a large
Japanese bank loan, the interruption of flows to Canada
because of political instability, and the inflow from Britain
due to uncertainties created by the failure of the Common
Market negotiations. Nevertheless, in the second quarter
short-term capital movements seem to have accounted for a
larger part of the deficit.t han in the earlier period.
At first glance, this development seems reassuring.
First, since our deficit basically represents an exchange of
liquid reserves for illiquid foreign assets, and since short
term claims on foreigners are less illiquid than other foreign
assets, the U.. S.. net liquidity position deteriorated
qualitatively less grievously than if the deficit had been
caused by a reduction in our current surplus or by an increase
in government expenditures or in private direct investments
abroad. Second, and more important, since short-term capital
movements are probably more directly influenced than any
other payments item by changes it monetary policies, it would
seem that it should be easier for the System to minimize
these outflows than either to raise the current account sur
plus or to reduce private long-term investments.
Unfortunately, the problem is not quite as simple as we
might wish. For the increase in the outflow of short-term
funds occurred in a period in which monetary ease was
slightly lessened and U. S.. short-term rates were slightly
raised, both absolutely and in relatior to rates in important
foreign financial centers.
In order to explain this paradox, we must try, in spite
of the paucity of data available at this time, to present a
tentative assessment of the composition of the short-term
capital outflow (including bank term loans). This outflow
was probably concentrated in five groups:
(1) A rise in medium-term bank loans to foreigners;
(2) A rise in bankers' acceptances for foreign account;
(3) The flow of U. S. corporate funds into the Euro
dollar market;
(4) An increase in money-market investments denominated
in foreign currencies; and
(5) An increase in "leads and lags" in commercial pay
ments.
(I) Most of the medium-term bank loans to foreigners
appear to have gone to countries such as Japan and Germany
where interest rates are very much higher than in the United
States; the difference is nearly 3 per cent for Japan and
probably 1 to 2 per cent for Germany. Nothing short of a

7/9/63 -15-
substantial rise in U. S. rates or a substantial lessening
of monetary ease could be expected to make such loans
significantly less attractive to both lenders and borrowers.
(2) The increase in acceptance credits in part probably
reflected the rise in U. S. foreign trade; in addition, there
was a more than proportionate increase in acceptances for
account of Japanese banks, which may be explained not only by
the rate differentials between Japan and the United States
but also by the restrictions on third-country financing in
other centers, especially in London.
(3) The flows to the Euro-dollar market presumably
respond to rate differentials in Euro-dollar and domestic
dollar markets. But while the exact relationship between
these markets is uncertain, there is some reason to believe
that Euro-dollar rates tend, in the longer run, to move
parallel with U. S. rates so that the differential need not
significantly vary in response to small changes in U..S.
rates.
(4) The flows to foreign money markets respond primarily
to covered rather than uncovered rate differentials. But
while uncovered differentials significantly narrowed between
the U. S. dollar and the Canadian dollar and changed little
between the dollar and the pound sterling, covered differ
entials moved against the U. S. dollar in both instances as
the Canacian dollar rose from a forward discount to a forward
premium and the forward discount on the pound sterling was
cut in half.
(5) Finally, the movement of leads and lags probably
reflected continuing if not increasing uncertainty about the
future value of dollar, which induces foreign exporters to
hedge against a possible further weakering of the dollar rate,
quite apart from any outright speculation on dollar devalua
tion.
In cases (4) and (5), the movements of funds might well
prove to be more easily influenced by a change in the
psychological climate than by the strictly financial
consequences of small variations in U. S. interest rates.
Thus, the possible confidence effect rather than the
arithmetic of rates and rate differentials might have to be
given primary consideration in assessing the impact of U. S.
monetary policies on short-term capital flows.
Chairman Martin noted at this point that Messrs. Robertson and
Ellis had recently returned from European trips during which each attended

7/9/63
the annual meeting of the Bank for International Settlements and also
visited a number of the European central banks.
At the invitation of the Chairman, Mr. Robertson presented
substantially the following comments:
First, let me say it was a most stimulating and enjoy
able trip. We (Mr. Holland and I) were graciously received
everywhere. In general, I was pleasantly surprised by the
moderateness of the views expressed on the U. S. position,
and the constructive nature of the comments received.
We visited London, Amsterdam, Copenhagen, and Stockholm,
then the BIS annual meeting at Basle, and afterwards Vienna,
Paris, and Frankfurt. We talked mostly to central bankers,
but also to various officials of the Ministries of Finance,
academic economists, officers of foreign commercial banks,
and officers of American bank branches abroad.
Literally everyone we talked with emphasized the long
range strength of the U. S. economy--its competitive ability,
its comparatively fine record of cost and price stability.
This meant to them that our balance of payments problem was
a relatively short-run, transitional thing that could be
dealt with accordingly. Some put less emphasis on our
unemployment problem than others, but it also was recognized.
Almost everyone recognized that the best policy approach
to both our domestic and balance of payments problems was the
stimulation of demand at home, with the aim of producing
rising business activity and higher interest rates as a
natural consequence. A good deal of optimism was expressed
about the U. S. situation because of our good performance on
the cost front, signs of improving business activity, and
indications that a tax cut stimulus is coming closer to
reality.
When it came to policy prescriptions, views differed as
to (a) whether anything more needed to be done on the policy
front to fill in during the transition period, and (b) if so,
what should be done. The majority seemed satisfied that the
best course was to push for improving business activity by
maintaining monetary ease and making efforts to get the
supplemental stimulus of a tax cut as soon as practicable.
These included chiefly the British and Scandinavian officials,
but also all of the academic economists we talked to in the
various countries. Most of these also said pointedly that
some observers, including perhaps the U.. S. itself, put too

7/9/63 -17-
much weight on the balance of payments deficit and, especi
ally, the ability of monetary policy to curtail it. They
expressed the view that there was a fundamental distinction
between a deficit on current account and a deficit on
capital account--the former being bad, the latter being
more in the nature of an investment in the future. Several,
for example, volunteered the comment that they would rather
be in the U. S. position than the Swiss position.
Some pointed out that monetary tightening in the U. S.
would have several disadvantages. Not only might it slow
down U. S. domestic activity, but any interest rate
increases might also compel others to raise their rates.
Several spokesmen maintained that if the U. S., U. K., and
Canada together held their short rates in line--or even
reduced them--the capacity of the Continent to receive
funds was not large enough relative to the resources of
these three countries- to be a serious threat in the short
run. To be sure, such movements could be of sufficient
size compared to the size of the receiving country to partly
offset any tightening of rates for domestic reasons to curb
inflationary development. In this sense, higher interest
rates in the U. S. could make it easier for France, Germany,
and the Netherlands to raise rates to deal with their
domestic problems; but it would make it harder for us to
deal with our domestic slack, and woul have little or no
over-all benefit in reducing the capital outflow.
A second group felt that, even though the prospect over
the longer run was favorable, something more needed to be
done now to reduce the deficit in the near future. But this
group fell into two camps. The restrictionists felt moder
ately higher interest rates might not do a great deal to
slow us domestically, but neither would they reduce the
capital outflow. They would not mind higher rates, but for
real effectiveness they favored d.rect controls--usually at
least on new capital issues in the U. S. market, but
sometimes also on foreign lending by U. S. banks. Actually,
they seemed to be bothered mostly by di-ect investments by
U. S. corporations abroad (a number of striking examples
were cited to us); still, no one (with one possible
exception) seemed prepared to recommend any direct controls
over direct investments at this time. In so far as controls
over loans and capital issues are concerned, these people
suggested they were feasible in the environment of Europe
and would be accepted there, not as a sign of weakness but as
a sign of determination on our part.

7/9/63 ,-18-
But these restrictionists were in the distinct minority.
Each had at least one colleague who felt differently--favor
ing some action to dampen flows, but by general action
rather than direct controls because of the inequities,
leakages, and general inappropriateness of such controls for
a key currency. Two who were outspoken on this point felt
their own experiences with direct controls had demonstrated
the unworkability of such controls over the long run. When
we pressed them concerning the dampening domestic effects of
tightening U. S. money policy prior to the achievement of
better business, I was impressed with their inclination to
choose to wait out the improvement in U. S. business, with
whatever policy mix we thought we could manage, rather than
jumping to direct controls in the interim.
The often-expressed view was that all that was needed
was the start of a declining trend in our balance of payments
deficit; with that, a change in market attitudes could be
expected that would accelerate the reflow of dollars. Some
even said that before many years we might be faced again with
a dollar gap.
Clearly there exists some restiveness over increasing
holdings of dollars at this juncture. Discussions tended to
indicate a desire for more multilateral understandings; for
example, on U. S. Treasury issues denominated in foreign
currencies, on the desirability for th U. S. to make an IMF
drawing, and on the need to harmonize gold reserve ratios.
The "push" behind these ideas stems partly, I think, from
the feeling that we (the U. S.) can manage to borrow more
bilaterally than we can multilaterally (and I think that is
right).
There also seems to be an increasing worry about the
Continent and its inflation. But this worry has resulted in
diverting some attention from the previous preoccupation with
the U. S. balance of payments deficit. The concern with
European inflation, however, did not extend to fear that it
was getting out of hand. International competition and the
application of governmental policies were generally expected
to hold future price trends within not too unreasonable
bounds. "Wage drift" and "creeping inflation" were the typical
phrases applied to the current and prospective situation.
Every country other than France and Holland spoke out
strongly on the need to move ahead with more economic
coordination, for a whole variety of reasons. Most recognize
that this means a tendency toward more uniform monetary
policies in Europe, and some need to open up capital markets,
at least to undertake net capital exports more freely. Most

7/9/63 -19-
also recognize that this would eventually leave fiscal
policy as the only governmental policy which could still be
used very differently in different countries to deal with
differing national situations. Therefore, most speak of
the need to develop more flexible and responsible fiscal
policy machinery. In this connection, Sweden has made real
progress with its investment reserve program. In the
interim, however, most European countries are now having to
orient monetary policy more toward their own internal
problems, and this seems to be making for a somewhat more
sympathetic view of our own situation as well.
In conclusion, I can say that I found not one single
bit of evidence among the officials with whom I spoke of lack
of confidence in the basic soundness of the dollar, despite
my efforts to draw them out in this respect. Some even
suggested that much of the talk about the underlying strength
or weakess of the dollar emanated from within the U. S.
itself. While some countries may be holding more dollars
than they would like to hold, no one expressed fears with
respect thereto. One or two of the more candid of the dollar
holders said they had no worry about dollar devaluation, for
if we should ever devalue they would have to devalue, too,
thereby avoiding any loss on their dollar holdings, but more
importantly, thereby also negating any gain to the U. S.
balance of payments position. Because they think the
responsible officials in both the U. S. and elsewhere are
wise enough to foresee these futile consequences of a U. S.
devaluation, they feel sure it will not happen.
Of course, everyone recognizes that the U. S. cannot go
on forever with a continuing deficit in our balance of
payments, but there seems to exist an underlying confidence
in the strength and competitive ability of the American
economy which in the long run will carry us back to a
suitable balance of payments position.
There followed a general discussion based on the impressions
reported by Mr. Robertson, in the course of which Mr. Hayes--referring
back to Mr. Robertson's statement that interest rate increases in the
U. S. might compel other countries to raise their rates--said that in
the case of one major country that Mr. Robertson presumably had in mind,

7/9/63 -20
Mr. Hayes had received a distinct impression from a high official that
that country's rates would not necessarily follow ours upward.
Chairman Martin then turned to Mr. Ellis, who said that he
concurred in many respects with Mr.. Robertson's summarization as just
presented, alchough there were naturally some differences in emphasis
in their views. As an illustration, he would start with the observa
tion that in the ten countries he had visited the primary concern
quite logically was not with the U. S. balance of payments problem
but with their domestic situations. The people with whom he had
visited were concerned principally about the relationship of their
respective countries to the United States insofar as the latter's
problems affected their own economies adversely. The Scandanavians,
for example, were anxious to continue to receive dollars to offset
their current account deficits; they could regard seriously any
interference with access to the U. S. capital market. On the other
hand, the French and the Germans disliked the pressure on their
internal markets occasioned by the inflow of capital and felt that the
U. S. should take action to stem the outflo of capital.
Of the impressions that had remained with him longest,
Mr. Ellis said, the attitudes toward gold were dominant. The French
were concerned that their gold ratio was not as high as the ratio in
some other countries. The possibility was suggested of a kind of
gentlemen's agreement among central banks to the effect that they would

7/9/63 -21
not hold gold above a certain percentage of total reserves. In
Holland, on the other hand, it was said that the holding of gold was
a central bank duty and that there should be an agreement for a
minimum holding of gold by each central bank. The Danes and others
in Scandanavia[hsiacd] low gold ratios but liked them because they could
invest dollars and earn on their reserves.
The concern expressed on an intellectual level throughout
Europe, Mr. Ellis continued, was that the U. S. seemed to be warding
off what was referred to by some as the discipline of the gold
standard. There were some suggestions about the possibility of the
U. S. going to the International Monetary Fund.
Mr. Ellis said that the principal difference he might have
with Mr. Robertson's summary had to do with the matter of timing. It
was true that the Europeans urged expansion in the U. S. that would
help to resolve the balance of payments problem, but the technique
they suggested seemed to envisage higher interest rates created by
strengthening demands. They differed on how soon they would expect
interest rates to rise in the U. S., but some seemed to expect that
a rise should occur rather quickly.
Mr. Ellis indicated that he had detected a general lack of
confidence that higher interest rates alone were going to resolve the
balance of payments problem. Nevertheless, it was suggested that they
would have some effect on short-term outflows. They would also have a

7/9/63 -22
psychological effect, by showing a willingness on the part of the U. S.
to use monetary policy for balance of payments purposes. Likewise, it
was suggested that a discount rate increase would strengthen the
position of the U. S. Treasury when it attempted to negotiate further
on financing the balance of payments deficit.
After expressing appreciation to Messrs. Robertson and Ellis
for their presentations, Chairman Martin said that at this point-
prior to the usual go-around of views on monetary policy--he would
like to make certain comments, not with a view to influencing anyone's
position but with the thought of providing everyone as much information
as possible. By way of introduction, he noted that some time ago, at
a meeting of the Open Market Committee, there was a suggestion to the
effect that it would be desirable to work toward a package deal, in
which the Federal Reserve would participate, for coping with the
balance of payments situation. At that time, the Chairman recalled,
he had pointed out hazards that he felt might be involved from the
standpoint of the position of the Federal Reserve System. Yet it must
be recognized that there are two sides to every issue.
Since then, Chairman Martin continued, he had participated at
the cabinet level in discussions of the balance of payments. One such
meeting, held in late April, included participants from the Treasury,
Defense, and State Departments, the Council of Economic Advisers, and
the Bureau of the Budget. While there were no specific decisions, he

7/9/63 -23
thought everyone came away from the meeting, with a conviction that the
problem should not be allowed to linger indefinitely, that it would
have a damaging effect on the business picture if it lingered
indefinitely, and that it would have to be attacked on a broad front.
He was careful at that time, the Chairman said, as in all discussions,
to express only a personal point of view and to make it clear that he
was expressing only his own personal views. He also made it clear that
the Federal Reserve System retained te right of willingness or
unwillingness to participate in any general program that might be
evolved,,
On June 10 there was another meeting with the President, toward
the end of which he (Chairman Martin) mentoned that there were two
schools of thought within the Federal Reserve System on the use of
monetary policy in relation to the balance of payments problem.
Personally, he told the group, he was convinced that monetary policy
alone would not solve the problem. He also painted out--and he continuec
to believe--that there was some similarity between the current situation
and the days prior to the Treasury-Federal Reserve accord when arguments
were heard that flexible interest rates would accomplish little or
nothing, and that their use would he disastrous to the economy, and that
even modest rate changes would have a dramatic impact. In his opinion
the extreme positions, in either direction, were not sound. Today it
was heard frequently that interest rates would be of little avail in

7/9/63 -24
dealing with the outflow of funds, yet in the past few years the
treasurers of large corporations had become international operators.
They were no longer going to sit by in the same way as 10 or 15 years
ago, and the development of the Euro-dollar market to its present
magnitude had been a reflection of these activities. He had told the
meeting on June 10 that he questioned very much whether one could
any longer be an isolationist with respect to interest rates any more
than politically. In his opinion this was one of the factors in the
over-all situation. Everything possible ought to be done on the
military front, in the foreign aid field, and in other directions before
any move was made toward direct controls or before sustaining a
substantial loss of gold, and he would hope that monetary policy would
make some contribution, at least to demonstrate whether it could have
any significant influence.
As a result of the June 10 meting, Chairman Martin continued,
it was agreed to set up a working party to make an evaluation at the
staff level without committing any of the principals, and with full
understanding of the Federal Reserve's status. He had requested
Mr. Noyes to represent him on this staff working party, which also
included representatives of the Treasury, the Council of Economic
Advisers, and the Budget Bureau. Copies of a paper prepared by that
group under date of July 5, 1963, had been distributed to the members
of the Open Market Committee on a confidential basis at the beginning
of this meeting. This paper presented staff estimates of the effects

7/9/63 -25
on the balance of payments, on the domestic economy, and on the budget
of a progran tat would include a rise in the Federal Reserve discount
rate to 3-1/2 per cent; a target Treasury bill rate of 3-1/4 to 3-3/8
per cent; a Federal Reserve policy that would supply normal seasonal
needs for reserves, plus normal reserve growth, through purchases of
intermediate and longer term securities to the maximum extent possible;
a debt management policy that would to the greatest feasible extent
rely upon bill financing rather than issuance of intermediate- and
long-term securities for meeting the Treasury's cash and refunding
needs (the later two points were designed to minimize adverse domestic
impacts of the program); a rise in interest rate ceilings on time
deposits sufficient to permit banks to continue to compete for such
deposits in the face of rising bill rites; intervention, if necessary,
in the foreign exchange markets to maintain as far as possible existing
spreads between spot and forward rates; attempts to obtain the
cooperation of other countries in pursuing interest rate policies that
would be consistent with the objectives of this program and, to the
extent possible, in persuading their banks to reduce their borrowing in
the Euro-dollar market; and announcement of the program in a way that
would make clear its limited objectives and avoid damaging effects on
the interest rate expectations of asset holders.
hairman Martin pointed out that he had not subscribed to the
paper as yet.. It was a staff paper, and it might not be approved by

7/9/63 -26
the principals. However, it represented an effort to bring together
divergent points of view.
The Chairman then turned to Mr. Noyes, who commented that the
working party had endeavored to look into the basis for varying
estimates of the possible impact on the domestic economy and on the
balance of payments of a change in the discount rate from 3 to 3-1/2
per cent. It was apparent that at least in part this difference was
due to differing assumptions as to the ancillary conditions. After
these assumptions were clarified, the working party devoted itself to
a refinement and more formal restatement of them, and to an apprai;al
of the impact of a discount rate change under these special conditions.
Basically, the group's paper concluded tha,, if successfully maneuvered,
an increase of 1/2 per cent in the discount rate, and of about 3/8 per
cent in the bill rate, without a reduction of credit availability and
any increase in long-term rates would produce some not inconsiderable
benefits for the balance of payments with only very moderate restrictive
implications for the domestic economy.
In further discussion, Chairman Martin referred to testimony
given yesterday by Secretary of the Treasury before the Joint Economic
Committee in connection with a special study of the balance of payments,
adding that copies of the Secretary's statement would be available after
this meeting for any of the members of the Committee who might want to
have them. The Chairman pointed out that the Secretary had consistently

7/9/63 -27
made it clear that any final decision on a matter such as a discount
rate change was within the province of the Federal Reserve System.
The Secretary, of course, could not conscientiously refrain from
expressing his own best judgment.. It was impossible to live in a
vacuum, the Chairman said, but he thought it could not be alleged that
pressure had been brought to bear on the Federal Reserve.
The Chairman noted that he had also caused to be distributed
to the Committee copies of a memorandum marked "administratively
confidential" from the. Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers
to the President and Cabinet dated July 3, 1963, on the economy in
1963. He (Chairman Martin) emphasized that the distribution of this
memorandum and of the staff working party paper was not intended in
any way to urge anyone to change his position. They were distributed
simply to supply as much information as possible.
As he saw it, the Chairman added, the problem was one of main
taining for the Federal Reserve System a proper degree of independence,
while at the same time allowing it to have a role in the general pclicy
making rocess. He also commented that it was understood that the
President might make a speech on the balance of payments later this
month, in which reference presumably would be made to all of the various
measures that would have been undertaken to deal with the problem. The
President, he added, was without doubt as sincerely concerned about the
balance of payments as anyone around the table at this meeting.

7/9/63 -28-
Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments and
views on economic conditions and monetary policy beginning with
Mr. Hayes, who presented the following statement:
The fundamental conditions on which monetary policy must
be based do not seem to have changed materially since our
last meeting. The domestic economy has continued to move up
and further expansion is likely, although there are some
uncertainties in the outlook and the pace of the advance may
slacken in the next few months. On the other hand, further
heavy balance of payments deficits continue to undermine the
international strength of the dollar, and the need for
concerted and effective action to defend the dollar becomes
ever more apparent.
On the domestic side there may have been some slight
deterioration of business sentiment, partly reflecting
uncertainty over the effects and timing of inventory
readjustments in the wake of the steel settlement--also
reflecting the usual summer letdown, some doubt about the
strength of consumer demand, and concern lest the civil rights
struggle have both direct adverse effects on business activity
and indirect adverse effects by delaying a tax cut. While
retail buying has been relatively sluggish on a high plateau,
too much has been made, in my judgment, of the slippage of
consumer sentiment indicated by the University of Michigan
survey, since this and other surveys generally show buying
intentions at a high level. Moreover, in contrast to the
doubts about the consumer picture, the outlook for plant and
equipment spending appears to be on firmer ground. For the
first time, plans to increase outlays on plant and equipment
are beginning to show up in the monthly series of new orders
and contract awards. The housing picture continues to show
greater strength.
Bank credit apparently expanded vigorously in June, and
for the first half of the year as a whole credit growth has
proceeded at the same brisk rate as in 1962. The money supply
advanced in June, in spite of the exceptionally large build-up
of Treasury deposits. There is some slight indication that
New York banks' eagerness to seek new loans is being affected
by concern over the extent to which they can hold on to
certificates of deposit if the rates thereon, as limited by
Regulation Q, begin to fall behind the rates on competing market
instruments. Indeed, the outstanding volume of certificates of

7/9/63
deposit of New York City and Chicago banks has already de
clined from the peak reached at the end of May.
Although very preliminary balance of payments statistics
indicate some decline in the deficit from May to June, the
second quarter report will probably be at least as unsatis
factory as that for the first quarter. From a longer
perspective the fact stands out that, contrary to the
experierce during earlier cyclical upswings when offsetting
changes occurred in the trade and capital accounts, in the
current business expansion our balance of payments has been
exposed simultaneously to larger imports and increasing
capital outflows.
While there is no way of knowing just when the situation
will become critical, the dollar has clearly reached a
vulnerable stage. The forthcoming gold losses caused by
French purchases will tend to unsettle the exchange markets,
and there are increasingly ominous signs of apprehension and
impatience among central bankers in Europe. It behooves us
to demonstrate that progress is being made on the balance
of payments front before this apprehension reaches crisis
proportions. My associates and I have made a number of
careful appraisals of recent short-te n capital outflows
and of the probability that a moderate increase in the dis
count rate and short-term market rates might materially
affect these flows. I am impressed by the fact that the
April-May aggregate of capital outflows in only three
specific categories--acceptance financing of foreign bor
rowers, placement of time deposits in Canadian banks, and
term loans by American banks to foreign borrowers--came to
about $550 million. For years there has been a heavy short
term drain, taking many forms, and it seems wholly reasonable
to believe that an appreciable firming; of short-term rates
in this country would check the flow ,nd might even bring
a reversal. In addition, it could have very important
psychological effects by signaling to our friends abroad,
as well as to our own citizens, the determination of the
System to maintain a strong dollar.
Accordingly, I would hope that the System would be pre
pared to take positive action as soon as possible in the form
of a 1/2 per cent increase in the discount rate. I have no
doubt that our directors will be prepared to do their part,
as they have felt for some time that we should be giving
greater emphasis to our international responsibilities. My
present intention is to recommend action to our directors
this Thursday.

7/9/63 -30-
Against the background of the demand-supply situation
existing in financial markets, and in view of the widespread
expectation in these markets that a d.scount rate rise is a
clear prospect, it is my belief that a prompt discount rate
increase would have minimum undesirable domestic effects.
The. rise in market rates over the past few days is such
that a 1/2 per cent increase in our rate has been largely
discounted, as indicated particularly by the market's
expectation that the one-year bill toay may be auctioned at
a rate in the neighborhood of 3-1/2 per cent. This raises
the question whether the customary even-keel considerations
apply in these circumstances. Many, perhaps most, market
participants anticipate that the change will be made this
week, both because one-year bill auctions have come to be
regarded as largely routine and because, as I just noted,
today's auction has so substantially discounted a 3-1/2 per
cent discount rate.
Indeed, if the rate should not be raised this week,
there is some danger that investors would be enticed into
committing funds being held off the market, with a consequent
rate decline that in turn would be abruptly reversed if the
rate should be raised on the 18th of July. It seems needless
to subject the market to this kind of whipsaw and to the
demoralizing effects of an additional week of great
uncertainty.
Moreover, the rate increase of recent days has generated
momentum, that it would be unfortunate to lose. The positive
impact abroad of the recent rise in our market rates would
be strengthened and confirmed by early discount rate action.
A week of delay could cause us to lose that momentum and
could create abroad an impression of indecision. Finally,
I should note that the testimony yesterday by the Secretary
of the Treasury has helped set the stage for action this
week.
As for open market policy, I should think any change in
policy should be deferred until the discount rate is
increased. It is hard at this juncture to gauge the degree
of pressure required to make the discount rate move reason
ably effective in its influence on the level of short-term
market rates. In order to get a desirable degree of benefit
in this respect from the discount rate rise, it would probably
be well to try to achieve and then maintain a three-month
bill rate of around 3-3/8 per cent to 3-1/2 per cent, and
this might call for free reserves averaging less than they
have and perhaps ranging from $100 million down to zero. On

7/963 -31--
the other hand, it is conceivable that the rate objective
could be achieved with hardly any further reduction in
free reserves--and certainly the Committee's aim should be
to keep them as high as proves to be consistent with this
rate objective.
Thus open market poliay might well be used, following
the discount rate increase, to offer reassurance to those
who might fear a general tightening of credit all along the
line. Expectational effects on long-term rates might be
minimized by this means, as well as by use of swaps to
whatever extent they may be practicable. Furthermore, it
might be well to accompany the rate action with a statement
that it is being taken solely for balance of payments
reasons.
The directive might well. be modified to indicate the
Committee's willingness to lend open market support to the
extent required to any discount rate action, if and when it
may be taken by the System.
I should like to urge again that the Board of Governors
consider increasing the interest rate ceilings on 3-month
and 6-month time deposits under Regulation Q to 3-1/2 per
cent ano 3-3/4 per cent, respectively, leaving some sub
stantial leeway above current market dates, and that this
be done without reference to possible discount rate action-
although, if such action is taken, a move with respect to
Regulation Q would lend appropriate support to the major
policy move.
Of course, monetary policy cannot be expected to solve
the balance of payments problem alone; and I have strong
hopes that the Administration will contribute other
important elements in the near future to a concerted program,
besides lending moral support to the System with respect to
the discount rate action itself. From the important stand
point of maintaining the maximum practicable degree of
inaependence of the System within the government, I think it
would be greatly preferable for the System to act in advance
of, rather than after, any Administration announcement of a
systematic attack on the balance of payments problem. Let
me add that it is not necessary that we see clearly at this
time the means of eliminating the deficit entirely. The
dollar's position will be immeasurably strengthened if the
country can demonstrate, abroad and at home, that it is
embarking on a program that promises substantial progress
along this path.

7/9/63 -32
Mr. Shuford said that after studying the various elements of
the situation last week in preparation for this meeting, he had
concluded that he would prefer no change in monetary policy at this
time, with no change in the discount rate. This conclusion reflected
mainly two factors. In the first place, he had some feeling that
there had not been time fully to evaluate the effects of the recent
policy shift toward a lesser degree of ease. Second, it seemed that
there were considerable elements of uncertainty in the economy,
including the steel situation and the railroad labor dispute.
In the past, Mr. Shuford continued, he had expressed the view
that monetary policy had a role to play in connection with the balance
of payments problem, that it had, in fact, played an appropriate role,
and that it could continue to have some, although perhaps a short run,
effect. On occasions he had questioned suggestions for changes toward
lesser monetary ease, mainly because of the domestic economy but also
because he had felt that any benefit from the balance of payments
standpoint might be more or less temporary. Also, he had believed that
there were other areas in relation to the balance of payments that were
more fundamental and more important, and therefore deserved forceful
attention. There was also the question of timing in considering changes
in monetary policy in relationship to steps being taken in other areas.
It now appeared, however, that those other areas were receiving active
attention and that more forceful steps were being planned and would be

7/9/63 -33-
taken. Accordingly, even though he was still concerned about the
domestic economy, with its unutilized resources, and while he still
felt that action in areas other than monetary policy was fundamental
to correction of the balance of payments problem, he would subscribe
to the general outlines of a policy such as set forth by Mr. Hayes.
As he understood it, this would envisage an increase of 1/2 per cent
in the discount rate and no substantial change in the thrust of open
market operations until after the discount rate move had been made
and the results could be appraised.
Mr. Bryan reported that the latest available statistics for
the Sixth District were rather mixed. Employment was up, but
manufacturing payrolls were down. Unemployment was up slightly,
while retail sales continued sluggish at a high level. Personal
income was up, along with bank loans and irvestments. In agriculture
there had been some relief from drought. In general, it was his
impression that the District figures did not show up as well as the
national figures, but he was not certain that the difference was too
significant. Similar variations between the District and national
figures had been seen before, and they had ironed themselves out in
due course.
From the national standpoint, it seemed to Mr. Bryan that the
current figures exhibited strength, even though there was certainly
no evidence of boom conditions. The inventory situation seemed to

7/9/63 -34
contain an element of strength; while inventories had been tending to
increase, the ratio of inventories to final domestic takings had gone
down. Meantime, the narrowly defined money supply was up about 3 per
cent on a year-to-year basis. The total money supply, including time
and savings deposits, was up 7.7 per cent, and liquid assets were up
7.8 per cent. Looking at the total picture, he had considerable
optimism regarding the domestic business situation.
As far as monetary policy was concerned, Mr. Bryan expressed
the view that the System was in a difficult situation.. It was a
matter of trying to reconcile elements that seemed almost irreconcilable.
As to the balance of payments, he concurred in the view that the
problem was indeed serious, perhaps almost of crisis proportions. The
System was being called upon to consider attempting to remedy this
problem in some degree through monetary policy, but he thought it was
easily demonstrable that the problem had not been caused by the rate
of monetary expansion in this country vis-a-vis the world. As to the
domesti situation, the unemployment problem was properly a matter of
concern. However, there seemed to have been a complete divorcement of
value theory from employment theory, and unskilled manpower had been
priced out of the market. Also, there seemed to be a tendency to
bemoan the growth rate and overlook the fact that economic growth was
being inhibited by factors such as Longer vacations, shorter work hours,
and the pouring of savings into a lot of things that would not stand
the test of the market.

7/9/63 -35
Mr. Bryan went on to say that he had found appealing the
reference at a recent meeting to "neutral" monetary poliy. If
monetary policy could assume a posture of reutrality in the present
struggle of varying elements, that would have an attraction to him,
but unfortunately he did not know that a definition of neutrality had
quite been reached. Perhaps it would be signified by free reserve
figures around the zero point, with some excursions into the free re
serve category and at other times a dip into net borrowed reserves.
As to the discount rate, Mr. Bryan found himself uncertain as
to the proper posture of the System at this time. A discount rate
move probably would have considerable announcement effect and lead to
charges that the System was preoccupied with the balance of payments
problem in the formulation of monetary policy. Also, such an
announcement might cause the market to anticipate further monetary
actions. If a discount rate increase to 3-1/2 per cent had already
been discounted by the latest spectaclar developments in the short
term market, the System might be under some compulsion to make the
new discount rate the effective market rate, and he was not sure how
much in the way of open market operations would be required toward that
end. On balance, Mr. Bryan said, his preference would be to let the
System's operations in the supplying of reserves speak for themselves
and then to follow with acticn on the discount rate.
Mr. Bopp said that there was little new to report from the
Third District. The economy continued sluggish, and the difficulties

7/9/63 -36
that had been reported on previous occasions persisted. Over a long
period the District had shown less growth than the national economy.
It suffered more in periods of recession and gained less in periods
of expansion.
Mr. Bopp went on to say that since the previous Committee
meeting he had studied further the memorandum from Mr. Coombs on the
position of the dollar and also had read the statement on liquidity
and monetary policy presented by Mr. Young at the meeting of Working
Party 3 of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
held in Paris on June 19, 1963. Beca se of their cogency, he would
u
like to quote certain excerpts from Mr. Young's paper, one of which
was as follows:
If bank credit had been less available and interest rates
higher, capital spending would doubtless have been even less
expansionary than it was. Considering the delicate and
uncertain balance of expansionary forces and U. S. margins
of unused capacity and manpower, the result might well have
been a full-scale and deflationary recession in the U. S.
rather than a slow expansion.
This was still possible, Mr. Bopp suggested, although Mr. Young's com
ments related to the situation in the past couple of years. Referring
further to Mr. Young's paper, Mr. Bopp quoted as follows:
Unless demands are vigorous, rates can be raised only by
reducing the supply of bank credit--possibly to the point
of deflationary contraction in the volume of cash balances
.... Firm action to reduce the internal supply of loanable
funds in order to make foreign lending less attractive in
the past year or two could have had an adverse effect on
domestic spending, and if undertaken through a crash program

7/9/63 -37-
would have had serious repercussions on the domestic economy
and in turn on the international economy. Surely a better
way to reduce foreign lending is to foster domestic
expansion so that the attraction of U. S. funds for external
placement would be significantly reduced.... Recently, economic
developments in the U. S. have been ercouraging. If re
surgence of expansive tendencies really carries through,
impelled in part by tax reduction, gr; dual reduction in U. S.
credit availability would be possible. In their duty to
resist possible future speculative tendencies and keep U. S.
industry competitive internationally, the U. S. monetary
authorities may be expected to pursue policies less conducive
to credit ease than in the last year. Some adaptation in
policy toward less ease occurred near the close of last year,
and further adaptation has taken place recently. Whether and
when still further steps will be taken is at this point in
time uncertain.. Given our balance of payments problem, there
would be no hesitancy in taking additional steps, if domestic
activity was showing strong upward momentum, but we are too
wary of economic forecasting to predict such strength now....
In my personal judgment, the monetary policy rein in the U. S.
is probably more taut now than at the comparable stage of any
earlier postwar cyclical expansion. here has recently been
another pull on these reins by the Federal Reserve, reflected
in a further decline in free reserves and some further
reduction in money market ease. The Federal Reserve feeling
is that it is operating in close contact with the market and
that it need go through no special effort to make the market
responsive to any change in its policy.
Mr. Bopp commented that he wihed the recent shift toward lesser
ease had not occurred, and he would not favor going further in that
direction at this time. He would recommend a somewhat greater avail
ability of reserves, with no change in the policy directive, recognizing
that recently the market had been tighter than intended by the directive
issued at the June 18 meeting. Neither would he recommend a change in
the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Hickman commented that the flow of domestic business news
continued to support the view that the economy was in an expansionary

7/9/63 -38
phase. New developments had been both on the favorable and unfavor
able sides, but with the favorable definitely predominant. Reduction
in steel activity was proceeding about as expected, with no reason to
change the view, which he had previously expressed, that the economy
was in a position to absorb the impact without serious disturbance.
By far the most significant development on the domestic scene
since the previous Committee meeting, Mr. Hickman suggested, was the
accumulation of strongly favorable news about construction activity
and prospects. Both the housing starts series and Dodge construction
contracts were at new highs. Starts in May were up 5 per cent from
April and 9 per cent from a year ago, while construction contracts
were up 21 per cent from a year ago. Recent gains had been impressive
enough to dominate the large random element in these series. The
construction sector of the economy, which had previously been regarded
as giving little support to general business activity, now gave clear
signs of becoming a strong plus factor. The manufacturing componert
of the construction contract series was particularly impressive,
confirming the widely-held view that plant and equipment spending was
in an upward phase.
Consumer spending remained strong Mr. Hickman continued.
,
Department store sales increased substantially in June. Auto sales
declined, but remained at a very high level. The decline in June auto
sales may have reflected some stiffening in dealer terms in anticipation
of inventory tightness during the impending model changeover.

7/9/63 -39
The performance of the Fourth District economy in June was
satisfactory. The drop-off in steel cutput had been orderly and
moderate thus far. Auto sales had eased somewhat, but other indica:ors
showed substantial improvement. Department store sales had continued
to increase, and the unemployment situation to improve, even in the
steel centers. In late June, the rate of insured unemployment was at
its lowest level in nearly four years, and remained well below that of
the nation. Electric power production in the District had continued to
expand at a more rapid rate than nationally,
Loan volume and other assets of Fourth District reporting banks
expanded sharply in June, with the gain in bank credit the largest in
recent years. The bulk of the June gain occurred in bank loans, with
all categories contributing. Deterioration in bank liquidity continued.
The character and continuity of borrowing from the Cleveland Reserve
Bank were causing some concern, and were beginning to create difficulties
in the policing of the discount window at present rate levels.
As had already been reported, the most recent information on the
balance of payments indicated that the second quarter record was at least
as unfavorable as that of the first quarter. In addition to being
disturbed by the over-all payments situation, Mr. Hickman was uneasy over
reports of large outflows of long-term capital in excess of last year,
and of increasing outflows of short-term capital. In his opinion, long
and short-term capital outflows were highly sensitive to interest rate

7/9/63 -40
differentials and excessive liquidity in the U. S. economy. The dollar
had not been strong vis-a-vis foreign currencies, and official
intervention in the foreign exchange markets was intreasing. He was
concerned over the possibility that temporizing devices of the Federal
Reserve and Treasury had misled the Open Market Committee by obscuring
the seriousness of the deterioration in the country's international
position. The seriousness of this situaticn stemmed primarily from
large capital outflows, which were responsive to the policy of the
Committee, and about which the Committee has done very little.
Insofar as policy over the next three weeks was concerned,
Mr. Hickman believed that a shift was not only appropriate but long
overdue. The domestic economy continued to move ahead and the balance
of intenational payments to deteriorate. He would recommend moving
immediately toward a higher term structure of interest rates. Further,
he would favor an increase in the discount rate from 3 per cent to
3-1/2 per cent, effective as soon as feasible, and he was prepared to
make such a recommendation at the July 11 meeting of the Board of
Directors of the Cleveland Bank.
Mr. Mitchell expressed the view that this was a juncture when
a major mistake could be made in the formulation of monetary policy.
He would not in any sense impugn the tenor of the earlier remarks by
Chairman Martin, which he thought had been properly stated. However,
in view of public statements that had been ade recently, it appeared
m

7/9/63 -41
that the Federal Reserve was placed in an awkward position. More than
that, he was concerned about the System making a policy move and then
finding itself charged with having plunged the country into recession.
This would be damaging to the prestige and the independence of the
System.
Mr. Mitchell said he continued of the view that:the domestic
economy was not as robust as its recent performance might indicate.
There was ahead a period of two or three months in which the economy
would have to absorb a shock from the change in inventory accumulation
policy, particularly in steel. Also, consumer spending had failed to
respond satisfactorily to rising levels of disposable income. For
corroboration of his assessment of the economy, he referred to the staff
economic memorandum distributed prior to this meeting, and to some of
the matters discussed therein. For example, he interpreted the data
on manufacturers' capital appropriations as discouraging, and the level
of retail sales had remained substantially unchanged for several months.
In summary, the domestic situation seemed t: present a problem of timing
from the standpoint of monetary policy. If a move were made at the
moment, it might be found that such action had been taken right at the
peak of activity. If so, it would be charged that the System's action
was the straw that broke the back of the economic expansion. The only
silver lining would be if it accelerated a tax reduction.

7/9/63 -42
Turning to the balance of payments situation, Mr. Mitchell
noted that monetary policy admittedly had some part to play in relation
to this problem.. As he saw it, the proper role for monetary policy was
in the area of trying to hold the line. It might stop some short-run
outflow of funds,, or encourage some short-run inflow.. He-did not:
suppose that many would subscribe to the use of monetary policy in a
manner that would plunge the economy into recession in order to push
down the price level.. Mainly, it seemed to be a matter of buying time,
while fundamental changes that had to be made to. redress the balance of
payment. situation were accomplished. One of the things needed was a
change in relative price levels, and the best hope here was inflation
abroad, not contraction in the United States. A second thing needed
was the containment of foreign aid and military spending overseas, and
monetary policy could have no impact in those areas. A third thing
needed was a change in the differentials in long-term rates. Here, the
best hope was that the System would not have, to move into this area.
Actions such as suggested in the distributed staff working party paper
would worsen the situation as far. as long-term rates were concerned.
While that paper might talk of a package deal, it appeared to him that
the only organization making a real contribution to the package would
be the Federal Reserve, and that actions suggested therein would involve
only a postponement of the day of reckoning.. It seemed to him that in a
sense the issue was one between European socialism and free financial

7/9/63 -43
markets in the United States.. In Europe, between cartelization and
socialism, there were controlled market rates, and something of that
sort apparently was being urged in the United States. For his part;
he would like to insure the greatest possible latitude for the
operation of free enterprise. For months efforts had been made to
maintain the short-term rate and now the working party paper memorandum
suggested pegging the long-term rate in a very complicated way., In his
opinion such an operation was not realistic.. He was willing to try to
cooperate in any reasonable way.. However, cooperation did not mean
that the Federal Reserve ought to surrender its integrity and
independence to further some proposition that seemed of doubtful
workability.
Mr. King said he interpreted that what the System had been
trying to do for some time was to help hold the line until more
fundamental things could be done in respect to the balance of payments.
Some steps had been taken, but the balance of payments was still in a
bad position. In his view, monetary policy probably had made about
as much of a contribution toward holding the line as it could without
at the same time nipping whatever vigor had been shown in the domestic
economy, which in his opinion was not robust. Mention had been made of
subscribing to further monetary policy action out of deference to the
balance of payments problem,. inv iew of what others were going to do..
But in the distributed staff paper he could find evidence of nothing

7/9/63 -44-
other than action in the area of debt management through limiting
Treasury financing substantially to bills.. In summary, he felt .that.
the Federal Reserve had done quite a good job with the tools at its
disposal, and considering its position within the Government. He
doubted whether the System could do much more..
Mr. King indicated that as of today he would not be inclined to
favor an increase in the discount rate,, for he did not feel prepared to
back up such a move with all of the measures that might then be
required. He did not think that there had been nearly as much
accomplished by other parts of the Government to deal with the balance
of payments problem as could he done. For example, he was inclined to
believe that fiscal policy might have more to do with causing fund. to
move abroad than any rate differentia. Certainly rates had something
to do with day-to-day movements, but he doubted whether higher interest
rates at this point would provide any significant and lasting
contribution to the over-all problem. While he would favor a tax cut,
he considered it necessary that such action be accompanied by some
reduction in governmental expenditures.
Mr. Shepardson agreed with the view that there were many factors
other than monetary policy involved in the total problem, which included
both the balance of payments and the domestic economy. So far.as the
domestic economy was concerned, however; it seemed to him that while
expansion might not he proceeding as fast as some would like, activity

7/9/63
was at rather high levels in nearly every sector.. As to unemployment,
the problem was a serious one but it was going to take. a. different
approach to deal with it adequately and the necessary measures lay
outside the purview of monetary policy.. From the standpoint of the
domestic economy, he was not concerned about the effect of some further
lessening of monetary ease, for he did not believe that this was going
to plunge the economy into a downturn in light of the existing liquidity.
As to. the balance of payments, Mr. Shepardson said he was not
sure how much could be done through monetary policy but-he thought it
could make some contribution at this time.. Market developments recently
had been such that the System should take advantage of the situation and
validate those developments through an inc ease in the discount rate.
He was inclined to agree with the view that an operation such as
outlined in the distributed staff paper lacked merit and he would expect
some increase in interest rates across the maturity spectrum. He would
be surp:ised if anything could be done to forestall some rate rise in
the long-term sector and he was not sure, in view of the signs of
deterioration in quality of credit in some areas, it would be
advantageous if this could be done.
Accordingly, Mr. Shepardson concluded, he would support the
proposition of an increase in the discount rate and validation of that
increase in terms of the bill rate, leaving other interest rates to fall
where they would.

7/9/63 -46-
Mr. Robertson. presented the followting, statement:
I returned from Europe reaffirmed in the basic con-
victions that I have held concerning U. S. monetary policy..
First, there is not any question but that we have a:
troublesome balance of payments problem,. in the short run,
at least--not a problem of crisis proportions,.butstill.one
that needs to be dealt with through the application of
appropriate remedies rather than gimmicks designed to
encourage people to forget it exists.. We are, incurring
deficits at a rate that cannot go on indefinitely.. Something
should be done to reverse the trend.
Second, what is needed is a thoughtful but resolute
adjustment of governmental and private policies, at a. level
(and in areas) which will permit effective dealing with the
causes of the deficits.. We must.h ave an "agonizing
reappraisal," if you will,. of our foreign aid and military
objectives, and the extent to which they have to involve
what are essentially unrequited dollar transfers abroad. We
must strive even harder to knock down the barriers to our
exports that exist in so many countries, denying us the full
fruits of the real competitive strength that we have already
achieved. Export promotion efforts at home can help, too,
in this respect.. But even more importantly, we must try to
increase business incentive, enriching profit opportunities,
employing idle resources, accelerating our rate of growth--
all changes that will enhance the basic attractiveness of the
U. S. as a place to invest. These call, above all, for an
early tax cut and generally stimulative monetary conditions.
The third set of convictions that I have had reinforced
by European conversations involves the futility--even the
danger--of attacking these problems with temporary palliatives.
I d. not mean to deny a place for arrangements among central
banks to counter the kind of private-interest-motivated surges
between money and exchange markets that can arise from time to
time. We have done rather well,. I think, on this score.. But
let us never be confused into thinking that the kind of
symbols and shibboleths that have a passing influence on
private attitudes can deal with our larger problem.. Let:.me
be explicit. Marking up the discount rate, but at the.same
time trying to keep reserve availability so ample as to offset
any dampening effect domestically, will not fool many foreign
central bankers. If there ever was a time when they were so
gullible, that time has now passed. Similarly, utilizing the
.kind of approach. outlined in the Coombs memorandum of several

7/9/63 -47-
weeks ago, in hopes of triggering a reversal of commercial
"leads and lags" relationships,, becomes very soon a self-
defeating device. It strikes me as having about the same
proportion of sense and nonsense as trying to cure our
unemployment problem by encouraging all businesses to produce
for inventory accumulation..
I am persuaded that these kinds of short-sighted devices,
oriented to market attitudes, are the despair of our wisest
official friends abroad. When we resort to them, we fall
into the trap of appearing to care more about "papering over"
the market manifestations of our problem than challenging its
basic causes.
But it is even worse than that. Unnatural efforts at
twisting short rates up, or at stampeding "lead-lag" movements,
can create domestic drags that delay fundamental market adjust
ments, divert the focus of official attention from the basic
problem, and create a later backwash of reactions that can
worsen our balance of payments statistics in future months.
How foolish it is to make today's figures better at the
expense of making tomorrow's figures worse; the effect is to
conceal for as long as possible any beginning of the basic
trend oi improvement, which is all that our friends abroad
ask for. I suspect, unhappily, that we have accomplished
something of this very result already by a number of our
official actions, including our inch-at-a-time movements to
tighten monetary policy over this past year and a half.
If bold action is to be called for, let us be bold where
it counts: with a formal statement throwing the weight of
Federal Reserve prestige behind a prompt tax cut, and behind
the kind of private wage and price decisions that will help
us reap the full fruits of that tax reduction in expanded
real output, without inflationary diversions. Here, I submit,
is where we ought to stand. And that is why I shall vote
today in favor of a monetary policy at least as stimulative
as that which prevailed before the unfortunate tightening of
the last two weeks, with the hope that the Committee will see
its way clear to move gradually back to a still more
stimulative atmosphere.
Mr. Mills said he had great sympathy with the background reason
ing of Messrs. Bopp, Mitchell, and Robertson. He wished that their
reasoning could be translated into policy actions, but unfortunately he
did not feel that this could be done.. Therefore, he would take his text

7/9/63
today from the farewell address of President Washington, who adjured
his countrymen to avoid foreign entanglements.. His policy recommenda
tions, Mr. Mills said, were colored by failure to take. President:
Washington's advice more seriously.. Mr.. Mills then presented .the:
following statement:
Significant developments since the last meeting of this
Committee are inexorably driving Federal Reserve System
monetary policy toward inducing a higher level of interest:
rates:
(a) Loose talk in.the press and.in financial circles,.
predicting that the balance of payments problem will be
combatted through the vehicle of higher interestrates, in
not having been officially denied has encouraged belief in.
its accuracy. In result, prices of U. S..Government
securities have fallen sharply.
(b) Secretary of the Treasury Dillon in his testimony
yesterday before the Joint Economic Committee stated
unequivocally that the Treasury Department would not consider
the imposition of controls over foreign borrowing in the
United States markets, which continues to be a major cause
of the outward movement of gold and dollars from this country.
In view of the Treasury's attitude and irrespective of
the undesirable economic consequences that can be anticipated,
it is clear that the Federal Reserve System is obliged to take
the brunt of the attack on the balance of payments problem by
way of whatever defense can be put up against the outflow of:
dollars through higher interest rates. Moreover, as the
financial markets have already anticipated a more restrictive.
monetary and credit policy, it would be impractical to
reverse the present market momentum toward higher interest
rates without causing utter confusion in financial circles.
As matters have shaped up, the Federal Reserve System has
been committed to fostering a higher level of interest rates
by circumstances that have not been within its complete control.
Whether a moderate increase in interest rates will suffice to
check the outflow of funds from the United States will.remain
to be seen, as will also whether foreign countries,.if
confronted with a reverse flow of funds back into the United
States, will be content to allow the level of their domestic:
rates of interest to be below those ruling in the United

7/9/63 -49
States. The dramatic actions that were taken by Great
Britain and Canada in raising interest rates on the occasions
of international runs on their currencies cannot be taken
as examples which the United States should now follow, in
that the deficit in our balance of payments is not due to
lack of confidence in the dollar but to capital movements
arising out of commercial transactions which are not
susceptible to correction through the vehicle of higher
interest rates, but which should be plugged mechanistically
at their source. It is unlikely that a modest rise in
interest rates can cure the deep-seated malady of our
balance of payments deficit and it is more.probable that
this attempted cure can do more harm than good.
Mr. Wayne reported that the slightly upward course of Fifth
District business had continued almost without change. Statistics now
supported evidence of improvement provided by the Reserve Bank's
surveys a month or so ago. Seasonally adjusted nonfarm employment and
factory man-hours had advanced rather generally, insured unemployment
rates had continued to decline, contract awards had risen at a
distinctly better than seasonal clip, and department store sales had
gained slowly but steadily. The current survey indicated a greater
diversity of business expectations but no significant change in the
general outlook, which remained moderately optimistic. Textile producers
again reported increases in new orders, backlogs, and shipments, but
other manufacturers on balance presented a somewhat more neutral picture
this time. Farmers' cash receipts during the first four months were
5 per cent higher than in 1962, and agricultural prospects had continued
to improve. Business loans at District weekly reporting banks had shown
better than seasonal strength during the past three weeks.

7/9/63 -50
Perhaps the most significant factor in the national outlook,
Mr. Wayne thought, was the increasing feeling that the steel slowdown
might not take as heavy a toll as originally appeared likely. With
construction outlays rising, automobile sales holding at a high level,
and business plant and equipment expenditures apparently heeded upward,
it was beginning to look more and more as if the tug of war between
steel and the factors of strength would be resolved on the upside. He
still doubted, however, that the sort of expansion was under way that
was going to cut appreciably into the relatively high rate of unemploy
ment any time soon.
As to policy, Mr. Wayne said he had come to this meeting prepared
to endorse, with some reluctance, a modest probing toward less ease in
view of the persistent outflow of sizeable quantities of capital. But in
the closing hours of yesterday--for whatever reason--the market seened to
have already moved further (in three hours) than he had been prepared to
accept over a period of three weeks.
There were many questions, Mr. Wayne continued, that disturbed
him greatly at such a juncture as this. To the extent that any
significant improvement in this country's short-term capital position
was achieved, through monetary policy,, might this not.at.the same time
contribute to a Canadian or British crisis toward which the Federal
Reserve could not remain indifferent? Even if no crisis should arise,
to what extent could one really expect that the basic problem could be

7/9/63 -51
altered with short-ter, money? Finally, was it not possible that a
pattern of rates that would produce the desired effects upon foreign
long-term portfolio investment might dampen the domestic business
putlook enough to produce offsetting effects on international direct
investment?
Nevertheles, any effort to reverse the market movements of
recent days was Likely, in Mr. Wayne' opinion, to be misunderstood
and prove confusing.. His preference would be to validate these
developments through open market actions first, with an increase in the
discount rate to follow. However, he was prepared to accept an increase
in the discount rate now if it seemed appropriate.
Mr. Clay commented that there appeared to have been no basic
change since the last meeting in the economic problems faced by the
Committee, although interest rate developments had created a problem
of policy implementation. The policy issues continued to revolve
around the dual problems of the pace of domestic economic activity and
the adverse international balance of payments, and the probable impact
on domestic activity of a policy action marked enough to have a
significant effect on the. international flow of funds. . On balance,
it appeared to him that a.m arked advance in interest rates would involve
a serious risk to domestic economic activity.. An adverse effect on
economic activity would be unfortunate not only. in terms of the domestic.
situation but with reference to the international situation as well.

7/9/63 -52-
The unfavorable balance of payments did not involve a domestic economy
operating under forced draft that could benefit by restrictive action
both domestically and internationally.. Rather, it was an economy
that needed to expand its output for both domestic and international
markets..
The availability of credit and its terms of availability, both
short-term and long-term, were of cruciall importance in economic
expansion, Mr. Clay noted. In a period of business expansion, for
instance, the rise in consumer and business capital outlays typically
outpaced the gain in total economic activity, and these were sectors
of the economy whose expansion was greatly dependent upon the use of
credit.
In the past two years,. consumer and business investment
expenditures had expanded and thus had provided a push for the economy.
Even so, their proportion to total economic activity remained relatively
low. This was true in terms of both the ratio of consumer durable
goods and housing to disposable personal income and the ratio of
business capital outlays to gross national product. The fact that the
growth in these sectors had not been in line with what one would expect
in a period of rapid economic growth was an, important factor in the lag
in aggregate demand for goods and in the employment of national
resources.. In the attainment of these levels ofconsumer-and business
investment, even though their ratios to total output remained low, there
had been a very substantial reliance upon borrowed funds.. Any significant

7/9/63 -53
lessening, of credit availability and the stiffening of its terms would
appear to be a matter of considerable importance.
Accordingly,.it appeared appropriate to Mr. Clay to continue
the monetary policy decided upon at the previous meeting of the
Committee. That would not infer a continuation of the situation that
existed during the latter part of the period since the last meeting,
however, as developments had moved beyond what the Committee's
directive called for.. Developments stemming from comments on policy
in the press and the bond letters had complicated the implementation
of monetary policy in accordance with the Committee's directive. The
sizeable miss in the country bank required reserves estimate added to
the difficulties, and this situation was compounded when the data
became public.
Pursuit of the monetary policy Mr. Clay suggested would call
for no change in the Reserve Bank discount rate. Admittedly, money
and capital market developments had complicated the pursuit of this
policy, but it could be carried out. Just as market expectations
became a powerful factor on the upside, they could become a powerful
fator an the other side if it became apparent-that the System had not
changed its monetary policy..
Mr.. Sanlon said that prospects for moderate further expansion
in Seventh District business activity continued to be favorable. This
view was given added- support recently by the semiannual roundup of

7/9/63 _54
opinions of top Midwest business executives conducted by one of the
large Chicago banks. Employment continued to edge up and unemployment .
had declined further in some ULatrictarean . wL.M-y only two of 23
major labor market areas were considered to have a-sabstantial -labor
surplus, and in June Detroit was removed from the substantial labor .
surplus group for the first time since July 1957:. Total retail sales
in the District seemed to have changed little in June from the plateau
of earlier months. In April and May, debits to demand deposits at
Chicago banks, seasonally adjusted, averaged 2 per cent below the
average for the first quarter. However, in 51 District areas, excluding
Chicago, debits were up 1 per cent in this comparison.
New car sales in mid-June were off slightly but still excellent,
especially when consideration was given to the fact that sales of
popular General Motors models were not being aided by special promotions.
Industry sources advised that changeovers would run smoothly, with only
minor facelifting made to most models. Luxury and bigness were to be
stressed in 1964, and more compacts would be stretched into the
previously intermediate-size range. Only one maker-planned significant
restyling, in an effort to increase its diminishing share of.the market.
There would be model shortages in the close-out period, but dealers
were expected to be relatively well supplied with the 1964 models when
introduction began, which would be slightly earlier than last year.
Steel production had declined since the-last week in May, as
expected. However,, steel people indicated that business confidence was

7/9/63 -55
considerably stronger than a year ago, and there was a general
expectation that prices would remain firm in the second half of 1963,
in contrast to the concessions obtained by purchasers in the second
half of 1962.
Construction contracts in May were very strong in the District.
For the five-month period, total contracts were up 8 per cent in the
Midwest. By far the most vigorous category in the District had been
manufacturing. The rise in construction contracts for manufacturing
plants might be the forerunner of a further improvement. Trade sources
reported that "advance planning" on industrial plants in the first half
of 1963 was more than double the year-ago total. The higher level of
prospective plant construction coincided with reports of further
increases in orders for capital equipment.
With respect to policy,. Mr. Scanlon said he came out at about
the same place as at the meeting three weeks previously. The current
evidence on prospective construction activity and business capital
outlays. together with the relatively low level of corporate liquidity,
tended to indicate a fairly firm demand for credit.. The risk to the
domestic economy of a somewhat less easy monetary policy probably had
diminished somewhat.. However,, if the Congress should fail to act on
taxes, this could have some negative effect particularly on private
capital outlays.

7/9/63 56
He concluded, Mr. Scanlon said, that no change in policy should
be made at this time, by which he meant no change from the position
adopted by the Committee three weeks earlier.. Insofar as a change in
the discount rate was concerned, he would prefer to wait.. At the same
time, he was certain that the directors of the Chicago Reserve Bank
were ready t increase the rate immediately, and he would find it
o
difficult to recommend against such action even though he had serious
doubt as to what this would accomplish, by itself, in the current
climate. His feelings on the discount rate were similar to those
expressed by Mr. Wayne..
Mr. Deming said that an halance the Ninth District economy
generally paralleled the national economy. If there was adequate rain
fall, the District economy would move ahead vigorously, while in the
event of drought it might fall behind. In June, both bank credit and
bank deposits expanded far more than seasonally, thereby changing a
normal second quarter performance into a much stronger than seasonal.
one, So far this year loans and investments had both risen more than
usual and deposits were up very strongly, both absolutely and seasonally.
However, June, second quarter, and first half performance had been much
stronger at country banks than at city bank. Even with high loan
deposit ratios evident in the former and well below peak ratios evident
at the latter, the recent lessening in reserve availability seemed to
have hit harder at city banks than at country banks. With Federal funds

7/9/63 -57
somewhat restricted recently,. there had heen some significant city bank
borrowing through the discount window for the first time in a long
period. Country bank borrowing had remained nominal. This suggested
that, at least in the Ninth District, current bank liquidity figures
might overstate the actual easiness of the banks, and consequently the
sensitivity of the banks to a moderation of easy monetary policy. This
was not to argue against such moderation but merely to note what seemed
to be a fact.
Mr. Deming went on to say that. he had watched with interest the.
developments in the money markets during the past week, and particularly
those of yesterday. There seemed to be little question but that the
markets expected discount rate action and a further lessening of ease.
Whether those expectations should be confirmed by discount rate action
or not seemed to him to rest on three points: (1) whether developments
had gone so far as to make a lack of confirmation dangerous in the sense
that market nervousness would be intensified by failure to confirm;
(2) the need for or desirability of direct rate action for balance of
payments reasons; and (3) the question of availability.
His own conclusion, Mr. Deming said, was that it would be unwise
to take direct rate action at this time (although that conclusion was a.
far from certain one; if other Banks moved on the discount rate now, he
would recommend such action to the Board of Directors of the Minneapolis
Bank). It seemed to him that some available evidence pointed to moving

7/9/63 58
via lessened availability rather than via rates: This of course, was
a matter of emphasis as well as a.matter of judgment; for the
availabilitya nad rate blades of the credit policy scissors both cut and
one could not cut very well without the other. Thus, while he believed
that some short-term capital flows. were interest rate sensitive, he
thought the evidence indicated that some of them, especially the bank
credit flows, might be more liquidity or availability sensitive.
Therefore, he would prefer to lessen the degree of availability by
reducing the level of free reserves, and letting rates fall where they
would rather than to attempt to seek a rate level and let the
availability follow from the need to maintain a, given rate level. He
thought this would fit better a situation such as the current situation,
where there might be a more than adequate credit supply, which might
have produced more speculative and forign lennding than desirable, and
where it was necessary to be concerned about flows from and to Canada
and Great Britain as well as the Continent.
Therefore, Mr. Deming continued, he would prefer not to move on
the discount rate at this time but: to pave the way for a future move by
lessening the level of free reserves. The amount of rate response to
this move would reflect the liquidity sensitivity of foreign lending.
If it was quite sensitive, there might be little rate response and
relatively little availability response insofar as the domestic economy
was concerned. He was not much worried about the former, but he was

7/9/63 -59
concerned about the latter., If rate response was obtained without
lessened domestic availability, he thought that would be just what was
wanted. On the other hand, it seemed to him that emphasis on rates as
the primary objective would run the danger of too much lessening of
domestic availability, which might unduly contain the expansion.
Consequently, he would lean toward a lower level of free reserves--
trending toward zero--,: somewhat more borrowing,. and no discount rate
action now.
Mr. Hemmings reported that information that had become available
since. the preceding Committee meeting indicated a general rise in
business in the Twelfth District. However, certain sectors lacked
vigor and some general indicators offered a mixed picture. The unemploy
ment rate in the Pacific Coast States dropped slightly from 6.1 per cent
in April to 5.9 per cent in May.. Nevertheless, there was some cause for
local concern since employment in defense-related industries declined
for the fourth consecutive month. Apparently there had been a rather
sharp dr p in defense contracts in the second quarter. Construction
activity was strong in May. Steel output fell more in the District in
June than nationally, and the decline in orders--along with the usual
summer lull--forecast a further decline in production in July.. Zinc,
lead, and lumber prices had strengthened, while farm income rose more
than seasonally in April., Department store sales in June remained at.
approximately the May level; the increase over, the previous year was
less than for the rest of the country. New car registrations in

7/9/63 _60_
California in June continued at the high May rate.. The cumulative
rate of gain of new car registrations exceeded the rate for the nation
as a whole.
There had been an. increase in bank credit,, attributable to an
increase in loans, and the position of reserve city banks continued
rather tight, Although District banks continued to be net-sellers of
Federal funds, there was a decline in average net sales by the ten
largest bank.. Borrowing activity from the Reserve Bank was substantial,
Rate changes had been announced by savings and loan associations in the
District in both directions, with the result that the situation was
confused; three different rates were currently in effect in the Los
Angeles and San Francisco areas.
Mr. Irons said that in most lines of economic activity in the
Eleventh District the indicators showed moderate improvement. While
resources were not being used fully, the indices showed further
improvement in industrial production, construction, agriculture, and
employment. The agricultural situation looked more promising at
present than a month or so ago.. New car registrations continued to
rise. Bank assets were up, along with both demand and time deposits,
and District banks did not exhibit too much need for funds.. Borrowings
from the Reserve Bank were averaging around $10 million; Federal funds
purchases increased in June, but this was accounted for by a few of the
largest banks. In general, the District seemed to be doing quite well,

7/9/63 61
statistically speaking, anc attitudes were generally favorable.. There
was no expectation of a strong upward surge of economic, activity, but.
neither did it appear to be frlt that the economic advance would not
hold.
Mr. Irons said he detected in casual conversations with
businessmen, bankers, and others a growing concern about the balance of
payments situation, with a feeling that little was being done about the
problem. The question was how long the sitation could continue. This
was not a general feeling,, perhaps,. and he would not want to over-
emphasize the remarks he had heard, but more and more comments had been
made to him along such lines in the past couple of months..
Turning to policy considerations, Mr. Irons said that a few days
ago he had about come to the conclusion that over the next few weeks it
might be desirable to probe in the direction of a little more firmness.
He had been thinking in terms of free reserves around $100 million, a
bill rate around 3.10 - 3.15 per cent, and other parts of the structure
in comparison. Since then, however, the market itself had taken things
in hand, and the Committee was now faced with a different situation. In
view of the developments that had taken place in the market and in view
of other factors that had entered into today's discussion, it would seem
to him unrealistic to try to roll back the changes that had taken place.
On the other hand, not much further probing would be necessary to get to
the point where market rates were a clear signal for a. change in the

7/9/63 -62
discount rate. The whole matter seemed to come down to a question of
timing. He would have preferred it if conditions had prevailed such
as to permit the System to probe in the market toward further firmness,
yet perhaps not reach a position where a discount rate change would
seem to be inevitable. Market events, however, seemed to have brought.
this step closer than he had anticipated in the middle of last week.
Mr. Irons went on to say that he waF. not too much concerned
about the possible effect of more firmness on the domestic situation.
Admittedly, there was a risk, but some risk must be accepted within
reasonable limits. Perhaps more funds could be made available through
the discount window and less through open m ,rket operations. That
might mean, for the time being, somewhat less rigid administration of
the window, for the System would want funds to be available in sufficient
quantities to meet basic requirements.
Mr. Irons repeated that he would not attempt to roll back what
had already happened in the past few days. As to the possibility of
probing in the direction of further firmness, the situation apparently
already was close to the point where discount rate action was generally
anticipated. If discount rate action was to be taken by Reserve Banks,
it seemed of some importance that there be some clustering.. Therefore,
he would be inclined to recommend a rate change at the meeting of the
Dallas Board of Directors on Thursday, although other things being equal
he would have preferred to wait and try to see more clearly what was
ahead.

7/9/63 -63
Mr. Ellis commented that econcmic expansion was continuing in
New England, but in a slower and more limited way than nationally.
The expansion was not even in rate,. it was spotty in coverage, and it
was not resolving the unemployment problem. Manufacturing output was
up in May after two months of decline, but it was only up 1.3 per cent
for the year Manufacturing employment declined slightly in May, and
on a year-to-year basis a decline was recorded of about two per cent.
However, manhours and weekly earnings in manufacturing in Massachusetts
rose in May. In banking, commercial and industrial loans had risen
more than seasonally since March and since the first of the year With
demand deposits holding and time deposits still rising, weekly reporting
banks had been expanding their municipal investments and had resumed
their buying of short-term Governments. They remained net sellers of
Federal funds.
As a preface to his comments on policy, Mr. Ellis referred to
remarks made to him by a foreign central banker during his recent
European trip with respect to the rate of increase of dollar holdings
since the first of this year. Question was raised as to how long this
could continue and what was planned to be done about it. Using this as
background, Mr. Ellis observed that System policy had appropriately
been stimulative all through this recovery period. It had not been
expected, of course, that monetary policy would solve the unemployment
problem. At present, with greater domestic strength, he felt that

7/9/63 -64
higher interest rates should be permitted, especially in the short
termm arket. Further, given the present level of short-term rates,
the discount rate was now in effect a drag on those rates. He was
impressed that what was needed essentially was something to last
through another two, perhaps three, years during which inflation in
Europe might work as a longer run solution to the balance of payments
problem while this country continued to hold its prices in check. In
retrospect, Mr. Ellis felt that the System probably had overshot on
liquidity, which spilled over and stimulated demand in European
countries.
The fact that monetary policy action might be blamed if there
should be a downturn of the domestic economy was a risk that deserved
consideration. Also deserving a consideration, however, was the risk
of being criticized for contributing to the current imbalance in
international payments. Such a charge might not be too well reasoned.
As long as higher interest rates were not tried, however, the System
would have to bear the responsibility for failing to use this method
as a basic part of any program to resolve the balance of payments
difficulty. Ift his method was not going to have any significant effect
on capital outflows, perhaps the best thing was to try to find out, so
as to avoid postponing further action in other areas of responsibility.
Mr. Ellis said that the Board of Directors of the Boston Reserve
Bank had met yesterday and was prepared to take action on the discount

7/9/63
rate. It had not done so, but a meeting of the executive committee
had been scheduled for tomorrow with authority to consider whatever
recommendation he (Mr. Ellis) might make. His present inclination was:
to recommend an increase in the discount rate to 31 /2 per cent, which
would be in line with the policy prescription outlined initially by
Mr. Hayes. This would call for consideration of confirming open market .
action later. after the Open Market Committee. had appraised,the
availability of reserves.. While it had not been in his thinking
earlier, at the moment he thought he saw a significant advantage, under
present conditions, in an announcement of discount rate action.. He felt
it would be inadvisable to try to roll back the rate changes that had
occurred in the market in anticipation of discount rate action.
Mr. Balderston referred, as a matter of interest, to a letter
written by the Acting Chairman of the Open Market Investment Committee
under date of April 17, 1928, which presented the following summary of
principal credit and business developments: gradual advance in money
rates; continued outflow of gold; moderate recovery in industrial
activity; unusual activity in stock prices advancing to new high levels;
increase in brokers' loans to higher levels than ever before; substantial
increase in the demand for Reserve Bank credit; and substantial increase
in commercial loans of reporting hanks. The letter observed that the .
index of prices of 228 stocks was 33 per cent higher than a year earlier,
when prices were higher relative to either earnings or dividends than in

7/9/63 -66
a number of years. Apparently the advance dad been based on the feeling
that there was an immense amount of funds in the country not needed for
business purposes. In 1927, bank credit had expanded at the rate of
8 per cent; and there was comment to the effect that the rate of increase
had been more rapid than could be continued without leading to
abnormalities of value.
Moving forward in time a third of a century to the current staff
report on economic and financial developments, Mr. Balderston noted that
over the first half of this year the annual rate of growth of total
loans and investments at all commercial banks, seasonally adjusted, was
9 per cent. This was about the same as for 1962 as a whole.
Turning to current policy considerations, Mr. Balderston spoke
favorably of the idea of a package of governmental actions, such as he
understood the President might announce later this month, to deal with
the balance of payments problem. When such an idea was advanced within
the Open Market Committee some time ago, it had impressed him as having
merit. Monetay policy obviously could not do the job alone. On the
other hand, monetary policy should play its part. Therefore, despite
whatever risk might he involved in participation from the standpoint of
the System's independence of action, he would welcome the announcement
of a package of concrete steps to stem the accumulation of dollars by
other countries. The Government's spending and lending abroad should be
curbed sharply in present circumstances, recognizing that substantial

7/9/63 -67
reductions in the outflow of dollars would take some time. The
spending and lending programs, added to the outflow of private capital,
long as well as short, had created a situation contrary to basic
equilibrium.
Mr. Balderston said he favored attempting to try to see what a
general flexible policy could do to stop the loss of dollars and gold,
in lieu of resorting to selective controls.. In this, he agreed with
what the Chairman had said at the meeting three weeks previously. If
the Government was evolving concrete steps to stop the loss of gold and
dollars, he felt that the System should play whatever role it could as part
of an integrated effort. He would assume that a rise of interest rates
would have to be accompanied by some reduction of liquidity and that an
operation such as discussed in the staff working party memorandum was
probably not feasible.
Mr. Balderston went on to say that he would aim at a range of
free reserves that would support the bill rate at current levels, and he
would meet any temporary needs through the discount window. As interest
rates rose, he supposed the volume of negotiable certificates of deposit
outstanding would shrink. If the total outstanding was in the order of
$6 or $8 billion at present, the loss of deposits could be embarrassing
to many banks. He felt sure there would be pressure on the Board again
to amend Regulation Q, but he would not favor such action except in
respect to 90-day to one-year time deposits.

7/9/63 -68
Chairman Martin. commented that he found himself encouraged by
the discussion at this meeting.. Most of. the points raised involved
problems that he had gone over in his mind in the course of the past
ten days. They were problems to which he either. felt that he had found
answers or concluded that they were impossible of solution This was
a time, he agreed, when the System could make a major mistake, but a
mistake could be made in either direction. It was hardly possible to
be neutral and avoid coming to grips with the situation. The question
was whether the System wanted to continue to pursue an easy money policy
in the face of what he sensed to be growing opinion in the banking and
business community that a firmer policy should at least be tried.. If it.
were not, and if the Government came forth with a program and it was not
successful, many people were going to say that the Federal Reserve had
not carried its weight--or that if the Federal Reserve had done
something drastic action might have been avoided. His views, the
Chairman noted, reflected his assumption that the problems of the balance
of payments and the domestic economy were inseparable. Some would not
agree, but he happened to think that they could not be separated. This
pertained also to the unemployment prohlem,.which was part.of the whole
picture.
In matters of this kind, the Chairman continued,, there were
always arguments as to who was carrying the greatest burden. Personally;
he was convinced that there had always been a tendency, through many

7/9/63
years, for monetary policy to be asked to bear more than its proper
share of the load. He felt that monetary policy had contributed
significantly to the current domestic recovery; perhaps it had over
contributed--so much so that the process of money creation, even if
it had not had the end result of inflation, had contributed to
speculation and deterioration in the quality of credit. Even if
monetary policy was asked to bear a larger share of the load than was
proper, however, the System ought not approach any national problem. on
the basis of doing anything less than it could, in however small a way,
to aid in solving them..
It might have been preferable if the whole thing had developed
differently, Chairman Martin added. However, this was a big Governent,
with many forces at play, and the Federal Reserve was only a part of it.
These forces had all converged in one way or another, and the Federal
Reserve must now face up to making a decision. The decision might, of
course, he the wrong one.. There was always this risk. But if the
System tried to roll back what had happened in the market, it might get
into an impossible situation; the reality of the current market must be
recognized.
On the other hand, Chairman Martin questioned whether the System
ought to change policy, so far as the availability of reserves was
concerned, at this meeting. He would think that that matter could well
take its course. Accordingly, he would be inclined to favor no change

7/9/63 -70
in policy, as reflected in reserves, at the moment with no pressing
one way or the other. In his opinion, the System did not have to cross
the bridge of determining whether or not to press down on reserve levels
at this particular juncture.
He would be prepared to support an increase in the discount rate,
the Chairman said, if such an increase was submitted for review and
determination by Federal Reserve Banks, but he felt that the timing of
an announcement ought to be related to the Administration's package This
would not be a particularly easy thing to work out, but it was necessary
to face up to realities and recognize what was involved. It seemed
important, if discount rate action was to be taken, to have as much
support as possible because this would put the action in perspective and
make it more effective. It would be recognized around the world that
this was a part of a concerted attack on the balance of payments problem.
Chairman Martin also pointed at that if a discount rate increase
was decided against, that step would simply be left out of the total
package. The System was at liberty to decide its own position. He did
not think, however, that in such event the System could escape
responsibility if drastic steps on the part of the Government later
became necessary. While he did not believe for a moment that discount
rate action would solve the balance of payments problem, it might do
more than one would imagine. At least it was something that he felt
ought to be tried, and the time for decision was at hand. Personally,

7/9/63 -77
be thought somewhat higher interest rates would stimulate the domestic
economy and not injure it.. This was something he could not prove, of
course; it was in the area of psychology. It was in the area of
psychology, however, that markets were frequently made, not in the area
of logic.
The Chairman pointed out that obviously it was not for the Open
Market Committee to approve or disapprove a move on the discount rate.
That was something the Board of Governors must decide if, as, and when
a rate change was submitted by a Reserve Bank. The timing of any
action by the Board of Governors must be left to the discretion of the
Board, as it always had been. Or the other hand, the Open Market
Committee was faced today with a question of open market policy. He
would propose that a vote be taken on no change in current policy.
Mr. Hayes observed that even though the Open Market Committee,
of course, had no power to take action on the discount rate, expecta
tions regarding the discount rate were playing a major part in the
market. It seemed to him that if the Committee could include some
phrase in the current policy directive indicating that its present
policy was to encourage short-term rates in a range consistent with the
discount rate, this would accomplish a consistency of policy if there
should be a change in the discount rate, and it would not alter present
policy in advance of such action.
Chairman Martin observed that no reference of that sort had
heretofore been included by the Committee in its policy directives.

7/9/63 -72
In his opinion it would be difficult to do this effectively. This
tied in with the question whether there could be a change in the
discount rate without a change in availability. He had come to believe
that there could be under certain conditions, but it was a difficult
thing to think through and he was not quite sure. In any event,
however, market expectations definitely had played a role relative to
present System policy. The Account Manager had not tried to develop
a policy different from the Committee's instruction. Under present
conditions he (Chairman Martin) was inclined to believe that it was not
unreasonable to feel that, given a change in the discount rate, interest
rates might be a little higher without, any reduction in the availability
of reserves.
In further discussion of this point, Mr. Deming noted that the
past few days had suggested that kind of situation. Mr. Balderston
expressed the view that it would be better to take one step at a time,
the first of which would be to approve a continuation of present open
market policy.
A vote was suggested on that basis, but question was raised as
to whether "no change of policy" should be understood to mean a
continuation of market conditions as of today or no change in the policy
contemplated at the June 18 meeting of the Committee.
Mr. Hayes spoke in favor of a continuation of the present degree
of firmness in the money market, which he thought would be quite clear,

7/9/63 -73
and Mr. Balderston stated that a different interpretation would force
him to vote against a directive calling for no change in policy.
Chairman Martin noted that this question had come up in various
ways from time to time within the Committee. The question was
essentially whether inadvertent changes that occurred between Committee
meetings should be construed as having established a current policy.
There followed references by members of the Committee to the
phrasing of both the first and the second paragraphs of the outstanding
policy directive. It was observed that one interpretation of the
phrase "continuing the degree of money market firmness that has pre
vailed recently" would force the Account Manager to roll back the
short-term rate closer to the level of three weeks ago. On this point,
Mr. Stone brought out that the term "money market firmness" comprehends
both rate and availability. The present degree of money market firmness
reflected a state of availability of credit that by and large had
obtained for six or eight weeks, but presently at a higher level of
rates. This differed from what the Committee had intended three weeks
ago. The current rate situation had been precipitated within the past
week, by factors such as he had mentioned in his earlier oral comments
on open market operations.. The basis lay in expectations. The tone
of the money market yesterday was in fact easy while rates were undergoing
their sharp rise.

7/9/63 -74-
As the discussion proceeded, several possible variations of
wording of the second paragraph of the directive were suggested with
a view to clarifying the intent of the instruction that was desired
to be issued to the Management of the Account.. During this discussion,
Chairman Martin commented that he would not envisage aiming at a roll
back of rates unless that came about from market processes; the present
situation might represent a temporary aberration that could reverse
itself. Mr. Mitchell inquired whether there was something to be said
for using the free reserve levels that the Account Manager had been
working with before and seeing how the market reacted. Mr. Stone
commented in this connection that, given free reserve levels in the
neighborhood of $150 to $220 million, which had prevailed from mid-May
until recently, it was his view that market expectations would keep
short-term rates at least temporarily at or around the levels they had
reached. If there was a discount rate change, he would expect short
term rates to rise somewhat further. He would not expect the bill rate
to rise much more than another 15 basis points, however. If the
Committee's irstruction was in terms of continuing the present degree
of firmness, he would regard this as contemplating short-term rates in
the present range, with reserve availability about as it had been. Asked
whether he felt that negative free reserves might not result, Mr. Stone
replied that he thought bill rates could be maintained in the area of
3.25 to 3.40 per cent with free reserves little changed.

7/9/63 -75
Mr. Hickman suggested that if no discount rate action was
forthcoming, market expectations probably would change in due course.
To maintain the present level of bill rates, it might then be necessary
to move toward zero on free reserves. If there was a change in the
discount rate, expectational factors would tend to keep the bill rate
up.
Chairman Martin proposed that the next Committee meeting would
be a more appropriate time for the Committee to make determinations
concerning the level of reserves. It was not known at present whether
anything was going to be done on the discount rate in the next three
weeks.
Mr.. Mills asked whether the question did not come down
essentially to the tone and feel of the market. To maintain the present
degree of market firmness might require enough withdrawal of reserves
to reduce the level of free reserves, but this would not be known until
market developments could be appraised. In a further comment, Mr. Mills
noted that if the discount rate were to be raised to 3-1/2 per cent, it
would not necessarily require an immediate contraction of reserves to
make the rate effective. However, he thought that would follow shortly.
Upon being apprised of a discount rate change, the market would expect
the new rate to be made effective promptly.
Mr. Hayes c mented that he had been thinking of the problem
om
the Account Manager would face if he should have a 3-1/2 per cent

7/9/63 -76
discount rate to contend with, and he continued to have in mind the
question whether some appropriate instruction related to this possible
rate change should not be included in the policy directive.
Chairman Martin repeated that this had not been done heretofore.
It seemed to him that it would be necessary to write the directive on
the basis of what the Account Manager should do if there was a discount
rate change and what he should do if there was not a discount rate
change. Mr. Balderston suggested that the System should not seem to
the public to be backing and filling at this point. He recalled that
during the go-around today a number of Committee members had advanced
the view that there should be as much consistency as possible in
System policy. Mr. Mitchell again inquired whether the Committee might
not instruct the Manager to maintain the same level of free reserves
and see what the market did. Mr. Hayes commented, however, that the
level of free reserves had never been a very good target. It had not
been used as a single specific target. At times of float bulge, for
example, it was a poor guide. Mr. Robertson noted that he sensed that
the discussion revolved largely around the question of the bill rate
continuing in the general area in which it stood at present. If so,
he felt that a sufficient instruction could be conveyed by words that
had been suggested for the directive somewhat earlier in the discussion,
namely, that open market operations should be conducted with a view to

7/9/63 -77-
continuing the present degree of firmness in the money market; Mr.
Hayes indicated that he would be satisfied with such wording.
It was then suggested that a vote be taken on a directive the
second paragraph of which would be phrased in such manner; The first.
paragraph would incorporate a technical change from the existing
directive so as to refer to the high level of domestic business activity
rather than an improved domestic business outlook.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Federal REserve Bank
of New York was authorized and directed,
until otherwise directed by the Com
mittee, to execute transactions in the
System Account in accordance with the
following current economic policy
directive:
It is the Committee's current policy to accommodate
moderate growth in bank credit, while putting increased
emphasis on money market conditions that would contribute to
an improvement in the capital account of the U. S. balance
of payments. This policy takes into consideration the
continuing adverse balance of payments position and its
cumulative effects and the high level of domestic business
activity, as well as the increases in bank credit, money
supply, and the reserve base in recent months. At the same
time, however, it recognizes the continuing underutilization
of resources.
To implement this policy, System open market operations
shall be conducted with a view to continuing the present.
degree of firmness in the money market..
Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,
Hayes, Balderston, Bopp, Clay, Irons, King,
Mills, Scanlon, and Shepardson. Votes
against this action; Messrs. Mitchell and
Robertson.

7/9/63 -78
It was agreed unanimously that no change should be made at this
meeting in the continuing authority directive, which, in the form
approved at the meeting on June 18, 1963, allowed a latitude of $1.5
billion on changes in the Open Market Account in the period between
meetings of the Open Market Committee.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, July 30, 1963.
The meeting then adjourned.
Assistant Secretary