A meeting of the Federal Open Markel: Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, March 26, 1963, at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. H ayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. B alderston
Mr. B opp
Mr. C lay
Mr. I rons
Mr. K ing
Mr. M ills
Mr. M itchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Scanlon
Mr. Shepardson
Messrs. Fulton, Wayne, Shuford, and Swan, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Ellis, Bryan, and Deming, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, and
Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Baughman, Brill, Eastburn, Furth,
Holland, Koch, and Tow, Associate Economists
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of
Governors
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors

3/26/63 -2
Mr. Hickman, Senior Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland
Messrs. Holmes and Sanford, Vice Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Ratchfcrd, Taylor, Jones, and Parsons,
Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Richmond, Atlanta, St. Louis, and
Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Willis, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston
Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Boykin, Assistant Counsel, Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas
Mr. Lynn, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report covering open market operations in U. S.
Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period March 5
through March 20, 1963, and a supplementary report covering operations
for the period March 21 through March 25, 1963. Copies of these reports
have been placed in the files of the Committee.
Mr. Stone commented in supplementation of the written reports
as follows:
The Treasury bond market has been engaged mainly in the
redistribution of the intermediate and long-term securities
acquired in the recent advance refunding. The market's per
formance has been rather impressive, especially when con
sidered against the background of an unusual succession of
press reports and statements suggesting the possibility that
an official preference toward higher interest rates, including
long-term rates, might be evolving in order to deal with the
balance of payments. Despite some selling by temporary
holders of both new and outstanding issues, price declines for
intermediate and long-term bonds were relatively moderate under
the circumstances, amounting at maximum to about 1/2 point.
Most issues showed declines of only 2/32-8/32. Early last week

3/26/63
Treasury investment accounts absorbed part of an overhang of
supply that developed in the long-term area, while System
operations to supply reserves away from the bill market, where
demand was reappearing after the tax date, absorbed securities
in the intermediate sector. Since the books on the advance
refunding closed for institutional investors on February 28,
dealers have reduced their positions by about $185 million in
5 - 10 year issues and by about $150 million in 10 - 20 year
issues. The market still has a considerable distance to go in
distributing the new issues, however, and it is primarily the
feeling of some congestion in these new issues that is causing
the market to approach the Treasury's April 9 auction of $300
million bonds somewhat more cautiously and realistically than
it approached the first auction in January.
Apart from this technical factor of a still undigested
supply of issues offered in the advance refunding, and not
withstanding the succession of reports and statements referred
to earlier, the market seems to be facing the immediate future
with some confidence in current rate levels. This confidence
is based fundamentally on the absence of any clear indication
of a significant rise in business activity and on the conviction
that, barring a crisis in the balance of payments, there is not
likely to be any major shift in credit policy until such a
rise in activity develops--a conviction that in turn rests in
part on the market's awareness of the close 7-5 vote by which
the Committee undertook its slight shift in policy last December.
Under all of these circumstances. the bond auction is currently
expected by the market to result in a reoffering yield of 4.05
to 4.10 per cent.
In the Treasury bill market, meanwhile, rates ended the
period about where they had started, although there was some
downward movement toward the outset of the interval. This
relative stability of rates reflects the influence of a series
of short-run factors that about offset the continuous downward
pull exerted by a more fundamental factor operative in the
market--the reduction of several billion of under-one-year
maturities as a result of the advance refunding. These short
run factors included the quarterly tax and dividend dates; the
auction of June tax anticipation bills, in which dealers received
particularly heavy awards; the sale of an additional $100 million
bills in yesterday's auction and the prospect of an extra $100
million in each of the next seven weeks; and the rise in United
Kingdom bill rates following the Bank of England's action in
raising its lending rate to the discount houses to 4-1/2 per
cent. Looking ahead, the unwinding of the effects of the Cook

3/26/63
County tax date after the first of next month, the sale of an
additional $100 million in each of the next seven regular bill
auctions, and the prospective raising of $500 million new money
in the auction of April 15 one-year bills, all constitute
additional short-run influences that will tend to offset the
downward pull on rates resulting from the recent sharp reduction
in the supply of short issues. After mid-April, however, we may
run out of such short-run influences, and rates may then begin
to reflect more openly the vacuum left in the short area by the
advance refunding.
I have already touched on forthcoming Treasury financing.
In summary, and apart from regular weekly bill auctions, the
Treasury will sell its new bond issue on April 9 and set the
coupon or coupons on April 3; it plans to auction $2.5 billion
of one-year bills on April 10; and it plans to announce the
terms of its regular May refunding on April 24 or 25, with the
subscription books to open April 29.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the
open market transactions in Government
securities and bankers' acceptances dur
ing the period March 5 through March 25,
1963, were approved, ratified, and con
firmed.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the Committee
a report from the Special Manager of the System Open Market Account on
foreign exchange market conditions and on Open Market Account and Treas
ury operations in foreign currencies for the period March 5 through
March 20, 1963, together with a supplementary report covering the period
March 21 through March 25, 1963. Copies of these reports have been
placed in the files of the Committee.
In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Sanford
summarized foreign exchange market developments during the past three
weeks, with particular reference to the weakness that had characterized

3/26/63 -5
the pound sterling and factors that seemed to have contributed. He
noted, among other things, that on March 19 the Bank of England had
increased to 4-1/2 per cent the rate charged discount houses, while
maintaining the Bank Rate at 4 per cent. This had resulted in a firm
ing of rates on money market instruments having a direct bearing on
international flows of funds; the covered interest differential between
U. S. and U. K. Treasury bills, which had reached .80 per cent in
favor of the U. S., was reduced to .44 per cent. Thus far there had
been no reports of a movement of funds out of U. K. bills into U. S.
bills, but there had been reports of investments in maturing U. K.
bills not being renewed and of some switching into Euro-dollar deposits.
As sterling declined or firmed, the Swiss franc and the German mark
generally showed movements inverse to that of sterling, although the
mark was also subject to other influences. The French franc and the
Italian lira held at or close to their ceilings, and the Canadian
dollar was essentially steady.
After commenting on London gold market developments, Mr.
Sanford reviewed System Account operations in foreign currencies since
the previous Committee meeting. The System had purchased $3.1 million
equivalent of Swiss francs, which were applied--along with existing
balances--to the repayment of $4.5 million of swap drawings from the
Bank for International Settlements, thus reducing such drawings to a
total of $45.5 million. On March 13, pursuant to authorization

3/26/63 -6
previously given by the Open Market Committee, the $50 million swap
agreement with the Netherlands Bank was renewed for another three
months. On March 11 the National Bank of Belguim[sriecd]e emed another
$10 million of U. S. Treasury certificates of indebtedness arising
from the System's swap drawing of Belgian francs, but yesterday, for
value March 27, the National Bank increased its holdings by $7.5
million. The National Bank had now disbursed $12.5 million net of
the $50 million it received on the swap drawing; the Federal Reserve
now had on deposit all of its drawings of Belgian francs. The $250
million standby swap arrangement with the Bank of Canada was today
being extended for another three months, pursuant to previous authori
zation of the Open Market Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the System Open
Market Account transactions in foreign
currencies during the period March 5
through March 25, 1963, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Sanford recommended that the swap arrangement with the Bank
of Sweden in the amount of $50 million, maturing April 17, 1963; the
arrangement with the Bank of Italy in the amount of $150 million,
maturing April 18, 1963; the arrangement with the Swiss National Bank
in the amount of $100 million, maturing April 18, 1963; and the arrange
ment with the Bank for International Settlements in the amount of $100
million, maturing April 18, 1963, each be extended for a period of three
months.

3/26/63 -7
After discussion, renewal of the
foregoing swap agreements, as recom
mended by Mr. Sanford, was authorized.
Mr. Sanford mentioned that on April 16, 1963, the $25 million
equivalent drawing on the swap arrangement with the Bank of England
would mature. If the Bank of England wished to extend the drawing for
another three months, Mr. Sanford indicated that there would be a
disposition to agree to such an extension.
Mr. Sanford also mentioned that on April 18, 1963, the $50 million
equivalent drawing in Swiss francs from the Swiss National Bank and the
$25.5 million equivalent drawing in Swiss francs from the Bank for Inter
national Settlements both would mature. He indicated that the Account
Management would expect to renew that part of each drawing that had not
been retired by the maturity date.
No objection was indicated to proceeding in the manner indicated
by Mr. Sanford in respect to the foregoing matters.
In further discussion of System operations in foreign currencies,
Mr. Mills referred to the possibility of problems arising and, over a
period of time, becoming aggravated in one or more of the countries whose
central banks had swap arrangements in effect with the Federal Reserve.
He recognized the mutually protective features embodied in the reciprocal
currency agreements with respect to devaluations. If, however, at some
unforeseeable time in the future a foreign country drifted into a
completely unsatisfactory situation, the Committee would be confronted

3/26/63 -8
with the question whether to extend further the swap arrangement with
the central bank of that country. In such a circumstance, he sensed
that a responsibility might be felt for continuing the arrangement. It
was his suggestion that the members of the Committee, especially the
Reserve Bank Presidents, should give serious thought to what could
develop in the way of possible losses at some future time, particularly
in relation to the capital of the Reserve Banks.
There followed comments on the length of time the various swap
arrangements had been outstanding and the uses made of such facilities
to date.
Chairman Martin then expressed the view that the System's
program of foreign currency operations had served a useful purpose.
However, the point made by Mr. Mills should be borne in mind. The
Committee should continue to study the program--which had now been in
effect for something over a year, keep abreast of all aspects of it, and
consider where the program might lead.
This concluded the discussion of System foreign currency
operations and related matters. Accordingly, the Chairman called for
the usual staff economic and financial reports, and Mr. Koch presented
the following statement on economic developments:
Considerable information on recent domestic economic
developments has become available since the last Committee
meeting. On balance the encouraging signs seem to me to out
weigh the discouraging ones. Nevertheless, the developing
information still does not suggest a speedy or a substantial
improvement in either our high unemployment rate or our
sluggish growth.

3/26/63
Consumers have continued to pull their spending oars,
and recent developments suggest a good spring and Easter
buying season. Excluding the effect of the special payment
of insurance dividends to veterans in January, personal
incomes were up in February to a level 4.5 per cent above
a year ago. The pace of shopping has picked up more than
seasonally thus far in March, and total retail sales in the
two weeks ending March 16 were 7 per cent larger than a
year earlier. Sales of new domestic autos continued strong
in the first twenty days of March. Recent consumer attitude
surveys conducted by the Survey Research Center of the
University of Michigan, the Census Bureau, and the Sindlinger
Service all suggest continuation of strong consumer sentiment
and willingness to buy autos and houses.
In addition to the consumer--and to Government, Federal
as well as State and local--we may be beginning again to get
some help from the business sector in furthering the economic
expansion. Although total business inventories showed little
change in January, steel stocks of manufacturers rose for
the first time since last April. On a seasonally adjusted
basis, from last April through December these stocks had been
reduced 30 per cent to the lowest level since the fall of
1961. According to a Commerce Department survey conducted
in February, manufacturers expect their inventories in the
first quarter to continue the modest upward drift that
characterized late 1962. In the second quarter, they
anticipate a sharp step-up in inventory buying, presumably
reflecting--in part at least--further precautionary stocking
of steel. Insofar as it reflects precautionary buying, how
ever, such stocking can hardly be viewed as an element of
underlying strength.
Turning to business fixed capital, a key economic
statistic that has become available since the last Committee
meeting and that we have been eagerly awaiting for some time
is the Commerce-SEC estimate of new plant and equipment
spending by business in 1963. As you are undoubtedly aware,
the estimate shows about a 5 per cent increase in 1963 spend
ing over that in 1962. The physical volume of outlays in
1963 suggested by this survey is not particularly high, but
the findings have been interpreted with some optimism, in
part because a McGraw-Hill estimate of business capital
spending in 1963 made last fall sho.ed an increase of less
than 3 per cent.
The recent Commerce-SEC survey shows business capital
spending reached a high in the third quarter of last year,
declined a little in the fourth quarter, is expected to

3/26/63
show little change in the current quarter, and then is likely
to rise moderately over the rest of the year.
Another recent survey dealing with business capital
spending is also encouraging. The Newsweek-National Industrial
Conference Board survey of capital appropriations made by
manufacturing firms in the fourth quarter of last year showed
them up 13 per cent from those made in the third quarter, and
the highest since early 1957. On the basis of this appropriations
estimate, Conference Board economists suggest that manufacturing
capital outlays in 1963 may exceed those in 1962 by from 6 to
8 per cent. This is strikingly consistent with the Commerce-SEC
estimate of a 7 per cent rise for manufacturing.
New orders received by durable goods makers, which reflect
buying not only for business capital but also for other pur
poses, set a record in February for the second straight month.
Steel and defense ordering accounted for much of the rise.
Incoming business rose 2 per cent over the previous high in
January. Despite the fact that these recent surveys of business
capital spending, together with the rise in durable goods orders,
are encouraging and somewhat higher than earlier expectations,
they are not strong enough to suggest that business spending is
likely to add enough to total spending to produce a dynamic
upward trend in economic activity soon.
Looking at the economy from an over-all point of view, the
gross national product in the current quarter is likely to be in
the neighborhood of $569 billion on a seasonally adjusted annual
rate basis. This compares with a rate of $563.5 billion in the
fourth quarter of last year. Without wishing to overemphasize
the significance of GNP figures per se, business and Government
economists do appear to be raising their GNP sights for this year.
It is far from clear, however, as to how much these estimates do
or do not reflect assumptions that tax reductions will be enacted.
In conclusion, little change probably continues to be the
byword for characterizing recent measures of economic activity,
particularly output of goods. But there is a somewhat rosier
hue to interpretations of the news, and this probably is not all
due to the fact that spring is officially here and better
weather actually here. Forecasts of recession are less numerous
now than they have been in many months, although there are still
some around. Forecasts of vigorous economic growth in the near
term future are also still few and far between. But one should
be warned that economists and businessmen have been a bit manic
depressive in their forecasts over the last year or so, with
sentiment experiencing roller-coaster ups and downs around a
much more stable course of actual activity. Indeed, further

3/26/63 -11-
moderate expansion in activity, but with a persistent high
level of unemployment, continues to be the most likely
characteristic of the domestic economy for the intermediate
as well as the near-term future.
Mr. Holland presented the following statement on financial
developments:
Considering the variety of financial cross-currents at work
in recent weeks, money and capital markets have been compara
tively stable. Occasions of either a substantially easier or
firmer tone were usually confined to very few days' duration, and
this despite the March tax date influence, the Treasury's record
size advance refunding and accompanying tax anticipation bill
offering, and the largest month's sales of new corporate and
municipal securities since last June. Perhaps the one exception
worth noting occurred in the municipal market, where yields on
Aaa securities adjusted downward by about one-tenth of a per cent
in reflection of good receptions of new offerings.
Debt markets might not have been so unruffled, however, had
not some official buying occurred in the intermediate and longer
maturity areas of the Government market, in the form of invest
ments for Treasury trust accounts and System Account purchases
to inject needed reserves without altering the rather delicate
balance in the bill market. With the overhang of recent offer
ings now reduced, long-term markets seem somewhat better prepared
for the scheduled continuation of heavier corporate and municipal
offerings through April and the $300 million Treasury bond
auction on April 9. Incidentally, I should report that the Treas
ury still expects to be able to squeeze both this financing and
the enlarged bill auctions outlined by Mr. Stone within the debt
limit, but it will be a very tight fit. Hopefully, Congress will
authorize a higher debt limit by mid-May, when a $305 billion
ceiling would begin to impinge seriously on the Treasury's
freedom of action.
Bank credit apparently continued to mount during the first
three weeks in March, but not in categories suggestive of any
underlying pick-up in economic activity. Business loans rose
less than usual in the weeks surrounding the tax date, bespeaking
the ample level of corporate liquid assets out of which payments
could be made. This same factor undoubtedly contributed to the
substantial net maturities of time certificates of deposit at
leading banks over the tax date, and the heavy temporary bank
borrowing by finance companies to cover commercial paper
maturities and meet other payments. On the other hand, securities

3/26/63 -12-
loans at city banks seesawed, running high in the first half
of March to finance dealer participation in Treasury financings,
then dropping down as dealer holdings were redistributed or
financed more cheaply elsewhere. Meanwhile, in the more
permanent parts of their portfolios, banks were continuing to
add to real estate loans, although seemingly at a more moderate
pace then earlier, and also to their holdings of consumer loans and
non-Government securities. In addition, banks lengthened some
$4.4 billion of their Government securities portfolio through
exchanges in the Treasury advance refunding. At city banks, some
of these portfolio acquisitions during the first three weeks of
March were financed by spinning off Treasury bills, but as of last
Friday banks more than replenished their bill holdings by acquiring
some $700 million of the $1.5 billion added issue of June tax
anticipation bills.
On the deposit side, time and savings deposits, seasonally
adjusted, were expanding at a somewhat slackened pace in February
and the first half of March. The money supply, however, re
bounded from its late February dip to an average $148.9 billion
in the first half of March, aided by a more than seasonal decline
in Government deposits. At this point member bank private demand
deposits had climbed at between a 5 and 6 per cent annual rate
since mid-December, compared to a less than 1 per cent advance
during 1962, while time deposits were climbing at between a 14
and 15 per cent annual rate since mid-December, compared with
17-18 per cent during 1962. Thus, the comparative rates of
growth in time and demand deposits have been moving back more
toward their early 1961 relationship and away from the extreme
skew in favor of time deposits that characterized particularly
the first three quarters of last year.
All these patterns are synthesized in the movements of the
statistics on aggregate reserves that are presented to the com
mittee. As the staff memorandum reported, seasonally adjusted
required reserves behind private deposits have mounted at an
annual rate of 7 per cent since mid-December. Most of this
growth stemmed from greater bank reserve utilization in late
December and January and again in March, with some intervening
weakness in February. However, the sharp advance in reserve use
in the last three weeks--as my previous comments have indicated-
is based upon component movements of bank credit and deposits
that suggest some of this bulge may prove temporary. Indeed,
early indications for the current week point to some sizable down
ward adjustment in reserve totals. A little more hindsight may
make it clear that the banking system is in fact fluctuating
around a more moderate growth rate than last fall, in the current

3/26/63 -13
operating, climate of $250-$350 million free reserves, bill
rates in the range of 2.85-2.95 per cent, and Federal funds
at or crowding 3 per cent.
You have observed, I am sure, that the required and total
reserve statistics presented in the staff projections memorandum
have a somewhat different look. This reflects the latest in our
periodic efforts to revise them in ways that we hope will maximize
their usefulness for current policy purposes. Perhaps a modest
disclaimer is also appropriate at this juncture. In developing
these seasonal and growth allowances, there is no disposition on
the part of the staff to regard them as eternal verities, rivaling
the Friedman 3 per cent or 4 per cent rule. Rather, the reserve
projections are efforts to trace the pattern of reserve use that
might be expected on the basis of past seasonal experience and
some reasonable allowance for monetary expansion. If thereafter
a sizable and persistent departure from the reserve guideline
should materialize, this is a sign that the banking system and its
customers are reacting to the current reserve environment in a way
significantly different from what might have been expected. After
studying the situation, the Committee might want to change policy
to resist the new trend, or it might wish to accommodate or even
encourage it. Such a decision would rest on all the economic and
financial evidence available at the tite, and not just upon the
guideline, but the guideline would have served its purpose if it
signalled fairly promptly when such a reconsideration was in order.
With reference to the revised reserve projections that had been
mentioned by Mr. Holland, Mr. Mills expressed concern that the Open Market
Committee may have attached more importance to such data in the formulation
of policy than was justified. This was offset, of course, to the extent
that the Account Manager was instructed to proceed with due allowance to
factors such as the feel and tone of the market. Mr. Mills inquired
whether, if the newly revised statistics had been available during 1962,
they might have had some effect from the standpoint of policy decisions
being different from those actually made.
In explanatory comments concerning the revision, Mr. Holland
noted that the only sizable adjustments made in the seasonal factors

3/26/63 -14
affected the months of April, August, and December. These adjustments
were an effort to recognize, insofar as the state of the art permitted,
the substantially stronger repetitive fluctuations that had materialized
in these months in each of the past two years. Mr. Holland did not feel
that any of the revisions in the series were large enough to have altered
the policy judgments of the Open Market Committee in 1962. In each
instance, Committee deliberations were focused on the trend of reserve
statistics over a longer span than the few weeks chiefly affected by the
revisions in seasonal allowance. However, the reserve movements at
several points would have appeared more moderate, and probably more
consistent with preceding and succeeding trends.
Mr. Furth presented the following statement on the U. S. balance
of payments:
The latest figures for February put net transfers of
gold, foreign convertible currencies, and dollars to foreigners
at $180 million. Preliminary weekly figures for the first
three weeks of March indicate sizable net transfers from
foreigners to the U. S. If we dare assume that the last ten
days of March will not do worse than the average of the past
12 weeks, we may tentatively estimate the U. S. payments
deficit for the first quarter at $650 million (after adding
to the official figures the increase in "non-liquid" Government
liabilities to foreigners, resulting from medium-term Treasury
borrowing abroad).
The first-quarter deficit was increased by the effects
of the dock strike and an unusual bunching of foreign bond issues
in January. But it was reduced by the repayment of year-end
window-dressing credits and other bank loans, and especially by
some undetermined but probably substantial impact of the recent
troubles of the pound sterling and the political uncertainties
in Canada on the international flow of funds. On balance, there
does not seem to be any conclusive evidence indicating that the

3/26/63 -15
tentatively estimated figure of $650 million was significantly
affected either way by unusual or temporary circumstances. An
annual deficit rate (before deducting prepayment receipts) of
$2-1/2 to $2-3/4 billion, if realized, would be somewhat lower
than the annual deficit figures for the past five years.
In consequence of sales of gold to the U. S. Treasury by
the United Kingdom and Brazil, March will presumably show an
increase in total U. S. gold holdings. The official Treasury
gold stock figure will remain constant, with the accrual being
absorbed by the Stabilization Fund. The decline in U. S. gold
holdings for the first quarter will thus presumably be kept to
$110 million, an annual rate far below the annual figures for
the past five years. But this relatively low level of net sales
was due to extraordinary circumstances, and even if our payments
deficit does not rise above the rate tentatively estimated for
the first quarter, we can hardly expect the gold situation to
remain as favorable as in these three months.
Most foreign industrial countries continue to show satis
factory growth. The French authorities have taken some moderately
restrictive monetary measures and money markets have been quite
tight in Germany and the Netherlands. But the authorities of
other European countries apparently permit domestic expansion to
go on in spite of expected further moderate pressures on their
prices and wages, and in spite of an expected decline in their
payments surpluses. Japan has again lowered its discount rate.
Even the United Kingdom, which is facing the most difficult pay
ments situation of any of the major countries, has reacted to the
near run on sterling merely by raising the rate for advances to
discount houses and pushing up the Treasury bill rate but has so
far avoided an increase in Bank rate.
Thus, for the first time since last summer, the future of
the U. S. payments balance seems perhaps just a little bit
brighter. But we must remember that both in 1961 and 1962 the
first quarters looked quite promising, and we must resist
temptation to extrapolate the recent improvement.
Chairman Martin then called for the usual go-around of comments
and views on economic conditions and monetary policy beginning with Mr.
Hayes, who presented the following statement:
Most of the important business statistics for February
registered some slight improvement, in contrast with the general
weakness shown in January. Although the basic business situation

3/26/63 -16-
is still one of sidewise movement, with a slight upward tilt,
and although unemployment is still a serious and apparently
rather intractable problem, I have a general impression that
the business outlook is considerably firmer than it was three
weeks ago. For one thing, the Commerce-SEC survey of plant
and equipment spending plans and the NICB survey of capital
appropriations indicate more strength in this crucial area
than was expected earlier, especially in the second half of
1963, while growing inventory accumulation will be a favorable
factor in the first half. Consumer buying intentions are
rather strong.
Much or all of the unusually sharp increase in bank credit
in February appears to have been connected with the large volume
of Treasury financing operations during the month. There is no
evidence of a real change in underlying loan demand. The daily
average money supply dipped slightly in February as Government
deposits rose sharply, but then rebounded strongly in the first
half of March in a typical lagged response to the upward movement
of bank credit during February. In general the economy's liqidity
still appears ample.
The basic situation with respect to the balance of payments
has not changed appreciably. It does look, however, as if some
of the extremely gloomy forecasts for the year 1963 may have been
overdone. Monthly data by themselves are not particularly mean
ingful, and this applies to the large indicated deficit for
January and February combined, as well as the indicated absence
of a deficit in the first three weeks of March. Most observers
estimate the annual deficit for 1963 as probably still close to
the $2.5 to $3 billion level (without taking account of special
receipts) which is of course much too high. Large foreign security
placements in the New York market have played a major role in our
payments recently; and I find especially disturbing the growing
tendency for American corporations, and even a few banks, to place
funds in dollar time deposits in Canadian and European banks to
take advantage of higher interest rates than can be obtained on
domestic short-term investments.
Sterling's troubles have tended to obscure our own in the
last two weeks. The British sale of gold to our Treasury has put
a halt for the time being to our gold losses; but it should be
borne in mind that if the British are able to overcome their
difficulties they will be back again to repurchase gold recently
sold. This has been the past pattern of the wide swings in the
British position. Fortunately for the stability of the interna
tional exchange system, the earlier spate of London press comments
on possible sterling devaluation has given way to much more

3/26/63 -17-
conservative commentaries as to Government intentions, and the
Bank of England's action in raising the rate applicable to bor
rowing by the discount houses has provided evidence that the
authorities intend to defend sterling by means of orthodox
measures. This action is also interesting in that it demon
strates how little reluctance there is among European central
banks to use monetary policy when needed to check external
threats to their currencies.
We continue to be confronted with a busy schedule of
Treasury financing. It is now eleven days since delivery of
the securities under the advance refunding program. With the
coupon on the long auction bond not to be announced until
April 3, there is a very brief period of a week or so that might
be considered open for policy changes by the System. However,
the period is doubtless too short for any very dramatic policy
change. A similar short period will occur in the latter part
of April after the bonds have been auctioned and before announce
ment of the May refunding. After mid-May there should be a
substantially longer period when we need not be concerned with
Treasury financing considerations.
The gravity of the threat posed to the dollar by the cumula
tive effects of our balance of payments deficits calls for
decisive efforts in the fairly near future to bring equilibrium
to our international payments. After careful reading of the
interesting papers distributed at the last meeting, I have not
found any basis for changing my view that there is a role for
monetary policy, including discount rate action, in any concerted
attack on the balance of payments problem that may be launched
by the U. S. authorities. Somewhat higher interest rates and
reduced credit availability could, I am convinced, bring important
benefits, both technical and psychological. By emphasizing the
short-term area, I believe the risk of damage to the domestic
economy could be held to a minimum. I am encouraged by the recent
signs that the balance of payments problem is receiving increasing
attention within the Administration, and I do not believe that the
Federal Reserve System can afford to lag behind.
However, these are matters for future determination, and our
scope for policy change with respect to the next three weeks is
distinctly limited. The time is not yet ripe for any discount
rate change. I do believe the Committee can properly help now
to pave the way for future decisive action by instructing the
Manager, within the context of the Treasury bond auction, to
probe toward a slightly lesser degree of ease through appropriate
open market operations, designed to bring the 90-day bill rate up
to about 3 per cent within the next few weeks and to keep the
Federal funds rate consistently at that figure. This might entail

3/26/63 -18
a modest decline in free reserves and a modest rise in
borrowing. Since the Desk will probably have to supply
reserves on balance over the three-week period, a start
toward these aims can be accomplished simply by supplying
reserves somewhat less liberally than we would have done
under our current directive. The directive might well be
changed to reflect this probing toward slightly less
monetary ease and to indicate our interest not merely in
"minimizing capital outflows internationally" but rather
in contributing to an improvement in the capital account
of the balance of payments.
Mr. Ellis said that in New England business sentiment was trying
to be more optimistic, and regional tendencies offered some support. The
Reserve Bank's survey of capital expenditure plans of manufacturers
indicated an increase of about 5 per cent in outlays this year as compared
with 1962. Observers also were encouraged by the steady growth in personal
income in recent months, by the strong showing of bank debits, and by the
strength of sales at retail counters and automobile showrooms. On the
other hand, much of the capital investment was aimed at eliminating
factory jobs, which were now running around one per cent below a year ago.
Insured unemployment through late February was running 10 per cent ahead
of year-ago levels. Since the end of last year, when there were none,
three labor market areas had been reclassified into the category of 9-12
per cent unemployment.
After more than a seasonal drop in January, loans at First
District banks increased in February and thus far in March. Demand
deposits were weak, but there was a continued rise in time deposits.
The average loan-deposit ratio was back up to the all-time high
registered in the first quarter of 1960.

3/26/63 -19
Turning to policy, Mr. Ellis said that he endorsed substantially
the position of Mr. Hayes. He had found the set of staff papers distrib
uted at the March 5 meeting informative and stimulating. It was his
conclusion that basically the imbalance in U. S. international accounts
was caused by the defense and foreign aid programs, accentuated by capital
outflows. If so, it might be a questionable remedy to impose sharp
credit restraint on the domestic economy in order to achieve a solution
to problems that were not inherent in the economy itself. The solution
to the balance of payments problem seemed to offer alternative possibilities
ranging from a reduction of foreign aid to tax action, efforts to change
the flows of exports and imports, and monetary action. It seemed
appropriate that monetary policy should play a role in any concerted
attack on the balance of payments problem.
Mr. Ellis expressed the view that there should not be a sharp
change in monetary policy in either direction at the present time. A
move toward a substantially reduced availability of reserves could
stimulate a weakness in the domestic economy, and it was not at all clear
to him that monetary policy action would by itself have a great effect
from the standpoint of the balance of payments. The possibility of
secondary effects on the United Kingdom should also be considered. On
the other hand, he felt that a general move toward greater ease would
be ill-advised in the absence of material changes in the economy. Accord
ingly, he would favor exploration of a slightly lower availability of

3/26/63 -20
reserves and slightly higher rates of interest to determine the
economy's reaction in the spring months. If there should be a
strengthening of business conditions, possibly the money market
would tighten on its own initiative.
Mr, Ellis concluded by saying that he thought the current
policy directive might well be changed to call for a probing action
toward slightly less reserve availability. However, he would not
recommend that any dramatic action be taken.
Mr. Irons said that in the Eleventh District various sectors
of the economy were displaying some improvement. Consumer spending,
as reflected by department store sales and automobile sales, showed
a rather considerable improvement in mid-February. Industrial activity
was relatively unchanged. The index of electric power use shcwed quite
a substantial increase in the past month, but this was a new series in
the District and might have some defects.
Nonagricultural employment had improved slightly, but there
was also an increase in unemployment as a percentage of the labor frce.
Construction activity continued to be very favorable, both in terms of
current levels and by comparison with a year ago. Oil and gas production
was up slightly, while refining was off slightly. The agricultural
situation was quite good, with growing conditions favorable.
Loans, investments, and deposits at District banks all showed
increases, although the increases were not as large as during the same

3/26/63 -21
period a year ago. Purchases of Federal funds increased, while there
was relatively little change in sales. Member bank borrowing was in
small volume. The banks appeared to have sufficient liquidity to meet
increased demands for credit if they should arise.
In general, business confidence in the Eleventh District was
good but not exuberant. There was still evidence of a feeling of
uncertainty as to what might be ahead, with the same issues continuing
to predominate, including the international situation, budgetary deficits,
and the question of tax reduction.
Mr. Irons expressed the view that the execution of policy during
the past three weeks in terms of interest rate levels and the adequacy
of reserves had been quite satisfactory. Apparently the availability
of reserves had been adequate to permit bank credit expansion, which
had been quite large since the first of the year. The money supply had
recently moved up.
Looking ahead to the next few weeks, Mr. Irons said he came to
the conclusion that this would not be in appropriate period for any
significant change in policy. He would recommend maintaining the present.
availability of reserves and the degree of money market ease that had
prevailed for the past three weeks, with the objective of maintaining a
stable market situation. If there should be any deviations, he would
rather have them fall on the side of slight additional firmness although
this would not be an objective. The forthcoming long-term bond auction

3/26/63 -22
by the Treasury and the problem of the debt ceiling would argue against
any substantial policy change on the part of the Federal Reserve at this
time.
Accordingly, Mr. Irons said, he came out in favor of maintenance
of the status quo, with any deviations on the side of less ease but with
no deliberate probing in that direction at this time. This would
envisage around $300 million of free reserves, relatively low levels of
member bank borrowing, Federal funds at about the 3 per cent level, and
the bill rate in the area of 2.85-2.95 per cent. His policy recommendation
would not contemplate changing the existing policy directive, and he
would not consider it appropriate to change the discount rate at this
time.
Mr. Swan said that after a rather abrupt drop in the seasonally
adjusted rate of unemployment in the Pacific Coast States in January,
as mentioned at the March 5 meeting, there was a slight increase in the
rate in February. This seemed to be related in part to the fact that
aircraft employment again declined. Ordnance employment regained some
of the ground lost in January but was still below the December high,
while employment in lumber and wood products and primary metals gained
in January as well as February. Orders for copper apparently were
quite high in March, and January and February deliveries were at the
highest levels since the middle of 1962. Steel production rose in
February and the first part of March. The amount of hedging against

3/26/63 -23
a strike was reportedly minor, with most of the orders reflecting
demand for steel for construction.
District banks as a group continued to be heavy net sellers
of Federal funds, due largely to the shift of one major bank from
the bill market to the Federal funds market. Time and savings
deposits continued to increase, although in the three weeks ended
March 15 about half of the increase in time deposits at reporting
banks reflected the issuance of certificates of deposit by one bank
in Los Angeles. Substantial activity in the municipal market was in
sight, with three offerings of $100 million or more scheduled for
April.
Mr. Swan noted that the business situation and the Treasury
financing program argued against a change in policy in the next three
weeks. In his opinion, operations in the past three weeks had been
quite satisfactory, particularly in view of the various problems with
which the Desk was confronted. He would like to see the same kind of
situation continue to prevail in the forthcoming period, with no
abrupt change in either direction and without any probing toward a
position of less ease. In his view the underlying situation did not
warrant such probing at this time, and he thought there was more to
be lost than to be gained. He would not recommend a change in the
discount rate. Neither would he recommend any changes in the policy
directive, other than technical changes, except that he again would

3/26/63 -24
suggest eliminating the phrase that called for offsetting downward
pressures on short-term interest rates, for reasons such as he had
outlined at the March 5 meeting.
Mr. Deming commented that latest economic data on the Ninth
District presented a more than ordinarily confusing picture.
Industrial activity apparently rose in February (on a seasonally
adjusted basis industrial power use increased), but more complete
information on nonagricultural employment indicated a slight decline,
seasonally adjusted, for that month (in contrast to what preliminary
data on Minnesota alone indicated, as reported at the preceding Com
mittee meeting). This latter factor, plus some decline in hours
worked, was reflected in a drop in District personal income in February,
which pulled the seasonally-adjusted annual rate down to last fall's
level. At the same time, unemployment evidently was not as serious
(except on the Iron Range) as it was at this time last year, and fewer
unemployed had exnausted their benefits this year than last. How much
the adverse developments reflected the severe winter was anybody's
guess. In fact, the mixture of developments made their combined
meaning anybody's guess also.
A recent Minnesota poll on consumer buying intentions added,
if anything, more confusion. Taken in March, it showed a somewhat
weaker demand for autos and durables than the national poll in January
and a somewhat weaker demand than indicated by the Minnesota poll a

3/26/63 -25
year ago. ThLs was rather puzzling in view of the income gains
recorded in the District over the past year up to February, which
were better than the national average.
Finally, District banking statistics for the first half of
March were most uncharacteristic, with loans declining and deposits
rising in contrast to their usual behavior.
As to policy, Mr. Deming said that he would recommend no
change during the next three weeks, particularly because of the
Treasury financing program. This would mean no change in the directive
except for technical changes. He would not recommend changing the
discount rate at this time.
Mr. Scanlon reported that evidence on Seventh District develop
ments tended to suggest that the current quarter was ending on a
stronger note than it began. To some extent, of course, the improvement
reflected moves to increase inventories of certain items, particularly
steel and tires, that might become short later in the year if work
stoppages developed. Nevertheless, the desire of businessmen to build
inventories indicated a confident view of the probable demand for
products in which these items were essential components.
The improvement in orders reported by Midwest producers of
capital equipment appeared to be continuing, with substantial gains
over last year reported for farm and construction machinery, railroad
equipment, and trucks.

3/26/63 -26
The auto market continued strong, and output in the second
quarter probably would equal or exceed the high rate of the first
quarter. Inventories at the beginning of March were lower relative
to current sales than in any year since 1959. However, the auto inventory
was not well balanced; in the case of most General Motors models,
inventories were quite low.
With retail sales apparently moving to another new high in
March, it had been noted that the rate cf increase in savings in the
Seventh District slowed somewhat in February and March. A large
retailer of general merchandise believed that inventories were some
what low relative to current sales and suggested that orders to
suppliers would have to be stepped up soon if sales continued at the
recent rate. The television industry expected a rise in sales of
color sets from about 450,000 last year to as much as 800,000 this
year.
Farm :ncome was now expected to be sharply lower in the
Seventh District in 1963 because of declines in prices of cattle and
hogs induced by the larger numbers of animals coming to market. Some
farmers who paid high prices for feeder cattle last fall probably were
going to lose money this year. In Illinois and Iowa net farm income
might be down one-fourth or more from 1962. Reduced income in live
stock producing areas could be expected to dampen the strong market
for farm machinery later this year.

3/26/63 -27
Loan demand by businesses and consumers at Seventh District
banks was moderate during February and March. Expansion in business
loans over the March corporate income tax date was substantially
smaller than in the past four years. As indicated by Mr. Holland,
the large banks continued to provide a large amount of financing to
Government securities dealers--with this accounting for the major
part of the rise in bank credit. Chicago banks were showing the
strains normally associated with preparation for the April 1 personal
property tax assessment date, but so far had been able to acquire
large amounts of Federal funds and, until last Friday, had made very
little use of the discount window. Inventories of Treasury bills at
these banks had been at a high level for several weeks, but if the
normal pattern was repeated, holdings were likely to drop by at least
$250 million by the end of April.
Mr. Scanlon believed the current policy posture was appropriate,
considering the diversity of economic developments--domestic and inter
national. He might be influenced, he felt, by the fact that the Cook
County tax date and the unwinding of positions taken by Chicago banks
in this connection would be occurring during the next three weeks. He
would favor continuation of the present directive, and he would not
favor a change in the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Clay expressed the opinion that, all factors considered,
the Committee should continue essentially the same monetary policy

3/26/63 -28
until its next meeting. In line with this view, the discount rate
should be left unchanged. Except for a change in the reference to
Treasury financing, he felt that the present directive would fit the
current situation and the monetary policy called for by that situation.
The domestic economy, Mr. Clay noted, continued to exhibit
the general pattern of activity that had prevailed for many months.
In the aggregate, the evidence did not suggest an imminent downturn.
Neither did it suggest any marked rise in the pace of activity. Rather,
it pointed to a slow upward movement that would be less than sufficient
to absorb potential labor force growth. The employment problem no
doubt was aggravated by the structural shifts that were taking place
in the economy as a result of mechanization. Quite apart from the
employment situation, however, the sluggishness of the domestic economy
was underscored by the fact that the measures of aggregate output showed a
very slow rate of expansion.
While the most recent data made it difficult to judge the real
magnitude of the deficit in the international balance of payments thus
far in 1963. there was no question that it remained a serious problem.
What could and should be done to deal with the problem so far as
monetary policy was concerned was quite another matter. For the
period immediately ahead, the recent developments in the British pound
sterling seemed to him to make any credit-tightening moves on the part
of the United States inappropriate at this time in any case.

3/26/63 -29
In considering the various factors to be taken into account
in formulating monetary policy at this time, there was also the
forthcoming Treasury auction of its long-term bond. Apart from other
compelling reasons, this would argue against any change in policy
in the period ahead.
Mr. Wayne reported that Fifth District business conditions
had changed little during the past three weeks. The Reserve Bank's
survey detected another small increase in optimism among businessmen
generally, and bankers on the panel took a more neutral but still
optimistic view of the near future. Manufacturers in the survey
reported virtually no change on balance in the flow of new orders.
Shipments and hours, however, were up slightly, employment was down
a little, and lower prices were indicated in nearly one-fourth of the
survey reports. Nothing had occurred recently to clarify the textile
industry's uncertain outlook, and conditions in most other important
sectors of District business--construction, trade, and coal mining
as well as areas of manufacturing--remained about the same as they were
three weeks ago. A drop in tourism in the District of Columbia had
been noted, dating back to last October.
It seemed clear to Mr. Wayne that there had been some strengthen
ing in the pulse of business during the usually gloomy month of February.
Fractional gains in retail sales, factory hours and employment, and
private payrolls underscored the more substantial improvements in

3/26/63 -30
housing starts, steel production, and sales and new orders for
durable goods. These improvements seemed to outweigh reduced
construction outlays and the higher rate of unemployment, although
their significance was not so apparent as their number. They might
reflect better weather, the end of the dock strike, hedge buying of
steel, the January payment of the special dividend on veterans'
insurance, or simply a one-shot rebound from sharp declines in
previous months. The gains in sales and new orders for durable goods
would seem to have some additional significance since they rose for
the second successive month. The continued growth in bank credit also
tended to confirm the upward movement in business activity. While
all of these developments, taken together, did not constitute a major
change of direction, they gave considerable assurance that the general
condition of business was not deteriorating further.
Mr. Wayne noted that the Desk had been quite successful, since
the previous Committee meeting, in promoting the degree of stability
and ease in the money market that the policy directive instructed the
Manager to maintain. In view of current domestic and international
developments and of the continued expansion of bank credit in recent
weeks, he felt that it would be difficult to describe a more appro
priate course of action under the circumstances. Again international
developments had brought a slight easing to the position of the
dollar, at least temporarily. At the same time there could be no

3/26/63 -31
doubt that the banking system was in a position to finance with ease
any growth in business activity that was likely to occur. In these
circumstances, and in view of the forthcoming auction of bonds by
the Treasury, he could find no justification for a change of policy.
He would renew the current directive except for an appropriate
reference to the Treasury bond sale. He would not favor any change
in the discount rate.
Mr. Mills said that he would recommend no change in policy
during the next three weeks. In his opinion the operations of the
Account, as reflected in bank reserve positions in the past three
weeks, had been desirable, and he would favor a continuation of
operations on the same basis in the forthcoming period. He did not
feel that this was an appropriate time to probe toward a slightly
greater degree of firmness, as he believed that domestic considerations
still had priority over the concern expressed about the balance of
payments problem. It seemed to him quite important to wait until one
could see the actual reserve figures of the past week or so, because
apparently there was a greater degree of market ease than might have
been suggested by the preliminary reports on reserves. If the early
record of market ease did not turn out to have had a truly factual
basis, probing beyond the degree of firmness that had really prevailed
could be harmful. He would consider it advisable to keep a close eye
on movements in the money supply and to determine whether the recently

3/26/63 -32
reported increase actually occurred or somehow was related to the
rather blurred reporting on reserves.
Mr. Mills saw no occasion to consider raising the discount
rate at this time and no reason to amend the policy directive in
substance. He agreed, however, with the view that the reference in
the directive to offsetting downward pressures on short-term interest
rates was misplaced. A strong effort to offset such downward pressures
could have the result of more than realizing the same degree of money
market firmness that had prevailed. This led him to repeat his regret
that the Committee did not go back to the old form of policy directive
(the clause "b" form of instruction) that it had used for many years.
In his opinion the time had come to consider whether it would not be
advisable to return to that form of directive, in light of the criticisms
made recently in the report of the Joint Economic Committee concerning
the vagueness of the Committee's directives.
Mr. Robertson presented the following statement:
It appears that the general business atmosphere may be
a shade better. This is certainly heartening, but it should
not lead us to relax our concern for the domestic economy.
On the contrary, with a 6 per cent unemployment rate and the
absence of inflationary pressures, I think we should be
seizing this opportunity to do everything we reasonably can
to nurture and encourage this improved business tone.
On this score, I am generally satisfied with the
financial performance of the last three weeks. Given the
number of different seasonal and other influences at work
recently, it seems to me bank reserve positions and the money
market have been fairly stable. The statistics on bank
credit and required reserve increases suggest some further expansion

3/26/63 -33-
thus far in March. I judge from the comments here that some
of that may be expected to be temporary, and I would not be
concerned if our banking statistics evidence some downward
adjustment to a more moderate expansive trend. But I am
convinced that, over time, some continued gradual, and more
than fractional, growth in bank credit, time deposits, and
the money supply is both feasible and desirable in an economy
with as many unemployed men and machines as we have, and with
our current record of generally stable prices for goods and
gradually declining unit labor costs.
For many months now, our discussions of how stimulative
monetary policy should be have had to take into account the
continuing deficit in our balance of payments. There is no
doubt in my mind that our monetary policy today is somewhat
less easy than it would be for domestic reasons alone, because
of Committee concern with our international financial position.
The papers distributed at the last meeting raise and explore
the question of whether monetary policy should be tightened
still further for balance of payments reasons. There seems
to be some question as to whether our action should be an
effective restraint, or merely something of a symbol. But I
am not persuaded that any such action by the Federal Reserve
would be other than disadvantageous, cn balance, to the
United States economy.
When it comes to the blunt issue of the need on inter
national grounds to tighten policy now, my answer is "no," on
three grounds raised in these papers. In terms of rate incen
tives to international capital f ows, it seems clear (even in
the light of the fuzzy figures that are bandied about in this
particular field) that the only area in which moderate changes
in rates by the U. S. might have an appreciable effect is in
the short-term and money market sectors. Here the covered
interest differentials are not greatly disadvantageous to us
on any major international instruments, and I have not heard
of any sizable flows developing. I submit that, as responsible
central bankers, we ought to feel flatly barred from any
unilateral act to move our short rate higher in the face of the
precarious position facing the other key currency and our closest
international ally. With the covered bill differential between
New York and London already substantially in our favor, and
pressures from a variety of sources already crowding Britain to
make some upward rate adjustments in self defense, further rate
increases on our part, it seems to me, would run unfathomable
risks. Even from a purely selfish point of view, rate action
on our part could simply give rise (as I pointed out at the last
meeting) to a vicious circle of higher rates in both the U. S.

3/26/63 -34-
and the U. K., with little net reserve gain to either and with
undesirable domestic effects in both. Right now the British
are living through a serious market threat to their currency.
We, by comparison, are not. I think it behooves us, in these
circumstances, to hold "steady in the boat," giving them all
the implicit support we can and leaving them the maximum range
of flexibility for their own policy actions.
I am not persuaded by the argument in one of these papers
that we ought to take overt policy action with the aim of
triggering a market scramble to reverse the "lead and lag"
relationships that have apparently moved against us during our
period of balance of payments deficits. The large short position
in the dollar, which has been developing for some time, in
effect puts our currency in a strong technical position. I
would rather preserve that technical strength than take super
ficial action (such as a discount rate increase) designed to
trigger a rash of short covering and then expose us to a creep
ing move back to a short market position again.
Finally, and more fundamentally, I just do not accept
the idea that we are so basically noncompetitive internation
ally, and that we need to go even further in wringing out our
economy in order to regain a reasonable foundation for compet
ing in the markets of the world. We already are in a position
to compete--and compete very effectively--in the world markets
for a wide variety of goods, although we are denied the full
fruits of our competitive ability by foreign tariffs and import
restrictions. Wheat, coal, automobiles, poultry--these are just
some of the many products of what are the most efficient sectors
of American business, for which international restrictions deny
us our full potential of export earnings. With our trade surplus
already so large, if we should develop any major new product
penetration of world markets, we should not be surprised to see
that export potential also curtailed by some counteracting
imposition of trade restrictions. We are not losing our competi
tive edge--we are whetting it, by maintaining a long span of
relatively stable prices of goods and gradually declining unit
labor costs, while the rest of our international competitors are
inflating. I fear that to try to do much more would be misplaced
effort, until we can do more to restrain foreign handicaps to
U. S. exports.
Finally, I am compelled to point out that the statistics
on our fundamental international trade position are rendered
literally uninterpretable during this period by the effects of
the dock strike. Were it not for that strike, we might be
seeing some improvement in our underlying position. Parenthetically,

3/26/63 -35
progress in this direction is all that. responsible foreign
colleagues ask of us. Given the size and the long duration
of divergent price trends here and abroad, some improvement
would not be unlikely. But the distortions of the current
figures deny us the basis for any firm view of the trend.
It would be the height of irony if, with no gold drain to
rush us into action, we were to tighten policy today, only
to learn two or three months from now that we had already
begun to experience the kind of underlying progress toward
a reduced balance of payments deficit that all of us devoutly
desire.
All this discussion leads me to the clear conclusion
that our best choice today--particularly in light of the
Treasury financing plans--would be to hold policy as it is
for the next three weeks. I would be pleased to have the
directive phrased in the somewhat more quantitative terms
that I advocated at our last meeting. I would acquiesce,
however, in almost any alternative suggestion for directive
language that would call for a continuation of the current
policy, especially if the words "and to offsetting downward
pressures on short-term interest rates" were deleted there
from. But I could not concur in the views expressed this
morning that we should probe toward a slightly tighter
monetary policy.
Mr. Shepardson referred to comments made by a number of the
delegations of State bankers associations that had visited the Board's
offices in recent weeks that seemed to indicate some concern about the
quality of credit. These comments suggested to him that there was no
doubt about the abundant availability of reserves. With that in mind,
he was inclined toward the position taken by Mr. Hayes and Mr. Ellis
in favor of probing toward a slightly lesser degree of ease. It had
been his view for some time that the growth of the economy was going
to be more dependent on other factors than on monetary policy. Factors
such as uncertainty about budgetary and tax developments seemed to have

3/26/63 -36
been having a significant effect, along with apprehension about
continuing labor strife. However, for the period immediately ahead,
he concluded that it would be best to continue the present monetary
policy, and he would subscribe to proceedirg along lines suggested
by Mr. Irons.
Mr. King expressed the view that there should not be any
substantial change in monetary policy at this time. As to the policy
directive, it probably would be appropriate to make certain technic.l
changes. He would also propose eliminating the phrase that called
for offsetting downward pressures on short-term interest rates, since
he was not sure that the retention of this language would contribute
a great deal toward expressing the position of the Committee.
Mr. Mitchell expressed the opinion that the balance of payments
situation was improving significantly and observably, mainly because
of the increasing problems of other countries in relation to those of
the United States. This kind of situation was gradually developing
around the world, and the net result should be a benefit in terms of
this country's balance of payments. Despite an understandable
reluctance to be too enthusiastic, the most recent figures seemed
quite good.
As to the staff papers on the balance of payments and monetary
policy that had been distributed at the March 5 meeting, Mr. Mitchell
noted that by necessity they were highly speculative. However, he had

3/26/63 -37
found them interesting and well organized. He hoped that there might
be additional papers dealing with certain assumed conditions. One such
paper might deal with what would happen from the standpoint of the
United States should the British devalue the pound sterling or take
certain other steps such as had recently been discussed in the British
press. Another paper might deal with the balance of payments effects
of a U. S. monetary policy directed toward moderately greater ease,
with short-term rates falling by perhaps one-half of one per cent.
Mr. Fulton reported that steel production and auto sales
continued to be the buoyant elements in the Fourth District business
picture. Most of the recent news seemed to be more on the favorable
side that the unfavorable. Although there were no firm indications
of a basic change in the business climate, the attitudes of business
executives were definitely more optimistic, sparked by increasing order
books for durable goods.
Steel production continued to increase substantially. Unfor
tunately, however, this substantial increase reflected orders to
accumulate inventories in anticipation of a strike at midyear; produc
tion after midyear would suffer whether or not a strike occurred. It
was not known as yet whether the United Steelworkers would request a
reopening of the contract by April 30, but this was a year when the
unions seemed determined to seek to improve job security, pensions,
etc., rather than cash wages. One of the phases of union security

3/26/63 -38
seemed to be to restrict the companies from contracting out various
types of maintenance and construction projects. If the union was
successful in preventing the steel companies from contracting for
such work, that would add substantially to costs. Union pressures
for benefits had constantly increased costs, which had accelerated
installation of labor-saving equipment, which in turn had caused
increased unemployment.
Lake shipping would be delayed in its opening until the latter
part of April or the first of May because of ice conditions. However,
the steel mills still had adequate supplies of iron ore.
Auto sales in the three principal areas of the Fourth District
were strong in the second week of March after a dip in the first week,
probably due to the end of concerted sales drives in the previous month.
Department store sales had been on the weak side, with sales for the
year to date being 2 per cent under the same period last year. Total
construction contracts slumped in January (seasonally adjusted). Resi
dential building contracts remained high in January and subsequently,
but the heavy engineering series had sagged. Unemployment showed nominal
improvement on a seasonally adjusted basis in the week ended March 16.
On an unadjusted basis, there was improvement in all but two of the major
labor markets.
The decline in total earning assets of District banks since the
latter part of 1962 had been the smallest in the past four years. The

3/26/63 -39
decline in loans was centered in repayments by nonbank financial
institutions. The reduction in U. S. Governments was concentrated
more in short-term issues than heretofore. While demand deposits had
shown a normal decline, the increase in time deposits was the largest
for this period in the past four years.
The Women's Federal Savings and Loan Association of Cleveland
had announced a reduction in its dividend rate from 4-1/2 per cent to
4-1/4 per cent, citing a plethora of funds, a low volume of new mortgages,
and declining interest rates on mortgages.
Mr. Fulton stated that he would not change the policy directive,
the discount rate, or the present posture of monetary policy in terms of
the short-term rate or the volume of free xeserves. In other words, for
the next three weeks he would hold to the posture of the past three weeks.
Mr. Bopp said a close look at the numbers for the Third District
suggested that business may have improved a little. Small rays of sun
shine came from weekly unemployment claims and steel production series,
which were improved, and from small increases in manufacturing employ
ment and help wanted advertising. Nevertheless, employment and output
had been stagnant and unemployment had been creeping upward, outpacing
slightly the expected seasonal rise.
Three weeks ago it had been hoped that the loan volume was
picking up, but the latest reading indicated that loans had been in
creasing less rapidly than a year ago. Business loans had fluctuated

3/26/63 -40
within a narrow range since the end of January. With the exception of
security loans, other categories had shown little sign of any sustained
advance in recent weeks. Meanwhile, the increase in time deposits
continued unabated.
Turning to policy considerations, Mr. Bopp noted that Treasury
operations dictated no substantial change in policy at the moment.
Although he would still prefer a somewhat easier monetary policy than
now prevailed, there seemed to be little point in dwelling on this
theme except to emphasize that the domestic economy continued to perform
sluggishly. Just a few months ago the Committee had decided that policy
should be slightly less easy, and he would not now recommend a reversal
of that decision. But neither would he like to see the movement away
from ease carried any further. Although the balance of payments was
still a gnawing problem, he felt that relatively small increases in
interest rates would contribute very little to the solution; larger
increases would depress the domestic economy unduly.
For the present, therefore, Mr. Bopp recommended no change in
policy, which implied a continuation of present levels of market rates
and reserve availability and continuation of the existing discount rate.
The directive might be changed along the lines suggested by Mr. Swan.
In a further comment, Mr. Bopp said he had spent the week that
included March 15 at the Trading Desk in New York. This developed to
be a particularly difficult week, and he was impressed by the competence

3/26/63 -41
of the Account Manager and his staff. He gained the feeling that the
phrase "color, tone, and feel of the market" had real substance and
content, with a large number of quantitative magnitudes, such as free
reserves and dealer positions, feeding into it. There might be some
virtue, he thought, in undertaking with the use of electronic equipment
some study to see whether there was a way of being more precise.
Mr. Bryan said that although some of the statistics were of
stale date, the latest figures from the Sixth District showed a generally
upward inclination. The changes were not of great magnitude, but they
supported the optimistic reports of the Reserve Bank's directors. The
series indicating an upward movement included nonfarm employment, manu
facturing employment, department store sales, construction employment,
personal income, and weekly average hours worked. The exceptions to the
slow upward movement related to financial statistics, in which the move
ment seemed to have been substantial. Bank debits, demand deposits and
currency, demand deposits and currency and time deposits, loans, and loans
and investments of member banks all exhibited upward movements that had
been consistent and of magnitudes much greater than those exhibited in
nonfinancial series.
Mr. Bryan felt that the Committee should continue in a policy
posture that he would describe essentially as one of no change. By that
language he meant to say that the System should continue to supply
reserves in a way that would take account of seasonal factors plus a

3/26/63 -42
small growth component to accommodate a growing population and the
growing transactions necessary to such a population. At this time,
he would not quarrel with anyone on whether the growth factor should
be at the rate of 2 per cent or 3 per cent annually; indeed, being
somewhat above a 3 per cent trendline, he would think it reasonable,
in terms of such an instruction, to head for the next few months for
a central target more nearly at a 2 per cent annual growth than a 3
per cent annual growth. In terms of figures, this would suggest a
central target of slightly less than $19.5 billion of total reserves
(daily average) for April and a central target for May of slightly more
than $19.5 billion. Such figures, assuming other factors equal, would
reconcile with a free reserve target centering around $300 million.
He would assume that the Manager of the Account should have an ample
latitude, around these central figures, to accommodate himself to
transitory conditions in the money market.
In conclusion, Mr. Bryan said he would not favor a change in
the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Shuford commented that on the basis of the information
reported this morning, he could appreciate that there probably would
be some improvement in the degree of optimism. However, he did not
believe that in the Eighth District the degree of improved optimism
was quite as strong as had been suggested at the national level and by
the reports from other Reserve Districts. This was not intended to

3/26/63 -43
leave an impression of pessimism, for the general views in the Eighth
District had been all along on the side of optimism, but he had not
seen any marked change of sentiment recently--and during the past month
he had had an opportunity to talk not only with bankers but a number
of business people around the District. The prevailing tone of
sentiment was probably borne out by recent statistics. Employment
remained at the level of November and December, while electric power
use had risen slightly to about the level of last summer. Department
store sales were up a little from the end of last year, but they had
remained substantially unchanged for the past three months. There had
been no significant change in business loans for several months;
however, bank debits had risen moderately in recent months. Cash farm
income in the District had been declining so far this year, with major
declines in beef cattle and hog prices.
Mr. Shuford said that a policy for the ensuing period such as
outlined by Mr. Irons would be agreeable to him. He would not be
inclined to do any probing in the direction of lesser ease, especially
in view of the forthcoming Treasury bond auction. In his opinion the
current level of interest rates was about right under existing
circumstances, but he would not be disturbed if the short-term rate
declined over a period of time as low as 2.85 per cent. He would not
recommend changing the discount rate. As to the policy directive, he
would suggest that changes be held to a minimum.

3/26/63 -44-
Mr. Balderston commented that there might be a rather critical
period ahead for the Treasury, considering factors in the offing such
as the Treasury bond auction. He would be sympathetic in principle with
the idea of probing in the direction of slightly less ease, as suggested
by Mr. Hayes, but the situation immediately ahead seemed to call for
maintaining an even keel until the date of the next Committee meeting.
Mr. Balderston then inquired of Mr. Stone how he proposed to
take care of the indicated shrinkage in reserves over the forthcoming
period and whether he anticipated substantial downward pressure on
short-term interest rates.
Mr. Stone said he would anticipate that there might be some
downward pressure on bill rates in the next few days. However, with
the unwinding of positions in bills after the April 1 Cook County
personal property tax date, a large amount of bills would have to be
absorbed. In meeting needs for reserves, he would have in mind a
combination of repurchase agreements--to the extent that they could
be made--with some purchases of bills as necessary, and purchases c
some quantity of coupon issues having maturities within five years
Mr. Balderston inquired of Mr. Stone whether he would consider
it inopportune to eliminate the words of the directive that called for
offsetting downward pressures on short-term interest rates, and the
latter replied that over the next three weeks he would not anticipate
the emergence of serious downward pressure. This could emerge, however

3/26/63 -45
after mid-April. Mr. Balderston then said that he would favor
elimination from the directive of the language to which he had
referred.
Chairman Martin commented that apparently there was general
agreement on maintenance of essentially the status quo during the
next three weeks, with some variations of opinion. Mr. Hayes and
perhaps one or two other members of the Committee would favor probing
toward slightly more firmness, but this view seemed clearly in the
minority.
The Chairman noted that Mr. Young had composed possible language
for the policy directive that reflected suggestions such as those ade
by Mr. Swan; the proposed language would involve only minor changes
from the wording of the existing directive. The Chairman then read
the suggested language.
In further discussion, Mr. Hayes referred to reservations that
had been expressed by some at this meeting about any move in the
direction of probing toward slightly less ease in light of the current
difficulties of the United Kingdom. His own feeling was that the
really serious threat would come if the dollar and the pound were both
in trouble on a continuing basis. He did not believe that the problem
of the dollar could be brushed under the rug simply on the ground that
the British were having some difficulties. The British were able to
take protective measures. The intractable balance of payments problem

3/26/63 -46
was between the Continental countries on the one side and the United
Kingdom, Canada, and the United States on the other. It would be
necessary to deal with that problem, and the policy he advocated was
intended to pave the way very tentatively. He would like to be
recorded as dissenting from adoption of a policy directive such as
was now being suggested. Also, he might wish to submit a supplemental
comment on why a program such as he had suggested would not be
damaging to the Treasury's forthcoming bond auction.
There followed a brief discussion during which Chairman Martin
referred to difficulties that might develop if Committee members were
to submit additional comments after a Committee meeting for inclusion
in the record of the meeting. On the other hand, he saw no reason why
a Committee member should not at any time submit a paper for distribution
to the other members of the Committee.
Chairman Martin went on to say that he had prepared a paper for
presentation at this meeting. However, he had decided simply to make
the comment, as had Mr. Hayes, that in his view the greatest single
shadow over the growth of the domestic economy was the balance of pay
ments problem. This involved a matter of judgment, but in his opinion
that problem was a real deterrent to economic growth; the one could
not be separated from the other. As he saw it, everyone was working
basically with the same objectives in mind. It was just a matter of
judgment as to whether a particular modus operandi would or would not
be effective in achieving the desired result.

3/26/63 -47-
The Chairman also commented that he would associate himself
with the view that any deviations from the status quo in the forth
coming period should preferably be on the side of firmness. However,
this was a minor point; he would not want to vote against the suggested
policy directive.
Thereupon, upon motior duly made
and seconded, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York was authorized and directed,
until otherwise directed by the Committee,
to execute transactions in the System Open
Market Account in accordance with the follow
ing current economic policy directive:
It is the Committee's current policy to accommodate moderate
growth in bank credit, while aiming at money market conditions
that would minimize capital outflows internationally. This
policy takes into account the continuing adverse United States
balance of payments position and the increases in bank credit,
money supply, and the reserve base in recent months, but at the
same time recognizes the limited progress of the domestic economy,
the continuing underutilization of resources, and the absence of
general inflationary pressures.
To implement this policy in a period of a Treasury bond
financing, System open market operations during the next three
weeks shall be conducted with a view to maintaining about the
same degree of firmness in the money market that has prevailed
in recent weeks, while accommodating moderate reserve expansion.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,
Balderston, Bopp, Clay, Irons, King, Mills,
Mitchell, Robertson, Scanlon, and Shepardson.
Vote against this action: Mr. Hayes.
Chairman Martin referred at this point to the report on open
market operations during the year 1962 prepared by the Manager of the
System Open Market Account, noting that it had been suggested that the

3/26/63 -48
Open Market Committee might want to authorize publication in the
April issue of the Federal Reserve Bulletin of the main part of
the report. The article would parallel the one on foreign currency
operations, prepared by the Special Manager, that had appeared in
the March issue of the Bulletin. Copies of the report, in form
suggested for publication, would be distributed to the members of
the Committee for their comments.
There was general agreement that the publication of such an
article in the Bulletin would be desirable for the purpose of con
tributing to a better public understanding of System open market
operations. It was suggested that the article be published as an
informational review--like the article on foreign currency operations-
rather than in the form of a report by the Manager of the Committee.
There was concurrence with this suggestion, and also with the view
that it would be desirable for the article to include a rather sub
stantial description of actual open market operations.
Question was raised about the possibility of distribution of
the article by a Federal Reserve Bank within its District subsequent
to the publication of the April issue of the Bulletin. It was stated,
in this connection, that reprints of the Bulletin article would be
available from the Board's offices for such distribution as Federal
Reserve Banks might want to make. This procedure, it was suggested,
would seem preferable to the inclusion of the article as part of the
content of the monthly review of a Reserve Bank.

3/26/63 -49-
There had been distributed to the members of the Committee
by the Secretary, under date of March 25, 1963, a brief summary
statement of the economic position, with the notation that it was
expected to be used as a basis for preparing a portion of the entry
for today's meeting that would be included in the record of policy
actions taken by the Committee. It had recently been the practice
to incorporate such a background statement at the end of the minutes
of the respective meetings in order that the Committee members might
have an opportunity to make comments and suggestions, as a step toward
expediting the preparation of the policy record entries.
Question was raised whether it was necessary to incorporate
the text of these statements of the economic position in the minutes,
it being suggested that the same purpose might be accomplished if the
background statements were distributed separately. There was general
agreement with this procedural suggestion.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, April 16, 1963.
All of those in attendance then withdrew except the Members
and Alternate Members of the Committee, the Reserve Bank Presidents
not currently serving on the Committee, and Messrs. Young, Sherman,
Kenyon, and Stone.
Chairman Martin reported informally on certain discussions
that he had had concerning matters in the area dealt with in the

3/26/63 -50
staff papers that had been distributed at the March 5 Committee
meeting. He also reported, as a matter of information, on plans
that had been announced by the Chairman of the House Banking and
Currency Committee for hearings by the Committee in regard to
Federal Reserve System matters, probably beginning some time this
summer.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary