A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, April 16, 1963, at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bopp
Mr. Clay
Mr. Irons
Mr. K ing
Mr. M ills
Mr. M itchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Scanlon
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Fulton, Wayne, Shuford, and Swan, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Ellis, Bryan, and Deming, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, and
Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Brill, Garvy, Green, Furth, Holland, and
Koch, Associate Economists
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market
Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors

4/16/63 -2
Messrs. Patterson and Helmer, First Vice Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and
Chicago, cespectively
Mr. Hickman, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland
Messrs. Black, Jones, Parsons, and Grove, Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Richmond, St. Louis, Minneapolis, and
San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Marsh, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
Messrs. Willis and Anderson, Economic Advisers,
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Philadelphia,
respectively
Mr. Sternlight, Manager, Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Scheld, Assistant Cashier, Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
March 5, 1963, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the Committee
a report from the Special Manager of the System Open Market Account on
foreign exchange market conditions and on Open Market Account and Treasury
operations in foreign currencies for the period March 26 through April
10, 1963, together with a supplementary report covering the period April
11 through April 15, 1963. Copies of these reports have been placed in
the files of the Committee.
In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs
first discussed current and prospective developments with respect to
the U. S. gold stock, following which he touched upon the situation in
the London gold market, including reference to operations of the gold
pool.

4/16/63
Turning to the foreign exchange markets, Mr. Coombs noted that
interest had centered in the pound sterling. In a description of recent
developments in this connection, based essentially on information con
tained in the reports that had been distributed to the Committee, he
noted that the disclosure by the Chancellor of the Exchequer in his
budget message that the Bank of England had received assistance from
central banks of other countries to the extent of $250 million during
February and March did not appear to have created apprehension. In
fact, the announcement seemed to have had the opposite effect of con
veying to the market an impression of solidarity in support of sterling.
He and other central bank officials in the exchange field, Mr. Coombs
said, believed that the repeated instances of central bank cooperation
in resisting speculative challenges were contributing to a gradual
change in market psychology. The market had become increasingly per
suaded that sufficient official funds could be rounded up when necessary
to resist speculative attacks on a currency successfully. Thus, some
psychological advantage seemed to have accrued from all that had been
done in the past two years.
Mr. Coombs also commented on the progress that had been made
towards paying off the Federal Reserve drawings of Swiss francs under the
swap arrangement with the Bank for International Settlements, again as
described in the reports that had been distributed. In the absence of
upsetting political developments, he hoped that the System's Swiss franc

4/16/63 -4
drawings from the Bank might be substantially paid off in the reasonably
near future. Progress likewise was being made by the U. S. Treasury in
dealing with its Swiss franc commitments.
Mr. Coombs then reviewed developments with respect to the German
mark, which had been under some buying pressure recently for reasons that
he described. He reported that selling operations by the German Federal
Bank, the U. S. Treasury, and the Federal Reserve seemed to have had some
effect in arresting the rise in the mark rate. Comments followed with
respect to the Netherlands guilder, including circumstances that ,ad
contributed to pushing the guilder to the ceiling against the dollar and
led to a drawing by the Federal Reserve under its swap arrangement with
the Netherlands Bank to provide additional guilder resources for market
operations.
In concluding his remarks on developments since the previous
Committee meeting, Mr. Coombs noted that the dollar had continued on or
close to the floor against the French franc and the Italian lira. The
dollar also had weakened against the German mark and the Netherlands
guilder, and the London gold price had been exhibiting a tendency to rise.
In this constellation of circumstances, intervention in the mark and guilder
markets had seemed advisable.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the System
Open Market Account transactions in foreign
currencies during the period March 26 through
April 15, 1963, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.

4/16/63
Certain recommendations were then presented by Mr. Coombs
for the Committee's consideration.
Mr. Coombs first recommended renewal for three months each of
the $50 million swap arrangement with the Austrian National Bank, which
would mature April 24, 1963; the $100 million swap arrangement with the
Bank of France, which would mature May 6, 1963; and $150 million swap
arrangement with the German Federal Bank, which also would mature
May 6, 1963.
After discussion, renewal of the afore
mentioned standby swap arrangements, as rec
ommended by Mr. Coombs, was authorized by
unanimous vote.
Mr. Coombs noted that a $20 million equivalent drawing in Swiss
francs under the swap arrangement with the Bank for International Settle
ments would mature April 30, 1963. He recommended renewal of the drawing
for another period of three months, adding, however, that he was hopeful
that it might be possible to repay the drawing entirely within the
relatively near future.
The proposed renewal of the Swiss franc
drawing was noted without objection.
Mr. Coombs recalled that at its meeting on September 11, 1962,
the Open Market Committee had authorized outright purchases of sterling
up to a total of not more than $25 million equivalent. It had been the
thought that if purchases of sterling could be made at favorable rates
in the ensuing few months, a period of the year when there is usually
some pressure on sterling, such holdings might be used to advantage after

4/16/63 -6
the turn of the year, when a seasonal flow of funds to the United Kingdom
normally might be expected. Due to subsequent developments, including
the breakdown of Common Market negotiations, the general picture had changed
considerably. In the present circumstances, however, it appeared that it
would be useful to have this authorization available, thus permitting
moderate purchases of sterling that might have a desirable effect under
certain conditions. Thus, an $8.5 million purchase by the Stabilization
Fund on March 29th had had a reassuring effect. Accordingly, Mr. Coombs
requested that the action taken by the Committee on September 11, 1962,
authorizing outright purchases of sterling up to a total of $25 million
equivalent be reconfirmed.
After discussion, the authorization re
ferred to by Mr. Coombs was reconfirmed.
This concluded the discussion of System foreign currency operations
and related matters.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report covering open market operations in U. S. Government
securities and bankers' acceptances for the period March 26 through
April 10, 1963, and a supplementary report covering operations for the
period April 11 through April 15, 1963. Copies of these reports have been
placed in the files of the Committee.
Mr. Marsh commented in supplementation of the written reports as
follows:

4/16/63 -7-
The highlight in developments since the last meeting of
the Committee was the competitive bidding for Treasury bonds of
1989-94 which took place on April 9. Events leading up to the
bidding suggested that the market had discounted the effects of
earlier doubts about the future of interest rates and would
approach the bidding with reasonable confidence in the rate
structure. Prices of longer term issues had declined substantially,
producing yields around 4.05 per cent in the longer key maturities,
and presumably establishing a viable level of rates for the bidding.
There were indications of sizable investor interest in the new
issue at yields of 4.10 per cent or higher, but it was believed
that the winning syndicate might offer the issue at a yield of
4.07 to 4.09 per cent, at which level reasonably good buying was
expected.
As you probably all know, the Salomon Bros. & Hutzler-Devine
syndicate won the issue on a bid of 100.55119 for a 4-1/8 per cent
coupon at a cost to the Treasury of 4.09 per cent. The bonds were
offered to the public at a yield of 4.082 per cent, which resulted
in an underwriting spread of $1.98 per bond at the reoffering
price.
Investors, however, showed more reluctance in buying the
bonds than had been generally anticipated, the principal difficulty
being that too many prospective buyers had apparently set their
sights on the 4.10 per cent rate. On top of this, there were still
many doubts about the rate structure and the action of the market
after the bidding was not reassuring, as prices were marked down
sharply the day after the bidding, making yields on outstanding
issues (4.06 per cent on 4s of 1980, for example) quite attractive
compared with the 4.08 per cent yield on the new issue. Market
activity subsequent to the bidding has been mostly professional.
The announcement by the American Telephone & Telegraph Company
of its intention to refund a $250 million 5 per cent issue due
in 1983 came as an added blow to the market just after the bidding.
The announcement of price increases by Wheeling Steel Corporation,
followed by several other steel price increases, also tended to
restrain investor demand for the bonds.
All these influences combined to produce an attitude of
"wait and see," and although there is reportedly plenty of long
term money to be invested, prospective buyers are still waiting.
The situation remains a standoff, with about half the issue sold.
We do not know how long the winning group will keep their syndicate
open, but progress since the bidding day has been slow and there
are no clear signs of give on either side. It looks as though
the capital market would remain on dead center until this impasse
is resolved one way or another.

4/16/63
While these results are not as happy as in the January
offering, we must recognize that the new technique is still on
trial as it was not really tested in January, when conditions
were almost ideal. The question, of course, is whether a syndicate
can successfully distribute an offering of this kind and size under
less than ideal conditions. Syndicates will have to learn how to
handle both themselves and the Government securities market, for
they must worry not only about distributing the new issue but
also about the action of the market for the various other
Government issues. Thus, they are subject to more pressures
than syndicates trying to distribute corporate issues. While
the Salomon-Devine syndicate is not optimistic about selling
out the account at the reoffering price, they are not greatly
distressed about it as the loss potential does not appear ex
cessive at this point. However, the whole performance has started
a reappraisal of syndicate attitudes toward the competitive bidding
process in terms of combining syndicates and submitting more
realistic bids.
Payment for the new bonds will be made on Thursday, April 18.
This weekend the Treasury will start its regular meetings with
advisory committees to discuss the May refunding of $9.5 billion
of three maturing issues of which $6 billion are held by the
public. Announcement of the refunding terms will probably
be made on Wednesday, April 24, with the books opening on Monday,
April 29, possibly for 3 days. The Treasury has in mind trying
a new technique suggested some time ago by the Investment Bankers
Association involving two stages. First, they would offer on
April 29 intermediate or longer term issues in exchange for the
maturing issues. A week or 10 days later, perhaps for subscription
on May 8, they would offer a short-term anchor issue for cash to
cover any attrition which might result from the exchange and also
to provide any new money that might be needed at the time. This
method, if used, would involve a somewhat longer than normal
period over which the Treasury would be seeking subscriptions.
The situation in the bill market has changed little, with
rates clinging to the 2.90-2.92 per cent level for three-month
bills and 2.97-3.00 per cent for six-month bills. Three weeks
ago the Treasury started adding $100 million to each weekly
offering of bills and last Wednesday auctioned an additional $500
million of one-year bills in refunding the $2 billion one-year
bills maturing April 15. These additions to the bill list have
tended to keep bill rates up, especially the one-year bills which
the dealers took in size and have not been able to sell readily.

4/16/63
The Cook County (Chicago) tax date was expected to put some
pressure on the bill market, but the Chicago banks were able to
deal with the situation smoothly and after the tax date found a
good market for the bills they had accumulated. The absence of
substantial upward pressures on bill rates from these influences
suggests that the market is beginning to reflect the effects of
the massive shifts of short-term Treasury debt to the longer area
in the March advance refunding. In addition, high nonbank liquidity
continues to stimulate strong demand for short-term investments.
System open market operations over the past three weeks were
relatively moderate and the tone of the money market was moderately
firm on the whole, although money conditions did ease noticeably at
times as the result of special influences; namely, the March 31 bank
statement date, the April 1 Cook County tax date, and efforts of
banks to build up accumulations of reserves in anticipation of
these and other special drains. On the other hand, the payment for
the one-year bills yesterday put considerable pressure on the money
market which will probably persist until the dealers are able to
reduce their holdings. Although our projections show somewhat
higher levels of free reserves for the next two weeks, some part
of the additional reserves may be needed to keep the money market
fluid up to and during the Treasury's next financing operation.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the open
market transactions in Government securities
and bankers' acceptances during the period
March 26 through April 15, 1953, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
At this point the Chairman called for the usual staff economic
and financial reports, and Mr. Brill presented the following statement
on economic developments:
After months of reporting no change in the current situation
or in the outlook, we can at last observe some change, and a
change for the better.
Most of the improved economic news has already been widely
reported, and I will only list the major items: the production
index up a full percentage point in March, after seven months of
virtually no change; nonfarm employment up for the second month
in a row to a new high, with significant strength in manufacturing
industries; a relatively large decline reported in the unemployment

4/16/63 -10-
rate; personal incomes continuing a rather moderate rise; retail
sales up from a February figure that in turn had been revised up
ward, with continued strength shown in consumer purchases of
durable goods and renewed strength in their buying of nondurables;
a slight upward revision also in the February figures for new
orders for durable goods, accompanied by a sizable rise in order
backlogs; and, finally, a crop of fine corporate earnings state
ments indicating that fourth quarter 1962 profits were at a record
level. Over all, gross national product in the first quarter is
estimated to have been at an annual rate of $572 billion, some
$5 billion higher than it seemed to be running at the height of
the winter storms and the accompanying economic pessimism.
This recent improvement in the economic scene, welcome as
it is, comes after a relatively long period of uncertainty and
hesitation and is therefore subject to some overinterpreation.
In the optimism engendered by the ecoromy's performance in March,
one cannot afford to overlook some clouds still on the economic
horizon. In the labor area, for example, those close to the data
express doubt as to the extent of both the deterioration indicated
in the unemployment figures for February and the improvement re
ported for March. It is not clear whether these fluctuations
in the unemployment rate actually occurred or were a product of
imperfect adjustment for seasonal variation. The data do indicate
little, if any, change in long-duration unemployment, are subse
quent figures on filing of unemployment claims do not suggest
any further inroads on the unemployment rate since the mid-March
observation.
Optimism based on recent developments must also be
tempered to the extent that the rise in industrial activity
reflects strike-threat-induced stockpiling of steel. The
rise in steel production last month accounted for a third of
the total rise in the production index; orders received by
iron and steel producers were a major factor in the January
February increase in durable goods new orders and backlogs;
and steel stockpiling undoubtedly accounts for a large part
of the recent rise in the business inventory component of GNP.
While as yet far from 1959 proportions, strike hedging is pro
viding some of the current lift to the industrial segment of
the economy, and the aftermath of such a stimulus can be
painful--as we learned in early 1960 and again in early 1962.
The other economic clouds are in the area of prices, both
in equity and goods markets. The rebound in stock prices since
last fall has retraced almost all of the spring 1962 decline,
bringing current price averages to within 5 per cent of the
historic peak reached at the end of 1961. Two factors tend to

4/16/63 -11-
mitigate alarm about so fast a rise: first, it has been
widespread, with no industrial concentration such as
proved vulnerable when price advances were mainly in
electronic or other "fad" stocks; and second, the rise in
corporate profits has been substantial and as yet is
keeping price-earnings ratios within the conventionally
accepted range. Nevertheless, these ratios are tending
upward, and credit in the stock market is rising as
rapidly as prices.
The other market developments occasioning concern is
the selective price increase announced by several steel
producers. If adopted throughout the industry, the announced
increases would raise the price index for steel products by
about 1-1/2 per cent, and the over-all wholesale price index
by less than one tenth of one per cent, but this does not
take into account secondary effects on the price structure.
Stability in our industrial costs and prices since
1959, in contrast with rising costs and prices abroad, has
been one important element of hope for our balance of pay
ments, and it would indeed be unfortunate if this advantage
were to be dissipated. One can sympathize with the steel
industry, of course, since profits and margins have lagged
somewhat behind those of manufacturing industries generally.
Nevertheless, it had been hoped that the solution to the
industry's problems would be sought primarily along the
lines of increased efficiency through modernization of
plant, stable or declining costs, and increased sales,
rather than through higher prices which might encourage
higher wages and other labor costs, and result in declining
sales from the increased competition of other products and
other countries.
It is too early to judge whether the steel price increase
will stick, and if so whether it will have repercussions on
the general price level that such increases had earlier in the
postwar period. The current level of steel demand is
partly induced by strike threats and therefore may prove
ephemeral; more basic supply-demand relationships in the in
dustry, and in the economy generally, are far different than
in 1955-57. The steel situation appears as yet too special
and too isolated to warrant the use of general instruments of
inflation restraint, particularly in a still fragile expansion
that, at least at the consumer end, has depended on substantial
availability of credit.

4/16/63 -12-
Nevertheless, if economic resurgence persists, sooner
or later we may have to face up to the possibility that con
ditions conducive to attempted price boosts will be reached
in other commodity areas long before aggregate unemployment
approaches, a tolerable level and an adequate growth trend
is assured. Some prices may respond promptly to rising
demand, but the unemployment situation could prove par
ticularly sticky. Productivity has increased substantially
since the last boom period, the repressed growth in labor
force over the past two years suggests ample reserve labor
supply, and new entrants into the labor force may not have
the skills most in demand for contemporary industrial tech
nology. Moreover, an increase in hours worked by those
already employed usually precedes new hirings. It may
therefore require a larger rise in GNP to accomplish a
given reduction in unemployment today than was the case in
past postwar expansions.
Large rises in GNP, however, increase our exposure to
price boosts and we can only hope those that occur will be
selective, and offset by decreases where productivity gains
or shifting demands permit. The general availability of
industrial capacity and material supplies both here and
abroad offers some basis for hope, but it is evident that
we haven't yet licked the problem of aaministered prices
that plagued us in the last boom. Continued advances in
economic activity, welcome as they will be, are likely to
test agair the statesmanship of businessmen, labor leaders,
and central bankers.
Mr. Koch presented the following statement on financial devel
opments:
Since first quarter figures are now relatively firm,
I shall focus my remarks this morning on the course of
various indicators of monetary policy and the effects of
policy thus far this year, commenting along the way on most
recent developments since this Committee's last meeting.
Looking first at the immediate effects of policy, bank
reserve and money market conditions have probably become a
bit more taut since mid-December. Free reserves, for example,
averaged about $320 million in the first quarter, as compared
with $390 million in the fourth quarter of last year. Borrowings

4/16/63 -13-
from the Reserve Banks are up a little. Three-month Treasury
bill rates have rarely been below 2.90 per cent, and the Federal
funds rate has bumped along at or just below the discount rate.
New York commercial bank lending rates to Government security
dealers have generally ranged between 3 and 3-3/8 per cent.
Since the last meeting, the free reserve average has
dropped to about $270 million, but despite this fact money
market conditions throughout part of this period were some
what more comfortable than earlier for a number of short-run
technical reasons, particularly bank adjustments just prior
to and after the March 31 statement date and the April 1
Cook County tax date.
Turning to the more basic indicators of monetary policy,
the total reserves of the banking system roe at a seasonally
adjusted annual rate of just under 3 per cent in the first
quarter, and required reserves behind private deposits at a
4 per cent rate. Since January, however, the excess of
actual required reserves behind private deposits above the
3 per cent growth guideline has been practically eliminated.
The excess amounted to a little under $200 million in January
and in the latest statement week ending April 10 it had de
clined to only$1 0 million.
As ftohr e narrowly defined money supply, it rose at a
2-3/4 per cent seasonally adjusted annual rate in the first
quarter. This compares with a 7 per cent rate of increase
in the la.t quirter of 1962. However, practically all of
the recent rise occurred very early in the first quarter.
Since mid-January, the money supply has shown only a small
rise. In the first half of April, it is likely to have in
creased a little more and over the next six weeks it may get
a further boost from a drawing down of cash balances by the
Treasury in order to keep within the debt ceiling.
Time and savings deposits continue to perplex us. Their
rise in the first quarter was as large as late last year, a
rise amounting to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of about
17-1/2 per cent, Thus, the money supply, including time de
posits, rose at an 8-1/2 per cent annual rate in the first
quarter. This was about the same rate of increase as that
in total liquid assets, as defined in our usual more in
clusive series. Of course, these liquid assets include many
forms of saving held for future spending as well as liquidity
held to facilitate current spending. The stimulative effect
of the rise in liquid asset holdings on current spending is

4/16/63 -14-
also offset to some extent by the dampening effect of the
sharp rise in private debt, particularly consumer credit
and mortgage debit, that has occurred in recent years.
As for credit, total loans and investments of all
commercial banks rose at a seasonally adjusted annual rate
of 12-1/2 per cent in the first quarter. This was even a
little larger than the 10 per cent rate of increase in the
fourth quarter of last year. However, the composition of
the recent expansion was quite different from that in late
1962. Bank holdings of U. S. Government securities in
creased $2-1/2 billion on a seasonally adjusted basis in
the first quarter, compared with a reduction of half a
billion in the fourth quarter. Loans, on the other hand,
increased about $3 billion in the first quarter, $2 billion
less than in the preceding quarter.
The major difference in loan behavior was in the busi
ness area. Business loans, which had risen $1-1/2 billion
in the fourth quarter, increased less than half a billion
in the first quarter. Nevertheless, this was still a
2-1/2 per cent annual rate of rise. Real estate, agri
culture, consumer, and security loans, as well as loans
to nonbank financial institutions have all continued to
increase sharply thus far this year.
To sum up my reactions to first quarter money and bank
ing developments, they indicate a continued high rate of
credit expansion consisting primarily of expansion in in
vestments and nonbusiness loans, a cred.t expansion re
flected mainly in the growth of time rather than demand
deposits. These developments suggest two things to me.
First, there has been less strength in what might be termed
the demand oriented sectors of bank portfolios, essentially
business loans, although this development may be due in
some part at least to inadequate allowance for the usual
early year slack in business financing demands and to
larger available internal funds. Secondly, there has been
little, if any, slowdown in the supply oriented sectors
of bank portfolios. This suggests to me that emphasis in
the phrase "slightly less easy" as used to characterize
monetary policy since mid-December should be on the word
"slightly" rather than on the word "less."
As for policy in the next three weeks, it continues to
have to recognize the full and substantial Treasury financing

4/16/63 -15-
program ahead of us. The bonds recently offered at auction
are still only partially distributed. Next weekend the
Treasury meets with its commercial bank advisory committee
to consult on its May refunding. The terms of this offering
are likely to be announced a week from tomorrow.
Even aside from Treasury financing considerations, however,
recent market developments would seem to me to call for a "steady
in the boat" policy. Financial markets are currently characterized
by hesitancy and uncertainty. They have been buffeted by rumors
of policy changes and rather substantial financing activity in
both the corporate and Government sectors of the market. Many
long-term interest rates have risen 5 basis points or so since
mid-March. Thus, the market itself has achieved a somewhat less
easy tone, with credit still readily available but at a slightly
higher cost. This is a situation in which both the Treasury and
the Federal Reserve might well afford to bide their time and
await further market developments.
Mr. Furth presented the following statement with respect to the
U. S. balance of payments:
The hopes for a significant improvement in the U. S. pay
ments balance guardedly expressed three weeks ago have not
been fulfilled.
First, the March deficit turned out to be somewhat larger
than was expected on the basis of the fragmentary weekly reports.
The deficit for the first quarter must now be estimated at $700
million.
Second, and more important, transfers of dollars to foreigners
in the first two weeks of April seem to have been unusually large.
For the week ending April 10, the amount was in excess of $200
million (if an increase in the so-called nonliquid foreign debt
of the U. S. Treasury is added to the official figure).
Obviously, extrapolation of figures tentatively reported
for one or two weeks would be even less justified than extrapo
lation of the results for one month or even one quarter. Never
theless, it seems disturbing that the dollar was simultaneously
weak in London and in Montreal, in Frankfurt and in Amsterdam.
It is true that dollar weakness in London could be explained
by the relative moderation of the British budget; dollar weakness
in Montreal by the election victory of the Liberal Party; dollar
weakness in Frankfurt by the restrictive policies of the German
Federal Bank and the attractiveness to foreign capital of a re
cent 6 per cent German Government bond issue; and dollar weakness

4/16/63 -16-
in Amsterdam by investments of U. S. oil firms. Nevertheless,
while there always are particular reasons for a currency's
weakness in a particular market, such explanations do not sound
convincing when the weakness is universal.
Third, and most inportant, the increase in steel prices
open disquieting perspectives. The companies may have excellent
reasons for announcing the increase, and the Administration may
have excellent reasons for not trying to oppose it. But the
U. S. payments balance has probably suffered a heavy blow.
Steel prices are rightly considered the pivot of the U. S.
price and wage system. Experience has shown that increases in
steel prices and wages tend to spread rapidly throughout the
economy. Moreover, steel and steel products, including machinery
and vehicles, account for nearly 40 per cent of total U. S.
exports and 15 per cent of total U. S. imports.
Optimists still may hope that the price rise will not be
followed by the rest of the industry, and that it will not induce
labor to reopen wage negotiations. But even an optimist would
have to concede heavy odds against the probability of such a
development. Thus, last week's action may well mean the end of
the hitherto successful efforts to keep prices and costs stable
in the United States while they are rising abroad.
Economists widely differ in their views about the best
methods to eliminate the payments deficit. But they are united
in the conviction that stability of prices and wage costs is a
necessary though perhaps not sufficient condition for any
successful attack on the problem.
By coincidence, a large German steel plant, August Thyssen,
has just distributed its report for 1962. It proudly states that
in spite of wage increases of 7 per cent it was able to reduce
steel prices by 7 per cent and still show a good profit. The
contrast between Continental Europe, where steel prices have
bee. reduced in the face of overall employment and large wage
increases, and the United States, where steel prices are being
raised in the face of underemployment and stable or falling
wage costs, explains better than any learnedtreatise the
contrast between Europe's domestic expansion and international
balance, and our own domestic lag and international deficit.
The Chairman then called for the usual go-around of comments and
views on economic conditions and monetary policy beginning with Mr.
Treiber, who presented the following statement:

4/16/63 -17-
Since the last meeting of the Committee there has been
an improvement in the business outlook. To some extent, of
course, the better tone merely reflects the fact that a num
ber of indicators that had declined in January, for temporary
reasons, ended up on the plus side in February. But the good
increase in industrial production, and the other information
that we do have for March, indicate that the pickup of February
has been extended. The major element of recent strength--con
sumer buying--has continued upward each month this year.
Prices generally continue to be stable. However, the rise
in steel prices recently posted by several steel companies
raises questions. What effect will the increase have on the
steel industry and on other segments of the economy? What
effect will it have on prices in general and on wage demands?
Developments in this area will need careful watching for their
implications for future monetary policy.
It is encouraging to see that in March total employment
moved up sharply and the rate of unemployment dropped back
to 5.6 per cent. Thus the present rate of unemployment is
about in line with the rate of a year ago and with the average
rate for 1962. Nevertheless, a significantly faster uptrend
in economic activity will be needed to provide enough new
jobs to keep up with the growing labor force and to reduce
unemployment.
Seasonally adjusted commercial bank credit expanded
sharply in March, following an even larger rise in February.
It will be interesting to see the March figures on stock
market credit, which will be released soon, for such credit
has continued to expand over recent months. While the money
supply advanced only moderately in March, there was a sub
stantial further rise in time deposits and a continued in
crease in Government deposits in connection with the large
Treasury financing operations. While business loans were
not strong in March, a number of corporations apparently
obtained needed funds by reducing their holdings of com
mercial paper rather than by borrowing directly from the
banks. There appears to have been somewhat greater cor
porate borrowing in the capital markets. These developments
suggest that demands by business concerns for bank loans
might increase fairly rapidly if there were a pronounced
upturn in business activity accompanied by a narrowing
in the differential between open market borrowing rates and
the prime bank lending rate. The banks still appear to
have ample liquidity to meet increased loan demands.

4/16/63 -18-
Our balance of payments deficit in 1963 continues to
run at a rate not much different from that of 1962. Pre
liminary data indicate a $120 million deficit in March,
with a deficit of about $700 million for the first three
months of 1963. The statistics may have been influenced,
however, by special favoraole factors, such as (i) increased
capital flows from sterling due co the recent weakening of
sterling; (ii) a greater interest in cur stock market on the
part of Europeans; and (iii) a more rapid increase (which is
probably temporary) in our exports compared with our imports,
following the end of the dock strike. Capital outflows from
the United States have been heavy as Americans have purchased
large amounts of new issues of foreign securities. There is
no doubt that there will be substantial drains on our gold
stock as the year progresses. Our balance of payments prob
lem continues to be most serious.
The $300 million of Treasury bonds of 1989-94 are to
be paid for the day after tomorrow, but their distribution
is far from complete. In the middle of next week the
Treasury presumably will be announcing the terms of its
May financing. Thus, "even keel" considerations would rule
out any major change in Federal Reserve policy prior to the
next meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee; but "even
keel" considerations should not, I believe, preclude some
probing toward a firmer money market.
It seems to me that the ample liquidity visible in the
economy, coupled with the recent somewhat improved rate of
business expansion, counsel placing more emphasis on our
stubborn balance of payments problem. While a change in
the discount rate would seem inadvisable at this time, I
suggest a further modest move through open market operations
toward somewhat less ease. Such a move would bring impor
tant benefits, both technical and psychological. Such a
move would be evidenced by a Federal funds rate consistently
at the 3 per cent discount rate, a three-month Treasury bill
rate at nearly 3 per cent, and probably a modest reduction
in free reserves and a modest increase in member bank borrowing.
While our scope for policy change is quite limited as to
timing and magnitude in view of the Treasury's financing pro
gram, I submit that open market operations should probe by
modest steps toward a bit less ease, and that the directive
should be modified to show such a change in policy.
Mr. Shuford noted that the period since mid-1962 had been
marked by a succession of minor changes, some upward and some downward,

4/16/63 -19
in the economic statistics. Over all, the word "plateau" seemed quite
descriptive of the situation. Recently it had been encouraging to
find more strength in the economic indicators. The improvement that
was noted at the March 26 meeting of the Committee appeared to have
continued to a desirable degree during the most recent period. It
seemed to him, however, that it would be premature to conclude that
a definite trend had been established.
The situation in the Eighth District remained substantially
unchanged, Mr. Shuford said. Offsetting movements in the more important
indicators had been occurring. Construction was up slightly in the
major metropolitan centers during the past few months as compared with
the same period in 1962. Employment appeared to be increasing from
the reduced level of November and December, while industrial use of
electric power in the first quarter was about 6 per cent higher than
in the last quarter of 1962. On the other hand, there had been some
decline in department store sales, and business loans had declined
for the past two months. Farm income prospects had deteriorated
somewhat due to a decline in average prices received for farm commodities,
which were down 10 per cent in the District since mid-January. Prices
of beef cattle and hogs were down 12 and 13 per cent, respectively
during that period.
Turning to the national picture, Mr. Shuford pointed out that the
recent increases in bank credit and total deposits apparently were due in

4/16/63 -20
large measure to increases in bank investments and in time deposits,
respectively. The picture of monetary expansion would appear to have
been less stimulative in the past few months than previously, certainly
when viewed in terms of demand forces. Reserves available in support
of private deposits had increased at only a 1 per cent annual rate since
January, he noted, compared with a 3 per cent rate for the past year as a
whole. Reserves available against private demand deposits declined at
a 2.5 per cent annual rate from January to March, compared with a slight
increase from March 1962 to March 1963. Since January the increase in
the money supply had been at an annual rate of 1 per cent, and since
March last year the money supply had increased at a 2.2 per cent rate.
Mr. Shuford indicated that he would not favor any change in
monetary policy at this time. The short-term rate did not appear
inappropriate in relation to short-term rates in Britain and Canada.
There was evidence of some strengthening in the domestic economic situa
tion, which was in accord with the objectives of Federal Reserve policy.
For the next three weeks, therefore, he would recommend continuation of
about the same degree of money market firmness that had prevailed re
cently. Before any probing was done in the direction of less ease,
there should at least be an opportunity to take a further look at the
picture. Accordingly, he would not change the policy directive; in
fact, he doubted the necessity of making even technical changes at
this time.

4/16/63 -21
Mr. Bryan, after noting the favorable tone of most economic
indicators, expressed apprehension about signs of speculation that he
detected in the economy. In Atlanta, for example, there were substantial
speculative developments in the form of construction of high-rise apart
ments and office buildings. Also, he did not view with complacency
the rapid rise of equity prices. His inclination was to feel that there
might be a vigorous economic expansion ahead, and that developments should
be carefully observed.
The Committee might be faced with an even keel problem for some
time, Mr. Bryan observed. This seemed to him an appropriate time for
the Committee to continue, in fixing the supply of reserves, to adjust
for seasonal variations and to provide for some growth increment. In
his opinion, however, the growth guideline might well be revised from
3 per cent annual rate to something more nearly approaching 2 per cent.
He would be particularly cautious at this time about relying on free
reserves as a guideline; the maintenance of a constant level of free
reserves would permit indefinite expansion of the money supply and the
financing of inflation.
Mr. Bopp reported that Third District business indices were
somewhat more encouraging than they had been for several months. There
were some small rises in place of former declines, and some greater-than
seasonal improvements. The level of unemployment remained unacceptably
high, and although recent declines in unemployment claims had exceeded

4/16/63 -22
seasonal expectations the indicated impact on total unemployment rates
was not great. Incomplete returns frcm the Reserve Bank's spring
re-check of capital spending estimates for 1963 indicated widespread
increases, to levels about 1962 expenditures.
Loans at District reporting banks had recovered somewhat from
the normal seasonal decline at the beginning of the year. Whether they
would continue to expand--as they did in 1962--or stabilize--as they
did for most of 1961--was now in question. In recent weeks, loans had
not increased to the same extent as last year, and for the year to date
they had declined by a larger amount than a year ago. The chief reason
for the poor showing for the year to date was the slump in business loans
and a decline in loans to financial institutions during the first quarter.
Real estate loans continued to increase. Bank credit had increased in
the past few weeks mainly because of an expansion in investments.
Except for short-term changes, there was no evidence of increasing
tightness or pressure on bank reserve positions since the beginning
of the year.
While the recent evidence that business activity might be turning
upward was encouraging, along with the improvement in business psychology,
in Mr. Bopp's judgment this did not justify any shift toward less ease.
In fact, the upward creep in market rates, especially intermediate and
long-term rates, served as a warning that as long as there was con
siderable economic slack the System should be on guard against permitting

4/16/63 -23
credit tightness and rising rates to retard or thwart a continued
rise in business activity. The balance of payments continued to be
a problem, but at present the covered spread between domestic and
foreign short-term market rates did not encourage an outflow of
short-term funds.
Mr. Bopp's appraisal of these various factors, together with
the forthcoming Treasury refunding, led him to the conclusion that about
the same degree of ease should be maintained for the next three weeks. In
view of the upward creep in intermediate and long-term rates, he believed
such additional reserves as might be needed should be supplied largely
by purchases of intermediate and longer maturities. Whatever effect
such purchases would have in retarding a rise in intermediate and long
term rates would be helpful in terms of the domestic situation without
significant harmful effects on the balance of payments. The present
directive afforded sufficient leeway for the policy suggested; hence,
he recommended no change in the directive. Neither would he recommend
a change in the discount rate.
Mr. Fulton said the faint signs of improvement in business in
the Fourth District that were reported earlier had strengthened in the
last half of March and early April. Unfortunately, the greatly increased
activity in the steel and rubber industries was due in good part to

4/16/63 -24
anticipation of labor strikes. More favorable weather was also a factor.
Department store sales had moved up fairly rapidly in the last
half of March and the first two weeks of April and appeared to have
recovered the level of last December. The strength of auto sales in
the major centers of the District had not abated; such sales were main
taining a margin over the comparable period of a year ago. A spot check
of auto dealers indicated that credit terms were not being extended be
yond 36 months for new or used cars, and it was stated that dealers,
banks, and finance companies would resist such a trend. However, rates
had been reduced, with 5 per cent being the prevailing rate among banks.
Only a partial recovery from the sharp decline in January had
been noted in construction contracts. A greater-than-seasonal decline
in the rate of insured unemployment from the mid-March position was
shown in all major labor markets in the District, especially in the
steel-producing centers. In fact, the improvement seemed to have been
better than for the nation as a whole.
The rubber industry was currently producing at a high rate.
New car tires, replacements, and mechanical rubber goods were all going
very well. Auto manufacturers were stockpiling in anticipation of a
strike that might begin on April 20. Union demands were high, with
extended vacations as part of the package, and management was resisting
such demands.
Orders for machine tools had picked up sharply. Foreign orders
had revived somewhat, and domestic orders were substantially higher.

4/16/63 -25
Management expected 10 to 15 per cent more business this year, with
demand and production looking particularly good for the third and
fourth quarters. The tax credit allowed for new equipment was said to
be a factor, as well as a demand for machines that would cut labor costs
while increasing production.
In the steel industry the rush to acquire inventory had created
a surge of orders and boosted output substantially. It was estimated
that already 3 million tons had been added to inventory. April output
was at the rate of 123 million tons annually, and an increase to a rate
of 133 million tons was anticipated in May. With price increases being
announced by at least three mills, it seemed certain that the labor
contract would be reopened, and an early settlement was not anticipated.
The companies had spent, and were currently spending, millions of dollars
to install modern equipment to reduce costs. However, with each labor
contract adding more to costs, profits had declined consistently.
Referring to the comment by Mr. Furth concerning the announcement
by a German steel company of its ability to absorb higher wage costs
without increasing prices, Mr. Fulton noted that the prices of German
finished goods apparently were similar to U. S. prices for comparable
products, while wages and fringe benefits were less than half as high.
Therefore, it would seem logical that German companies could make a
profit even if substantial wage increases were granted. Unless the U. S.
Government took a stand against excessive wage increases in this country,

4/16/63 -26
it was Mr. Fulton's opinion that the steel companies might well be
given the privilege of increasing prices despite possible adverse
effects on the economy. He observed that the present surge of pro
duction was costly for the steel companies because they had to increase
their labor forces, with the attendant. increase in employment costs,
following which the workers would be entitled to benefit payments if
laid off when work slackened. It was realized generally that inven
tories now being created must eventually be used, with adverse effects
from the standpoint of both the mills and labor. The middle level of
labor leaders was said to be frustrated by continued unemployment and
the realization that many long-term unemployed workers would never re
turn to the mills.
In light of the improved business atmosphere, Mr. Fulton felt
that at least the same degree of money market firmness that had pre
vailed in the past three weeks should be continued. He saw no need to
change the directive, and he would not recommend changing the discount
rate at this time.
Mr. Mitchell noted that despite the steel situation, which was
unsettling, the performance of the economy in other respects was en
couraging. If the right Governmental policies were pursued, including
an appropriate monetary policy, he foresaw the possibility of a domestic
revival that would push the economy to considerably higher levels in
1963 than had been anticipated.

4/16/63 -27
As to the balance of payments, short-run considerations seemed
to require that nothing be done to charge the short-term rate significantly
at this time. The covered rate differential was now favorable to the
United States, and nothing should be done that would make the situation
more difficult for the British. The consequences in terms of the dollar
were too great to risk taking any actions that might make the sterling
problem more difficult.
From the longer run standpoint, the balance of payments problem
seemed to center around the rate of capital outflow. Basically, if time
was available, the way to deal with the capital outflow would be to im
prove the rates of return on investments in this country. This would
require a substantial increase in economic activity. Therefore, it
would seem desirable to encourage the domestic economy to move ahead
more vigorously. It now seemed doubtful whether there would be a tax
cut as a prop for the economy. Accordingly, it appeared quite important
from the point of view of longer run balance of payments considerations,
as well as from the standpoint of the domestic economy, to follow a
monetary policy that would accommodate and encourage expansion.
For the moment, Mr. Mitchell said, he would accept the prescription
of Mr. Bopp: no change in the discount rate, no change in the directive,
and no significant change in current monetary policy.
Mr. King commented that for some time the System had walked a
relatively narrow path in terms of policy. In his opinion it had followed

4/16/63 -28
quite a good course. Recently there were indications of solid improvement
in the economy, not in all sectors but in quite a few. In general, con
ditions looked better than they had for a long while. Gross national
product, of course, was only now reaching a level that it had been hoped
to achieve some time ago. He foresaw the likelihood of a fairly sub
stantial and lengthy upswing in the economy if the move was not nipped in
the bud too soon.
Mr. King indicated that he would be inclined to favor a slight
reduction in the degree of market ease, without creating any serious
pressure on the bill rate. He would not favor a change in the discount
rate at this time, but he would like to suggest for the Committee's con
sideration a modification of the policy directive intended to carry for
ward the modest type of policy change reflected in the directive adopted
December 18, 1962, which he thought had probably been quite favorably
received by the financial community, particularly the international fi
nancial community, when published in the Board's Annual Report for 1962.
The suggested policy directive read as follows:
It is the Committee's current policy to allow some further
growth in bank credit, while aiming at money market conditions
that would minimize capital outflows. This policy takes into
account the continuing adverse U. S. balance of payments
position and at the same time recognizes the progress of the
domestic economy.
To implement this policy, System open market operations
during the next three weeks shall be conducted with a view
to effecting a small reduction in net free reserves through
open market operations.

4/16/63 -29-
Mr. King added that he would not vote against a renewal of the
existing directive if the majority of the Committee was so inclined.
However, he believed an opportunity was afforded to modify the directive
somewhat in light of the most recent statistical evidence.
Mr. Shepardson commented that the available economic information
seemed certainly to indicate some increase in economic activity. This
was gratifying. On the other hand, the continuing rise in stock market
prices and the pending increase in steel prices gave cause for concern.
There was additional reason for concern, of course, in the statistics on
the balance of payments. Except for the continuing problem of Treasury
financing, he would be inclined to follow the suggestion of Mr. Treiber.
In view of that situation, he would favor a continuation of present
policy, though with any deviations on the side of less ease.
Turning to the policy directive, Mr. Shepardson referred to
comments he had made at recent Committee meetings regarding the phrase
in the directive that alluded to an absence of general inflationary
pressures. He continued to believe that inflationary pressures in fact
existed and that the evidence of them was increasing. If there should
be any change in the directive, he would like to see that phrase deleted.
However, there might be an advantage, in terms of stability of policy,
in making no change in the directive at this meeting.
Mr. Robertson said that his views were in line with those
expressed by Mr. Bopp and Mr. Mitchell. Encouragement could be derived

4/16/63 -30
from economic developments in recent weeks, and he would like to see
everything possible done to encourage the furtherance of such develop
ments. He would suggest, therefore, waiting quietly and watching
carefully the trends that might develop over the next three weeks, with
no change in policy. Such a course would recognize the problems that
flowed from the undigested overhang of the recent auction of Treasury
bonds and would take into account the financing operations to be carried
out by the Treasury over the forthcoming period.
Mr. Robertson expressed the view that the policy directive was
adequate in its present form and said he would recommend making no change
in it. In summary, he would not change policy in any respect at this
particular time.
Mr. Mills said he was convinced, particularly after hearing Mr.
Koch's presentation, that financial developments were resulting in un
desirable downward pressure on the money supply. If so, a situation was
arising that required the attention of the Open Market Committee. Con
sidering the lag that occurs before policy actions can take effect and
be reflected in financial markets, it was not too early, in his opinion,
to alter the tone and direction of monetary policy toward slightly greater
ease. In elaboration of this line of reasoning, Mr. Mills presented the
following statement:

4/16/63 -31-
Money supply problems are likely to become an increasingly
important issue in the System Open Market Committee's formulation
of monetary and credit policy throughout 1963.
The vast expansion of commercial bank credit that occurred
in 1962 was financed largely by a phenomenal increase in time
and savings deposits and was based to a much smaller degree
on a rise in credit-created demand deposits. Credit expansion
in 1963 is proceeding along similar lines, but because of a
sluggish demand for commercial and industrial loans, demand
deposits have not risen appreciably.
The modest statistical increase that has been recorded
in the money supply thus far in 1963 is a reflection of the
passive demand for commercial and industrial loans and the
unwillingness of the Treasury to finance any of its security
offerings through the commercial banking system and tax and
loan account procedures. If this situation continues, growth
in the money supply will fall short of the amount needed to
foster a rising gross national product and over-all economic
activity will have been retarded. Tangible indications of
such possibilities can even now be traced to a declining
trend in required reserves which, if it gathers momentum,
conceivably can result in a harmful reduction in the money
supply that would represent a contraction of the means of
payment in the hands of the public.
Developments of this nature, both actual and potential,
pose serious problems to the formulation of Federal Reserve
System moretary and credit policy. Commercial bank time and
savings deposits go on increasing and have found employment
principally in the areas of real estate mortgage and consumer
credit and investment in tax exempt municipal obligations.
In fact, the plethora of such funds seeking employment, both
in the hands of the commercial banks and related financial
intermediaries such as mutual savings banks and savings and
loan associations, has prompted discussion of a competitively
inspired deterioration in the quality of the credits being
handled. This in turn leads to the question whether monetary
and credit policy actions aimed at fostering the money supply
would exhaust their intended usefulness in uneconomic and
undesirable credit usages. A correct answer to the question
must be found!
The vast increase in commercial bank time and savings
deposits has made apparent the very important fact that the
nature of these funds is identical whether in the hand of the

4/16/63 -32-
commercial banks or the various financial intermediaries, and
that in every case they must be defined as "near money" and
not as a "substitute for money," or as a segment of the
circulating medium as in the case of commercial bank demand
deposits. The clear distinction that exists between commercial
bank demand and time and savings deposits is crucial to the
formulation of Federal Reserve System monetary and credit
policy as it bears on money supply problems. This is so be
cause open market policy actions exert their influence on the
creation or extinction of demand deposits and only remotely
on the accumulation or dispersal of time and savings deposits
with their concomitant credit usages. Therefore, it follows
that open market policy actions cannot be taken that will
directly exert a restraining influence on the credit employ
ment of commercial bank time and savings deposits, and that
if they were erroneously attempted, a harmful downward pressure
would be put on the money supply. In that latter event, a
contraction in the means of payment in the hands of the public
occurring at a time when economic stimulation is sought after,
would have unfortunate consequences.
All of these circumstances face the System Open Market
Committee with a dilemma that cannot be easily resolved. In
my opinion, the state of the domestic economy deserves policy
priority over balance of payments considerations. Monetary
and credit policy should, therefore aim at fostering the
expansion of commercial bank credit which, by the same token,
would support needed growth in the money supply. Such a
policy would recognize that aberrations in the use of credit
financed cut of commercial bank time and savings deposits
are not susceptible to the direct influence of open market
policy actions, but can only be controlled by other means.
It would also conceive that in the absence of a demand for
commercial and industrial loans, the Treasury would grant
the commercial banks a judicious use of tax and loan privi
leges as a means for creating new demand deposits and
supporting the money supply. I do not believe that the
interest rate objectives that have been sought for would
suffer from the kind of policy proposed, even though free
market principles for determining interest rates have been
rejected in favor of an artificially manipulated United
States Government securities market that has made the interest

4/16/63 -33
rate structure a subject of deliberate policy attention.
Judging from recent experience, I have a suspicion that
the level of free reserves has been brought down to a
point that is putting the money supply under pressure,
and that the free reserve level pertaining may not repre
sent as much credit leeway as the figures suggest, in
that the fluctuations in vault cash, as they enter and
leave the free reserves total, are too temporary in their
influence as to affect the credit base. Similarly, the
hard core of Federal funds in constant use does no more
than support the outstanding use of commercial bank credit
and due to its shifting ownership adds little or no support
to credit expansion.
Mr. Mills said he saw no occasion to change the discount rate
at this time. However, the position he had taken as to policy would
require deleting from the second paragraph of the directive the phrase
that called for maintaining the same degree of money market firmness.
As indicated by his statement, he felt that there should be a lesser
degree of firmness.
Mr. Wayne said the latest information indicated that Fifth District
business activity was improving at about the same rate as the national
economy. Retail trade was strong; the coal business had improved a
little; construction contract awards had spurted; and a substantial
number of reporting manufacturers had been experiencing increased orders,
backlogs, shipments, employment, and hours. In addition, loan demand at
weekly reporting banks had recently shown greater-than-seasonal strength.
The most striking shift noticed by the Reserve Bank, however, was a sharp
rise in optimism among its grass roots contacts. During the period
covered by the Bank's latest survey, general business sentiment rose

4/16/63 -34
substantially. About two-thirds of the respondents now felt that further
gains were likely, and a number of these considered more improvement
fairly certain. Three weeks earlier, only a few thought a pick-up was
probable, and almost half expected no change.
The national business situation had definitely taken a turn for
the better, Mr. Wayne noted, and there were some signs that the improve
ment might be more than temporary. He was particularly encouraged by
the strengthening in leading indicators--especially new orders for
durable goods--and by the scattered signs that plant and equipment out
lays might be rising. No doubt the favorable weather and strike hedge
buying had played an important role, however, so it might be some time
before one knew how solid the improvement really was.
Turning to questions of policy, Mr. Wayne commented that the
existing degree of liquidity seemed adequate to finance any likely ex
pansion without undue upward pressure on rates. Despite the recent steel
price increases and the more general signs of strength in the economy,
excess capacity still seemed sufficiently large to preclude any general
upward pressure on prices. Accordingly, he felt that domestic develop
ments did not as yet justify any shift in policy. While he believed there
was room for further correction in this country's international accounts,
he had not yet been persuaded that monetary policy could make a further
contribution in this area without a more abrupt shift than he would be

4/16/63 -35
prepared to risk. Consequently, he would favor maintaining about the
same degree of ease as in the past three weeks, with due regard to prob
lems occasioned for the Desk by the post-Easter seasonal swing in re
serves. He favored renewing the directive, and he would be opposed to
a change in the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Clay observed that the latest available information on pro
duction, personal incomes and retail sales, and business spending clearly
was encouraging. The evidence also appeared to promise that some addi
tional expansion would be forthcoming in subsequent months. The signifi
cance of these signs of higher activity for the formulation of monetary
policy would be read differently depending upon the weight one assigned
to domestic versus balance of payments considerations.
From the standpoint of the domestic economy, the latest improve
ment was no greater than had been expected earlier; it did not reflect,
in Mr. Clay's view, an expansion so robust as to warrant a less stimu
lating policy. Moreover, the gains should not be interpreted as being
independent of the favorable influences monetary policy had generated
through expansion of bank reserves. Commercial bank data suggested
that total private spending for consumption and investment was re
ceiving significant support from the efforts of lenders to find cutlets
for their expanding resources.
If this interpretation of domestic developments was reasonably
accurate, Mr. Clay continued, the implications for the balance of pay
ments problem might be evaluated in two ways. On the one hand, it

4/16/63 -36
might be argued that the domestic capital market was made more recep
tive to foreign security issues. On the other hand, the domestic
economy was becoming more attractive for business investment--a trend
reinforced by signs that the boom in a number of European economies
was losing forward momentum.
Mr. Clay pointed out that the foregoing observations with re
spect to the current importance of monetary policy favored a continuation
of the recent moderate expansion of bank reserves and approximately the
same level of bill rates. If a temporary decline in bill rates should
occur, it did not appear to him that any serious consequences would
result if free reserves were allowed to decline temporarily to some
what lower levels. In his view, the directive was satisfactory as
now stated and the discount rate should not be changed.
Mr. Scanlon reported that developments in the Seventh District
appeared to support the more confident tone of business and banking
expectations. Retail sales and new orders for manufacturers' durable
goods had shown substantial gains. There were some signs that employment
and production were breaking out of their long plateau on the up side.
The rise in manufacturers' orders and the acceleration of in
ventory building reflected partly, of course, hedge buying of steel and

4/16/63 -37
products containing steel, Mr. Scanlon noted. To the extent that this
was true, a reaction later in the year was inevitable. However, he did
not think that hedge buying was the whole story. Inventories of many
types of goods had been at minimum levels relative to output, partly
because business managements commonly had been expecting a moderate
recession in early 1963. However, instead of declining, orders had
moved upwards. Although order backlogs of most firms remained very low
relative to earlier postwar years, there had been a stretch-out of
delivery dates in some instances. Lead times on certain types of steel
in strong demand, such as galvanized sheets, had lengthened appreciably.
Information received from capital goods producers indicated
that the rate of new orders from a large variety of customers had been
very strong in recent months, suggesting that the 5 per cent rise in
capital expenditures projected for 1963 might prove to be an under
statement. (However, there had been some slowing in shipments of farm
machinery, probably reflecting the prospect for lower farm income.)
Increasingly, the tax credit and the new depreciation guidelines were
credited with stimulating capital goods purchases.
One auto company estimated that car and truck sales had been at
annual rates of 7.5 million and 1.2 million, respectively, for the first
quarter. If these rates continued for the entire year, sales of both
cars and trucks would be at a record in 1963. (For cars the record year

4/16/63 -38
was 1955, for trucks, 1950.) The manufacturers still maintained that
the sales pace will slow down in the second half. Meanwhile, however,
production schedules for autos were being raised rather than reduced.
For the most part, Seventh District banking developments had
paralleled the national picture. Lending to nonfinancial business had
remained moderate and dealer loans had declined. Business loan demand
during the past month had been lower than in other recent years. On the
other hand, loans to consumers and finance companies and bank purchases
of mortgages and non-Federal securities had risen in recent weeks.
Mr. Scanlon pointed out that while business prospects had
strengthened, many businessmen had doubts regarding prospects for the
second half of the year, particularly because of expected declines in
the output of steel and autos. These doubts were strong enoug. that he
would be hesitant to recommend any material change in System operations
at this time. In view of these factors and the forthcoming Treasury
refunding, he believed that no basic change was indicated for monetary
policy. He would not change the directive, and obviously he would not
change the discount rate.
Mr. Deming reported that inventories of livestock and grain were
quite high in the Ninth District. It appeared that marketings would be
heavy this year. Therefore, despite price weaknesses he rather antici
pated that cash farm income in the first half of this year might be from

4/16/63 -39
5 to 10 per cent higher than in the first half of 1962. The Reserve
Bank's latest survey, taken in April, showed a considerable rise in
business sentiment since February, when the previous survey was taken.
A much higher percentage of respondents thought that improvement was
probable or certain. On the other hand, the pattern of optimism was
not appreciably different from that reported last July and in the early
part of the fall. In general, it might be said that the prevailing
attitude at present was one of tempered optimism.
On a seasonally adjusted basis, bank credit expansion continued
in the District in March. The pace of increase was not quite as strong
as in February, but it was a bit stronger than a year ago. At city
banks there was no particular strength in the demand for business loans,
with credit expansion taking the form of increased investments. Deposit
behavior was about normal for this time of year. City banks were in a
reasonably easy reserve position as long as they could get money through
the Federal funds market. At country banks, on the other hand, the loan
growth for the first quarter of the year was the largest on record. This
reflected not only loans to farmers but small business and real estate
loans. The growth seemed to have tapered off a bit in March, being about
normal for that month, but the deposit decline was smaller than in previ
ous years.

4/16/63 -40-
Turning to policy, Mr. Deming said that without prejudice to
the possibility of probing toward lesser ease at some future time, he
would not want to see any change in policy for the next three weeks.
The Treasury financing schedule, the overhang of undistributed bonds
from the recent auction, and market uncertainties all argued that no
change in policy would represent the best course. He saw no particular
reason to change the policy directive, except possibly in one technical
respect, and he would not favor changing the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Swan reported that on a seasonally adjusted basis the rate
of unemployment in the Pacific Coast States declined in March, but the
drop was less than for the nation. For the third successive month
defense-related industries laid off workers, and some further decline
in aircraft employment in California and Washington was anticipated
for April, and possibly for May. Department store sales set a new
record in the District in March, but in early April the year-to-year
comparisons for the District lagged behind those for the nation as a
whole. Late snow and rain had improved both pasture conditions and the
outlook for the water supply this summer.
In the three weeks ended April 3, demand and time deposits at
District weekly reporting banks both increased. The picture of credit
expansion was somewhat similar to that reported nationally, being pri
marily in investments, and major District banks continued to be net

4/16/63 -41
sellers of Federal funds into mid-April. The demand for municipal
securities apparently continued to be strong. The State of California
recently marketed two bond issues at the most favorable terms for any
large issue since 1958.
Mr. Swan expressed himself as gratified by the improvement
indicated in the national business situation. He believed, however,
that any move toward less ease at this juncture would be premature.
Of the statistics presented the drop in the rate of unemployment was
perhaps the most dramatic change, but the decline was only to about the
1962 average. It certainly did not seem conclusive as yet that a rapid
and continuing expansion of domestic economic activity was inevitable,
and in his opinion the increased pace of expansion noted thus far should
certainly not be discouraged. Also, despite the existing problems from
the international standpoint, he saw no impelling reason in the balance
of payments position for immediate action.
In summary, Mr. Swan said, it seemed preferable for the System
to save its ammunition until either the international or the domestic
situation, or both, called for stronger action than would be justified
at this time. Further, the problems of the Treasury, including its
imminent financing program, supported a position of no change in monetary
policy.

4/16/63 -42
Mr. Swan concluded by saying that he would not recommend a
change in the discount rate at this time and that he would leave the
policy directive unchanged.
Mr. Irons reported that conditions in the Eleventh District
were reasonably good. During the past month there had been a slight
strengthening of several of the major indicators of economic activity.
Industrial production was up a bit according to the basic index and as
reflected in the use of electric power. Construction conditions were
very strong, with activity during the past month having risen to a
record high for that month. Construction of office buildings and
apartments was going on apace in the major cities. Nonagricultural
employment had increased slightly, but unemployment had also increased
slightly on an unadjusted basis. The agricultural outlook was quite
good despite a lack of rainfall, and department store sales were up
after adjustment for the date of Easter. Petroleum was off a bit in
terms of production, refining, and drilling.
District. banks seemed adequately liquid, and there was no sub
stantial borrowing from the Reserve Bank by either city or country banks.
Except for two large banks that were persistent buyers of Federal funds,
most of the banks dealing in such funds had been on the selling side.
There were no reports of need for additional reserves. Loans had in
creased during the past three weeks, along with time and savings de
posits, but investments declined--counter to the national pattern--and
demand deposits declined seasonally.

4/16/63 -43
There seemed to be no particular problem areas so far as attitudes
in the District were concerned. On a random basis, businessmen seemed
quite encouraged. They were worried about the usual number of things
and would like to see better profit margins, but the results, when added
up, looked quite good.
Mr. Irons noted that the improvement in the broad sweep of
national economic activity was encouraging. This was, of course, what
the System had been hoping to see for a long time. In his opinion it
would not be appropriate to make any change in policy at this stage,
for he doubted whether the degree of improvement in domestic activity
that had been noticed thus far was sufficient to warrant the conclusion
that a different monetary policy was in order. The same line of think
ing appealed to him from the standpoint of the international situation,
and the fact that the Treasury would be in the market also argued for
maintenance of the status quo. All in all, he would suggest continuing
the policy that had been followed for the past three weeks. The Desk
had done a good job of implementation, and he hoped the same conditions
could prevail for another three weeks, including a continuation of the
same degree of market firmness.
In conclusion, Mr. Irons said he would not change the policy
directive or the discount rate. He added that in his opinion this was

4/16/63 -44
not a time when fine shadings and gracations of policy would serve a
useful purpose.
Mr. Ellis reported that the New England economy reflected some
improvement in most of the economic indicators except employment and
unemployment. In March unemployment ran some 10 per cent above a year
ago, and initial claims for unemployment compensation were about 5 per
cent higher. The manufacturing index rose slightly in February after
seasonal adjustment, and construction awards and building permits
showed improvement, along with personal income, consumer spending, new
orders, and capital outlays. Business loans had increased more than
seasonally since January, with reporting banks showing increases wall
distributed according to broad categories.
Mr. Ellis then reviewed a recent report indicating that savings
banks in at least one part of the District were encountering difficlty
in putting to work a record volume of deposits. Competition for mortgages
apparently had led to some lowering of quality standards, along with rate
reductions. He also referred to financial difficulties besetting potato
growers in Arostook County, Maine, due to higher costs and lower prices.
Mr. Ellis expressed the view that in retrospect Federal Reserve
policy had been properly stimulative and should be entitled to some
credit for making a contribution to the current strengthening of the
economy. He found it interesting to review the financial trends that had

4/16/63 -45
prevailed since the modest shift in monetary policy last December. Since
then, total reserves appeared to have expanded at an annual rate at about
3.5 per cent. The reduction of reserves available for growth to about
the 3 per cent guideline seemed to fall within the pattern of what the
Committee should have been trying to achieve.
Mr. Ellis suggested that the first paragraph of the policy
directive might be changed to reflect the recent improvement in eco
nomic conditions. He also suggested that the range of policy making
open to the Committee seemed somewhat broader than in recent months.
At least this would be the case once the imminent Treasury financing was
out of the picture. For some time, he noted, the Committee had been
walking a narrow path, between concern about short-term capital outflows
and stimulation of the domestic economy. Now, however, there was more
of a choice of paths to follow. The Committee could move down the middle
or undertake some probing in one direction or another.
Mr. Ellis foresaw that a continuation of the current degree of
monetary ease would lead to a more rapid expansion of credit as the
current economic improvement continued. It also appeared, according to
reports from lenders, that the present degree of ease was leading to a
slight weakening of credit standards. His inclination would be to probe
toward less ease, and determine pragmatically the effect on the domestic

4/16/63 -46
economy, after the imminent Treasury financing was out of the way. Such
a course of action would involve aiming for a slightly lower level of
free reserves, perhaps around $250 million, with short-term rates edging
toward 3 per cent, few days when the Federal funds rate was below 3 per
cent, and moderately higher member bank borrowing. Only after such
exploratory probing and judgment as to the effect would he consider
increasing the discount rate.
As to the next three weeks, Mr. Ellis said he would consider it
appropriate to modify the first paragraph of the policy directive so as
to reflect the fact that some strengthening in the domestic economy was
being seen. He would not, however, change monetary policy in any
significant degree due to the need for an even keel in view of the
Treasury financing.
Mr. Balderston expressed the view the impending Treasury
financing, together with the aftermath of the Treasury bond auction,
indicated a need to maintain steady money market conditions until the
next meeting of the Committee. After that time, however, he believed
the Committee should come to grips more vigorously with the problem of
how best to minimize disturbing influences that were lurking beneath
the surface.
Internationally, the dollar was on the floor in most of the
European markets, and the current foreign exchange figures were not

4/16/63 -47
reassuring. It appeared that not too much progress had been made in
achieving a basic equilibrium in the U. S. international payments posi
tion even though the first quarter figures might appear somewhat better
than those for the first quarter of 1962. The most recent flash report
on the balance of payments carried the disturbing possibility that the
deterioration indicated thereby might be more than merely ephemeral.
Domestically, it seemed to Mr. Balderston that the quality of
lending was lower. Stock market loans were on the rise again, esp cially
in the area of unlisted securities. While he was told that insurance
companies had not gone below the 5-1/2 per cent rate on mortgages, he
was also told that they were taking on mortgages of definitely lower
quality and were engaging in direct deals with companies they would
not have looked at a couple of years ago. In short, he saw more and
more resemblances to 1928. Preoccupation with unusued resources, human
and otherwise, might be setting the stage for substantial difficulties.
Three weeks from today he felt that he might be inclined to favor a
shift in the course of monetary policy toward less ease.
Chairman Martin commented that the discussion at this meeting
had seemed to recognize as overriding factors the problem being faced
by the Treasury and the condition of the money market. Seldom had he
seen a time when the market situation was as much dominated by long
range changes. In the March advance refunding a large volume of

4/16/63 -48
securities had changed hands, and that operation had not yet been fully
digested. Additionally, there were the difficulties encountered in the
long-term bond auction and the fact that an uncertain market atmosphere
existed, reflecting conditions that had been discussed around the table
today. The Committee should not do anything, in his opinion, to upset
market forces in either direction. Although he was sympathetic to the
points raised by Mr. Treiber from the standpoint of the balance of pay
ments situation, it would be disturbing to the money market for the
System to interfere in any way at the present time. Instead, the
Committee should be concentrating on maintaining the same degree of
ease. To use Mr. Koch's expression, "steady in the boat" ought to be
the policy for the next three weeks, at which time another look could
be taken at the situation. In this connection, the Chairman cautioned
against committing one's self to a policy position at some time in the
future. A lot of things could change in the interim.
The Chairman foresaw difficulties for the Treasury in the present
situation. Although the Treasury had not tasked with him about the
matter, it was almost certain to have a difficult period ahead, with a
refunding coming up so shortly after the long-term bond auction. In his
view the System should not complicate the situation in either direction.
Steady in the boat was the policy that ought to be pursued.

4/16/63 -49
Continuing, Chairman Martin expressed agreement with those who
felt that the balance of payments picture looked more cloudy. He did
not pretend to know how long it might take for a storm to develop.
Nevertheless, vigorous domestic business activity could create further
difficulties from the standpoint of the balance of payments and intensify
the problem. One should not overemphasize what monetary policy could do
in that regard, nor should one underestimate.
Chairman Martin then proposed that the current economic policy
directive be renewed in its present form, adding that he doubted whether
it was necessary even to make technical changes. This would imply no
change in current policy and no change in the discount rate. He in
quired whether there were those who would want to be recorded as dis
senting.
Mr. Mills stated that he wished to be recorded as dissenting,
in line with the views he had expressed earlier during the meeting.
Mr. Treiber also indicated that he would like to be recorded as
dissenting. In explanation of his position, he said that the degree of
liquidity now existing in the economy and the improvement in the domestic
economic situation made it possible, in his opinion, to give greater
attention to the balance of payments problem, which he considered a very
serious one. He recognized that probing toward less ease in a period of
Treasury financing presented a delicate problem, and there might be

4/16/63 -50-
developments in the market of such nature that the probing could not
take place. However, from the point of view of policy formulation, he
felt the Committee should be moving in that direction.
Chairman Martin commented that if he were the Account Manager, he
would not want to be given that degree of discretion in view of the prob
lems being faced at this juncture. This, of course, was a matter of
judgment.
Thereupon, upon motion duly
made and seconded, the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York was authorized and
directed, until otherwise directed by
the Committee, to execute transactions
for the System Open Market Account in
accordance with the following current
economic policy directive:
It is the Committee's current policy to accommodate mod
erate growth in bank credit, while aiming at money market
conditions that would minimize capital outflows internationall,.
This policy takes into account the continuing adverse United
States balance of payments position and the increases in bank
credit, money supply, and the reserve base in recent months, but
at the same time recognizes the limited progress of the domestc
economy, the continuing underutilization of resources, and the
absence of general inflationary pressures.
To implement this policy in a period of a Treasury bond
financing, System open market operations during the next three
weeks shall be conducted with a view to maintaining about the
same degree of firmness in the money market that has prevailed
in recent weeks, while accommodating moderate reserve expansion.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,
Balderston, Bopp, Clay, Irons, King, Mitchell,
Robertson, Scanlon, and Shepardson. Votes
against this action: Messrs. Mills and Treiber.

4/16/63 -51
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, May 7, 1963.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary