A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington cn Tuesday, September 10, 1963, at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Clay
Mr. Irons
Mr. King
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Scanlon
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Wayne, Alternate for Mr. Bopp
Messrs. Hickman, Shuford, and Swan, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Ellis and Deming, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Boston and Minneapolis,
respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Messrs. Baughman, Brill, Eastburn, Furth, Garvy,
Green, Holland, Koch, and Tow, Associate
Economists
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market
Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of
Governors
Mr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Mr. Broida, Chief, Consumer Credit and Finances
Section, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Spencer, General Assistant, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors

9/10/63 -2-
Messrs. Hilkert and Patterson, First Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Philadelphia and Atlanta, respectively
Messrs. Mann, Ratchford, Taylor, Jones, Parsons,
and Grove, Vice Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta,
St.. Louis, Minneapolis, and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Marsh, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston
Mr. Sternlight, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com-
mittee held on July 30, 1963, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the Committee
a report from the Special Manager of the System Open Market Account on
foreign exchange market conditions and on Open Market Account and
Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the period August 20
through September 4, 1963, together with a supplementary report covering
the period September 5 through 9, 1963. Copies of these reports have
been placed in the files of the Committee.
In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs observed
that the U. S. gold stock would remain unchanged this week. There was a
sufficient balance in the Treasury Stabilizazion Fund to take care of
immediate foreseeable needs, and he was hopeful that it might be possible
to get through the remainder of this month without showing further losses
in the gold stock.

9/10/63 -3-
In the London gold market, a certain amount of speculative buying
had developed during the last few days of August, resulting in depletion
of the gold pool. The proposed interest equalization tax was a disturbing
influence, along with the recent Brookings study recommending flexible
exchange rates. There were also the usual rumors in advance of the annual
meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank.
The gold market developments began to worry some Western European bankers,
but the Russiars then came in with sizable gold sales and the gold pool
was able to acquire a substantial part of those sales.
The U. S. dollar had shown a mixed pattern in the foreign exchange
markets, being firm against sterling, the Canadian dollar, the guilder,
and the lira, but weak against the French franc, the Swiss franc and the
mark. The total flow of dollars to Germany and Switzerland had not been
sizable in recent weeks, however, and there had been a noticeable decline
in the intake of dollars by the Bank of France. In summary, there had
been a gradual improvement in the over-all position of the dollar. A
major factor appeared to be the proposed interest equalization tax,
which was placing a virtual freeze on new foreign flotations in the
U. S. market. However, the recent improvement in the balance of pay-
ments figures was mainly at the expense of Canada and Japan. The longer
run consequences of the tax were difficult to estimate, but Mr. Coombs
was inclined to feel that they might be much less than the short-run
influence.

9/10/63 -4-
There were also a number of indications that the recent rise in
U. S. short-term interest rates was beginning to encourage a repatriation
of U. S. corporate funds previously placed. in the Euro-dollar market.
The situation appeared to be at a point where even a moderate easing
abroad, coupled with a firm short-term interest rate structure in this
country, would bring about a substantial inflow of short-term funds.
In reply to a question about the effect of the interest equaliza-
tion tax in light of the proposed exemption of Canadian issues, Mr. Coombs
said that until the tax was actually passed, no one was prepared to take
a Canadian issue for fear the Congress might not approve the exemption.
The same thing applied in the case of Japan. In the short run, the pro-
posed tax would exert a substantial effect on the balance of payments
statistics, like the virtual freeze on the flow of short-term funds to
Canada in the first part of 1962.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the System
Open Market Account transactions in foreign
currencies during the period August 20 through
September 9, 1963, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
Turning to recommendations for consideration by the Committee,
Mr. Coombs pointed out that the $250 million reciprocal currency agree-
ment with the Bank of Canada, currently on a standby basis, would mature
September 26, 1963. He recommended its renewal for a period of three
months.

9/10/63 -5-
In discussion, which centered around the relatively large sie
of the Canadian arrangement, Mr. Coombs brought out that Canada was the
most important trading partner of the United States. He felt that the
relationship of the British and Canadian swap arrangements ($500 million
and $250 million) was about right. In relation to the British swap
arrangement, the swap agreements with two or three of the Continental
central banks were probably on the low side, and in due course it might
be desirable to attempt to work out somewhat larger swap lines in these
cases.
Thereupon, the renewal of the reciprocal
currency agreement with the Bank of Canada, as
recommended by Mr. Coombs, was approved unan-
imously.
Mr. Coombs noted that three drawings of $25 million each under
the swap arrangement with the German Federal Bank would mature September
18, September 20, and September 23, 1963, respectively. It appeared that
during September there might be rather substantial payments by the German
Government to the United States for military hardware. If the remainder
of the payments balance between the two countries was roughly in equi-
librium, it might be possible to pay off the swap drawings by buying
marks against the dollars used by the German Government and by buying
the necessary additional marks through the market. If developments did
not unfold in this way, however, he would recommend renewing the swap
drawings for three months. In each case, this would be the first renewal
of the drawing.

9/10/63 -6-
The renewal of the three swap drawings,
if necessary, was noted without objection.
Proceeding to his third recommendation, Mr. Coombs noted
that the $12.5 million System drawing of French francs under the swap
line with the Bank of France had been completely covered by equivalent
purchases of French francs forward. Thus the swap drawing would be
repaid by around the end of October. The forward purchases were made
under the $25 million authorization for forard purchases of foreign
currencies that: was given by the Committee on March 5, 1963. Mr. Coombs
felt that this had been a useful operation and that it would be desirable
to provide room to take care of other similar opportunities that might
appear. He recommended, therefore, that the authorization for forward
purchases of foreign currencies be increased from $25 million to $50 million.
In reply to questions, Mr. Coombs stated that it would be the
intent, if the increased continuing authorization were granted, to acquire
from time to time currencies in which the System had a short position
as the result of drawings under swap lines. At the moment, only the
German and French swap drawings were outstanding, but in the future
there might be other drawings where forward purchases would be useful
in arranging for repayment. This seemed a businesslike way of taking
care of debts incurred. In the French case, before the due date of the
drawing, the possibility arose of buying francs forward at a discount,
and in this manner the drawing was completely covered. The Committee's
Guidelines, he pointed out, specify that forward purchases should be

9/10/63 -7-
cleared in advance, and this had been done. He did not think that for-
ward purchases in such circumstances could be regarded as an unwarranted
manipulation of normal market processes. Instead, it amounted to
anticipating the repayment of drawings by buying forward rather than
waiting to buy spot. If the needed currency was available at a discount,
its purchase forward would seem to be a businesslike way of handling the
repayment of a drawing.
Mr. Mitchell commented that he thought several members of the
Committee felt some concern as to whether System foreign exchange
operations might tend to obscure normal market forces. He found him-
self trying to evaluate the extent to which System operations might
tend to obscure fundamental adjustments in the process of taking place
in the market.
Mr. Coombs said that he could understand this concern. There
was clearly the potential in System foreign exchange operations of doing
what had been suggested. However, in view of the way that System
operations had been conducted, he thought that this had not been the
case. Whenever the System had run into great pressure, it had yielded
to the pressure and backed away; in no instance had an attempt been
made to dig in and maintain an artificial rate. As to forward opera-
tions, he felt that the risk of distorting market forces was less than
in the case of spot operations. There was admittedly a real risk in the
whole area of System operations of obscuring basic market forces. On the

9/10/63
other hand, the System had drawn under its swap lines only on occasions
when it appeared that existing flows of funds might be reversible.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the con-
tinuing authority directive for System
foreign currency operations was amended,
effective immediately, to read as follows:
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is authorized and
directed to purchase and sell through spot transactions any
or all of the following currencies in accordance with the
Guidelines on System Foreign Currency Operations reaffirmed
by the Federal Open Market Committee on March 5, 1963, as
amended on May 28, 1963:
Pounds sterling
French francs
German marks
Italian lire
Netherlands guilders
Swiss francs
Belgian francs
Canadian dollars
Austrian schillings
Swedish kronor
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also authorized
and directed to purchase, in accordance with the Guidelines and
for the purpose of allowing greater flexibility in covering
commitments under reciprocal currency agreements, any or all
of the foregoing currencies through forward transactions, up
to a combined total of $50 million equivalent.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is further authorized
and directed to purchase and sell, in accordance with the
Guidelines and for the purpose of utilizing its holdings of one
currency for the settlement of commitments denominated in other
currencies, any or all of the foregoing currencies through for-
ward as well as spot transactions. up to a combined total of $50
million equivalent.
Total foreign currencies held at any one time shall not
exceed $1.75 billion.

9/10/63 -9-
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report covering open market operations in U. S.
Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period August 20
through September 4, 1963, and a supplementary report covering the
period September 5 through September 9, 1963. Copies of these reports
have been placed in the files of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Marsh commented
as follows:
During the past three weeks we were able to maintain
about the same degree of firmness in the money market as in
the previous period while supplying reserves to meet normal
monthly drains and Labor Day needs without creating downward
pressures on short-term rates. In fact, due to a combination
of fortuitous circumstances bill rates ranged somewhat higher,
with the 91-day rate between 3.38 and 3.40 per cent until the
last three days of the period when down ward pressures have
developed as a result of the Treasury's advance refunding
operation.
Over the period the System supplied a net total of $516
million reserves, $288 million through purchases of bills,
$78 million through purchases of coupon issues, and $150
million through an increase in holdings of repurchase agree-
ments. $247 million of the bills were purchased in the
market, consisting of very short maturities offered to us
in large blocks as dealers took them back from corporation
repurchase agreements; $41 millior of other bills were pur-
chased from foreign accounts. These purchases had practically
no effect on market rates for bills. The $78 million coupon
issues were bought on August 23, after which no further opera-
tions were undertaken in these issues in view of the imminence
of the Treasury's advance refunding operation. In the last
part of the period, additions to reserves were made through
increases in repurchase agreements, which were facilitated
by large increases in dealer portfolios just before and after
Labor Day.
At the time of the last meeting of the Committee bill rates
were around 3.35 per cent bid for 91-day bills. In the next few
days rates backed up to about 3.40 per cent bid as nonbank demand

9/10/63 -10-
tapered off and dealers displayed a cautious attitude in the
face of the three bill auctions scheduled for the week before
Labor Day, including the first billion dollars of the new
monthly one-year bills. Dealers bid quite aggressively in
these auctions, anticipating better demand at the higher
rate levels, particularly as an outgrowth of the expected
advance refunding. They also felt that the authorities
would be satisfied with rates this close to the discount
rate. Their awards in these three auctions were quite
substantial, totaling $2,225,000,000, and their. trading
positions were increased well above $2 billion, where they
remained, acting as a damper on the market, at least until
the announcement of the advance refundi.ng last Wednesday.
In planning for the advance refunding, the Treasury
had recognized that the "prerefunding" portion, or the part
involving the extension of relatively short maturities,
could create downward pressures on short rates. They had
expected to make a simultaneous announcement of an auction
of a strip of Treasury bills to counteract this effect but
decided to delay this action until they were actually faced
with the need for it. However, in announcing the advance
refunding, they stated that it was intended to meet the
cash needs of approximately $6 billion for the remainder
of calender 1963 largely through offerings of Treasury
bills. Also, they said that the timing and magnitude of
these borrowings would be adjusted to the pattern of cash
requirements and the needs of the balance of payments
situation. The most recent Treasury estimates show
excessively high cash balances, at least through the end
of September, so that they now feel inhibited from borrow-
ing any new cash in the near future, which is unfortunate
in view of the effect the advance refunding is having in
increasing the demand for bills. Since the Treasury's
announcement last Wednesday a fairly substantial amount
of "right." has been sold against purchases of bills
with the result that the 91-day rate has backed down
to 3.34 per cent bid and dealer bill positions have been
reduced below $2 billion. Yesterday's auction (in which
the three- and six-month rates were 3.34 and 3.46 per
cent, respectively) and market performance did not reflect
any further downward pressure on bill rates; in fact, the
dealers were awarded $820 million more new bills in the
auction. However, if there should be a resurgence of
demand, we could find it difficult to keep the bill rate
from falling lower in the absence of assistance from the

9/10/63 -11-
Treasury. The quarterly tax date is expected to have
little effect on the Treasury bill market.
As you are probably aware, the refunding package
is made up of two parts, the "pre efunding" in which the
r
holders of the large May 1964 maturities are offered
three new issues, 3-7/8s of 1968, 4s of 1973, and 4-1/8s
of 1989-94 (which will be reopened), and the "junior
advance refunding" in which holders of tour issues due
in 1966 and 1967 are offered the 4s of 1973 and 4-1/8s
of 1989-94. The terms are generous, including substan-
tial cash payments by the Treasury which result in a
yield as high as about 4.20 per cent tc the buyers of
"rights" who wish to exchange into the long-term 4-1/8s.
There was some initial surprise that the operation
covered such a wide range of eligible issues and in-
cluded an offering of a long bond. The reception has
been favorable up to now, but the attractive pricing
against the market required a substantial adjustment
on Thursday in prices of outstanding issues running
from 1/8 cf a point in the 1968 area to 3/4 of a point
in the longest term issues and almost two points in the
reopened 4-1/8s of 1989-94. The Treasury has expected
an exchange of the $23 billion of public holdings of
eligible issues to the extent of about 25 per cent, or
$6 billion. It is too soon to tell how it will work
out, but it seems likely that this goal will be reached
and that the exchange into the long 4-1/8 per cent bonds
will be substantial, possibly as much as $1 billion.
The books for the exchange will close this Friday, Sep-
tember 13, and the payment date will be Wednesday,
September 18.
Aside from the technical price adjustment in
Government securities, the capital markets in general
have not yet shown any significant reaction to the
higher yields made available on the long bonds. There
has been some slight softening in the market for cor-
porate bonds as two long-standing syndicates were
broken last week, but activity generally has been
light as the market awaits the results of the advance
refunding. In view of the projected high level of its
cash balances, the Treasury is taking advantage of the
supply of securities generated by the advance refunding
to purchase a substantial amount of intermediate and
longer term issues for the trust accounts. This will
not only put the excess cash to work but also will re-
duce the total outstanding debt, which the Treasury

9/10/63 -12-
believes will be bumping against the ceiling after the
first of October. We don't yet know the total magnitude
of this program, but it is safe to say that it will mini-
mize any possible effect of the advance refunding on longer
term rates. The market has not yet become fully aware of
these purchases, and it may well be that after the entire
refunding operation is over, long rates will fall back to
the range somewhat above 4 per cent where they have been
for some time.
In discussion, it was suggested that if the market became aware
of substantial Treasury purchases of longer term issues, this might pro-
voke a speculative situation. Mr. Marsh replied that this subject had
been discussed with the Treasury yesterday. It was pointed out to the
Treasury that this could encourage redundant subscriptions to the 4-1/8
per cent bonds. The Treasury was aware of the possible result and
actually had not been buying the 4-1/8 per cent bonds direct to any
extent. Most of its purchases had beer in other issues, mainly the
4 per cent bonds of 1980.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimcus vote, the open
market transactions in Government securities
and bankers' acceptances during the period
August 20 through September 9, 1963, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
At this point Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel of the
Committee, and Messrs. Conkling and Daniels, Assistant Directors of the
Board's Division of Bank Operations, joined the meeting.
There had been distributed a memorandum dated August 29, 1963,
from Mr. Stone, Manager of the System Open Market Account, and Mr. Farrell,

9/10/63 -13-
Director of the Board's Division of Bank Operations, suggesting revisions
of procedures with respect to allocations of the System Account. The
memorandum pointed out that when the present allocation procedures were
adopted in March it was indicated that as gold reserve ratios pushed
downward it would be necessary to devise new procedures that would be
workable even if such ratios should move close to 25 per cent. To date
the existing procedures had been working satisfactorily. However, with
the combined reserve ratio for all Reserve Banks now in the neighborhood
of 31 per cent, and with the fall expansion in note and deposit liabili-
ties about to get under way, it seemed desirable to develop a revised set
of procedures for the Committee's consideration. The proposed new pro-
cedures, which were set forth as an attachment, were discussed in sone
detail in the memorandum. In addition, the hope was expressed that
before too long the allocation procedures--which now involved the use
of high-speed computers--would have developed to a point where, if it.
should be the Committee's desire, no Reserve Bank would need to show
a reserve deficiency on any day as long as the combined ratio for all
Banks was at least somewhat above 25 per cent..
During a discussion of the proposed revised procedures, Mr.
Marsh explained a minor change that had been suggested since the
memorandum was distributed, and agreement with this change was
indicated.

9/10/63 -14-
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the pro-
posed revised procedures for allocating the
System Open Market Account were adopted,
effective with the reallocation for
September 25, 1963. The revised procedures
were as follows:
1. Securities in the System Open Market Account shall be
reallocated on the last business day of each statement week
and of each month by means of adjustments proportionate to the
adjustments that would have been required to equalize approxi-
mately the average combined reserve ratios of the 12 Federal
Reserve Banks based on the most recent available five business
days' reserve ratio figures.
2. The morning after each weekly and monthly statement
date, the Board's staff shall calculate the reserve ratios of
each Bank after allowing for the indicated effects of the
settlement of the Interdistrict Settlement Fund for the
preceding day. If these calculat.ons should disclose a
deficiency in the reserve ratio of any Bank, the Board's
staff shall inform the Manager of the System Open Market
Account, who shall make a special adjustment as of the
previous day to restore the combined reserve ratio of that
Bank to the average of all the Banks or to such higher level
as may be necessary to eliminate the deficiency in note or
deposit reserves. However, such adjustments shall not be
made beyond the point where a deficiency would be created
at any other Bank. Such adjustments shall be offset
against the participation of the Bank or Banks best able
to absorb the additional amount or, at the discretion of
the Manager, against the participation of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York. The Board's staff and the Bank
or Banks concerned shall then be notified of the amounts
involved and the Interdistrict Settlement Fund shall be
closed after giving effect to the adjustments as of the
statement date.
3. If a Bank anticipates that its reserve ratio will
fall below 25 per cent on any other day (because of purchases
that day for the System Open Market Account or for other
reasons), it may arrange with the Manager of the System Open
Market Account for an adjustment on that day in an amount
sufficient to raise its combined reserve ratio to the
average reserve ratio of the 12 Banks combined on the pre-
ceding day, or to such point as the Manager of the System

9/10/63 -15-
Account and the Bank concerned consider feasible. Such
securities shall be allocated to other Banks in order of
their ability to absorb the largest additional amount
without reducing their reserve ratios below the ratio of
the 12 Barks combined.
4. Until the next reallocation the Account shall be
apportioned on the basis of the ratios determined in
paragraph 1, after allowing for any adjustments as pro-
vided for in paragraphs 2 and 3.
5. Profits and losses on the sale of securities
from the Account shall be allocated on the day of delivery
of the securities sold on the basis of each Bank's current
holdings at the opening of business on that day.
Messrs. Hexter, Conkling, and Daniels then withdrew from the
meeting.
The Chairman called at this point for the usual staff economic
and financial reports beginning with Mr. Brill, who presented the
following statement on economic developments:
Not very much in the way of new economic information
has become available since the last meeting of this Committee,
but what evidence there is provides no basis for modifying
the staff's appraisal of the economic situation. More of
the same seems to be the order of the day.
On the labor front, the unemployment rate edged down
slightly in August, but at 5-1/2 per cent it still is not
significantly different from a year ago and there continues
to be no change in the number of workers suffering from
longer term unemployment. Some improvement in the job
situation among adult males has been offset, in large
part, by continued inability to find enough opportunities
for the rising number of younger workers now entering the
labor force.
On the production front, the index for August has not as
yet been calculated, but present indications suggest little
change from the July level. It is encouraging that there
appeared to have been sufficient strength in other lines of
activity to offset the sharp decline in auto and steel out-
put. It is encouraging also that in recent weeks steel
production appears to have stabilized at these reduced

9/10/63 -16-
levels and that September auto production is scheduled to
increase. How far this carries, however, depends in large
measure on the public's reception of the new auto models.
As for prices, scattered reports of increases for
some industrial commodities have been balanced by reported
declines it others, and the over-all commodity average
remains stable at a level little different from that pre-
vailing over the past two years. Unfavorable weather and
increased sales taxes contributed to the rise in consumer
prices earlier in the summer, along with the usual slow
but persistent updrift in prices of services.
Turning to prospective developments, the new survey
of business plant and equipment spending plans reported
by the Department of Commerce confirms earlier indications
that business capital outlays should be rising substantially
over the balance of the year, with the fourth quarter rate
of outlays expected to be some 8 per cent greater than a
year ago. Welcome as this rise in spending would be, one
can legitimately express some disappointment about the
survey results. For one thing, since last autumn there
has been a persistent shortfall in actual as against
planned spending. The shortfall has not been very large
in amount, but still is a rather unusual development in
a cyclical expansion during which neither strikes nor
material shortages have inhibited realization of plans.
Second, the anticipated rise would bring total capital
spending for the year to a level slightly below that pro-
jected by businessmen last spring, and, in fact, only about
2 per cent above the levels projected almost a year ago.
In light of the surprisingly strong profit and cash flow
picture that has developed this year, one might have
reasonably expected some raising of sights by businessmen
as to capital requirements, but apparently availability
of funds by itself does not carry enough weight in de-
termination of investment plans. Finally, one might note
that, in dollar terms, the rise in fixed capital spending
over the second half of this year--some $3 billion--is
likely to be offset in large part by lower rates of
inventory accumulation than in the pre-strike-threat
period. Over-all, therefore, the business sector's
contribution to further rise in economic activity is
not likely to be much greater than earlier this year.
The enigmatic consumer remains a question mark,
spending generously--weekly data suggest August retail
sales up slightly from July, the third consecutive monthly

9/10/63 -17-
increase--but also saving providently. There are some
signs suggesting a further moderate diminution of sav-
ings, particularly through financial intermediaries,
but July data tend to be volatile and certainly what
information we have is too fragmentary to permit any
conclusion about basic shifts in trends. By and large,
nothing suggests any significant deviation in consumer
behavior from recent patterns.
The Federal Government's contribution to economic
activity may rise more sharply in the fourth quarter,
if the military pay raise is approved and becomes
effective promptly. The outlook for other types of
Federal expenditures, however, seems to be for a con-
tinued advance at the pace of recent quarters. Federal
spending for goods and services, transfers, interest,
and grants-in-aid has continued to rise in step with
GNP throughout almost all of the recovery and expansion
period since early 1961. This is in contrast to no
rise for almost two years after the 1954 recession
trough, and to the leveling off after less than a year
of the 1958-60 upswing. Federal revenues, however,
have been rising as rapidly as expenditures, and the
net of the Government's injection and withdrawal of
funds has been a moderate deficit position--as measured
in the income and product accounts--that hasn't changed much
over the past two years. Again, this contrasts with the
rapid return to a net surplus position chat acted as a
drag on the economy in earlier cyclical recoveries.
However, merely not making the same fiscal mistake is
hardly an adequate substitute for aggressively adopting
the right fiscal policies. Tax reduction seems as much
a necessity today as it was last winter Unfortunately,
monetary policy has to be formulat .d today in light of
the absence of such fiscal stimulation to the domestic
economy.
Mr. Koch presented the following statement on financial
developments:
To phrase my text for today, let us beware of over-
emphasizing the importance of small and gradual changes
in monetary policy, even sometimes those cumulated over a
considerable period of time. I come back from a four-week
vacation to find a policy of monetary ease lessened slightly

9/10/63 -18-
again, for the fifth time since late 1961. And yet I find
essentially unchanged the more fundamental indicators of
monetary policy considered as a group, namely, the course
of bank reserves, bank credit, the money supply, both
narrowly and broadly defined, and even interest rates, if
one excludes short-term rates, which probably have only
minor effects on over-all economic activity.
This combination of policy changes and actual events
may have been exactly what was sought. But it has probably
been more a reflection of the basic forces of the demand
for credit and capital and the supply of real saving rather
than of monetary policy. I'm afraid only a loose relation-
ship can also be found to have existed between recent changes
in monetary policy and international capital movements.
Looking at the factual evidence t. support these obviously
somewhat cverdrawn conclusions, the money market has firmed a
bit, at least since late July, although not perceptibly since
the Committee's last meeting. Free reserves have ranged
around $100 million, as compared with about $150 million
earlier. Member bank borrowings from the Reserve Banks have
averaged a little over $300 million a day, unchanged from
July. The Federal funds rate has generally been at or just
under the new 3-1/2 per cent discount rate. New York City
commercial bank lending rates to Governnent securities dealers
have been most often at 3-3/4 per cent, and the 90-day
Treasury bill rate has fluctuated between 3.35 and 3.40 per cent.
Bank reserve expansion, on the othar hand, has proceeded
apace, despite the slightly firmer tone of the money market.
Required reserves behind private deposits continue to average
about $100 million above the guideline used in the staff
memorandu, which includes a 3 per cent secular growth rate.
The money supply, narrowly defined, has probably risen
somewhat again in early September after having declined a
little in August. Thus far this year, growth has been at
an annual rate of about 2-1/2 per cent, as compared with
1-1/2 per cent in 1962 as a whole.
Time deposit growth at commercial banks has quickened
a little since the July action raising maximum rates payable
on certain of these deposits, with the growth being especially
sharp in the case of negotiable time certificates of deposit.
The money supply, including time deposits, continues to in-
crease at a 7 to 8 per cent annual rate.
As for bank credit expansion, the pace in the third
quarter is off a little from earlier in the year, but this

9/10/63
may be due largely to the changed timing of Treasury
financing. Normally, Treasury financing in the summer
occurs in July, whereas this year it occurred in June.
Bank acquisitions of municipal and Government agency
securities continue large, as do real estate and consumer
loans, with business loans experiencing a somewhat slower
rate of growth thus far this year than in 1962--about 5
per cent compared with 9 per cent.
Business financing through the capital markets, as
well as through the banks, has been seasonally less this
summer than earlier. These business financial develop-
ments reflect somewhat larger flows of internal funds as
a result of better earnings and higher depreciation
accruals and only a moderate rise in capital spending.
Although on balance the major impact of a slightly
less easy monetary policy has thus far been on money
market conditions and short-term rates of interest, there
may be beginning to be some spillcver effects on longer
term rates and even credit availatility. Long-term
Government, corporate, and municipal bond yields are
now all between 1/8 and 1/4 of a percentage point above
their lows earlier in the year. ields on intermediate-
term Governments have experienced a somewhat greater
rise. Even mortgage rates appear to be under less
downward pressure than they were earlier. This course
of longer term rates has occurred in the wake of rather
large System purchases of Government coupon issues in
August. It has been accelerated by the current large
Treasury advance refunding, and there are signs that
even with larger cash flows, some corporations may be
deciding that this is a good time to borrow long-term.
Having opened my remarks by noting the relatively
small changes in the basic indicators of monetary policy
that have resulted from the gradual lessening of monetary
ease that has occurred, not only just this summer but
indeed since late 1961, let me conclude by expressing a
note of caution about this conclusion. Granted that in
a private economy as large and varied as ours, monetary
policy can normally be only a marginal and a lagging
influence on financial and economic developments, we
may be entering a period when such an influence can
become quite important.
Bank liquidity has been decreasing for some time
now, and longer term interest rates have risen a little.
In these circumstances, further reduction in monetary

9/10/63 -20-
ease could unduly dampen domestic activity in general and
investment in particular. In any case, the timing and
magnitude of the advance refunding and the current market
readjustments that are occurring as a result of this
action no doubt preclude any significant shift in policy
throughout most, if not all, of the period between this
and the next meeting of the Committee.
Mr. Furth presented the following statement with regard to the
U. S. balance of payments:
On the basis of the tentative and fragmentary weekly
data, the deficit for August apparently was in the neighbor-
hood of $250 million, or about the same as that for July, if
both figures are adjusted for special transactions (including
the reversal of window-dressing in July).
A deficit of that magnitude would be somewhat lower than
the monthly averages for either the first or the second quarter;
and it would be very much smaller on a seasonally adjusted
basis since the first and second quarters are seasonally
favorable but the third quarter is seasonally unfavorable.
The trade balance does not seem to have improved--on
the contrary, in July the trade surplus declined substantially.
The service balance, before seasonal adjustment, certainly has
deteriorated in view of the travel season. There is no reason
to assume a significant reduction in Government expenditures
abroad; thus, the improvement would seem to have been concen-
trated mainly in the capital sector.
Within this sector, there does not seem to have been much
change on short-term account. The rise in U. S. short-term
rates has not altered rate differentials in relation to major
financial centers abroad: Euro-dollar rates have increased
virtually as much as U. S. rates; the covered rate differential
in favor cf U. K. Treasury bills again exceeds 1/4 of 1 per cent;
and while the covered differential in favor of Canadian Treasury
bills, despite the rise in Canadian bill rates, has been vir-
tually eliminated by a widening of the forward discount on
the Canadian dollar, the differential in favor of Canadian
financial paper continues to attract U. S. funds. In fact,
according to the admittedly fragmentary reports collected by
the New York Reserve Bank, the outflow of morey market funds,
almost exclusively to Canada, amounted to $55 million gross
and $40 million net during the past three weeks, or about as
much as during the least favorable three-week period last spring.

9/10/63 -21-
Thus, we may guess that the improvement occurred in the
long-term sector. Since nothing has happened to diminish the
outflow of direct investments, it seems likely that the improve-
ment was in portfolio investments and long-term bank lending.
This assumption seems confirmed by the virtual cessation of
scheduling of foreign bond issues in the New York market,
following the announcement of the equalization tax proposal.
The flight: of foreign and domestic capital, predicted by some
domestic and foreign bankers, has failed to materialize--as
witnessed by the recent events in the stock market. In fact,
as Mr. Coombs has suggested, the effect of the tax proposal
on capital outflows may well have been greater during the past
and present period of uncertainty than it will be once the tax
is enacted. Right now, nobody knows for sure what transactions
will be subject to the tax retroactively, and therefore it is
virtually impossible to take measures to avoid the tax. Once
the tax provisions have been settled, the inevitable loopholes
will greatly reduce its effectiveness.
Econcmic expansion appears to continue in foreign developed
countries. This permits us to expect a further rise in U. S.
exports but also further outflows of direct investments to those
countries. In contrast, financial chaos continues to reign in
some less developed countries that are among the best U. S.
customers, and especially in Brazil. This not only clouds the
future of U. S. exports to those areas but also raises the
prospect of additional calls for U. S. Government assistance.
Two recent statistical reports have shed some light on
recent movements of U. S. capital. The first is a confidential
report on dollar holdings of European countries collected by
the Bank for International Settlements. The figures are
significant mainly because they show that, contrary to our
fears, our figures on U. S. short-term liabilities to and
claims on Europeans are pretty close to the European data.
The Euro-dollar market has made for some changes in the
distribution by countries but shows about the same net
balance for Europe as a whole as the figures collected by
the Federal Reserve Banks.
The second report is the survey of U. S. foreign in-
vestments published in the August issue of the Survey of
Current Business. The stock market decline of May 1962
improved the net international asset position of the U. S.
during 1962, since foreign holdings in the U. S. are mainly
in the form of shares while U. S. foreign holdings are mainly
direct or fixed-interest investments. Partly in consequence,
although our payments statistics showed a deficit of $3-1/2

9/10/63 -22-
billion in 1962, our net asset position actually improved
by $3 billion, surpassing the level reached at the end of
1957. While these figures give no reason for complacency,
they should remind us that we exaggerate the magnitude of
the U. S. payments deficit if we fail to consider changes
in our assets as well as in our liabilities.
Equally important are the figures on our total in-
vestments in foreign developed countries. If we count as
gross investment abroad not only our recorded capital out--
flow but also reinvested earnings of foreign subsidiaries
and, say, half of the usual depreciation allowances of foreign
branches and subsidiaries, total U. S. investment in Canada,
Europe, and Japan amounted to $2.8 billion in 1962--a figure
equal to 80 per cent of our total deficit. If it were possible
to eliminate that investment without harming U. S. exports--
or, as one member of this Committee recently suggested as an
alternative, to raise U. S. exports by the amount of that
investment by means of some tying mechanism--those short-
term capital outflows that reflect bear speculation would
presumably cease, if not be turned into an inflow. Moreover,
if it were possible to divert those funds to domestic invest-
ment, this would increase gross investment in the U. S. by
3-1/2 per cent, GNP probably by more than 1 per cent, and
employment perhaps by 1/2 of 1 per cent. Thus, U. S. gross
investment in foreign developed countries may well hold the
key not only to our payments deficit but also to our lag.
in domestic growth and employment. How to find the best
way to reduce that investment and especially how to cir-
cumscribe the role of monetary policy in that endeavor--
this is aiother story.
.The Chairman then called for the go-around of comments and views
on economic conditions and monetary policy beginning with Mr. Hayes, who
presented the following statement:
There has been no major change in the business
situation since our meeting three weeks ago. The upward
movement has been broadly based but moderate in pace, and
the prospect is for a similar tendency over the coming
months. Removal of the rail strike threat has of course
been a significant favorable development. Retail trade
continues to be a bright spot in the economic picture; and
the good clean-up of 1963 auto models, together with indica-
tions of strong consumer buying intentions, augurs well for

9/10/63 -23-
auto sales in the new model year. Plant and equipment out-
lays, according to the latest survey, should show good gains
in the second half of the year, but are no higher than esti-
mates made three months ago. Declines in leading indicators
in the residential construction area may well turn out to be
only an erratic statistical movement. Underlying strength
in this field is suggested by the rising trend of new house-
hold formations, lower apartment vacancy rates, and ample
mortgage credit.
Signs of upward price pressures, in addition to specific
influences pushing up food prices, have become more noticeable
in the past two months. However, it is certainly too early
to interpret these developments as an inflationary break-out
from the narrow range of major price indices over the past
three or four years. Stock market prices indexes have
touched new highs, and volume has picked up, suggesting
that there is renewed public interest in equity shares.
This rebound of activity and optimism is, no doubt, rooted
in the brighter outlook for profits against the background
of better business prospects and the expectation of a tax
cut this year. I find cause for watchfulness rather than
for concern in recent commodity price and stock market
developments.
Credit conditions are also little changed in the past
three weeks. Real estate and consumer loans have continued
to show strength, while business loans have remained slug-
gish. With corporate liquidity still high, corporate funds
have tended to flow into the money market in record volume,
helping the dealers to finance their inventories. Over-all
nonbank liquidity seems ample. As for bank liquidity, the
statistical ratios point to some downward drift in recent
months, to which our own policies have doubtless contributed.
Yet despite the discount rate increase, the related firming
of market rates, and some increase in the pressure on bank
reserve positions, the banks are still aggressively seeking
new loans, particularly in the mortgage and foreign areas.
The advance refunding has had some downward influence on
short-term market rates. The persistently heavy flow of
savings has acted as a stabilizing influence on long-term
rates in the face of the System's monetary moves--although
the advance refunding announcement has caused some rise in
long-term rates in the last few days. The deflection of
investment from abroad resulting from the interest equali-
zation tax proposal is likely to add moderately to the
demand for domestic longer term investments.

9/10/63 -24-
Turning to the balance of payments, there is some faint
cause for encouragement in the declining tendency of the
deficit over the first four weeks of August and the likeli-
hood that the third quarter deficit--even after adjustment
for special window-dressing factors around the end of June
and early July--will show a pronounced improvement over the very
poor second quarter results. The dollar has been performing
a little better in the foreign exchange markets, and it may
well be that the capital account is already showing the
favorable effects of higher interest rates and reduced
reserve availability in this country, together with the
sharply inhibiting effects of the interest equalization tax
proposal on new foreign issues. On the other hand, the out-
flow of short-term funds to Canada has been resumed since
the Canadian discount rate rise of August 12 and the sub-
sequent upward adjustment of Canadian money market rates.
Recent trade developments have been less encouraging
than the capital account. Imports rose in July, and as the
business expansion goes on, we can hardly hope to avoid
further import increases. At the same time, exports
declined in July. With the over-all deficit still running
at a dangerously high level, we cannot afford to give any
less weight than we have been giving to international con-
siderations. It is of course vitally important that we do
show a real improvement in the balance of payments in the
third anc' fourth quarters, if we are to build confidence
that we have been taking appropriate action, and if we are
to avoid a burgeoning of fears that direct controls will
be imposed--with all that this would mean for the dollar's
standing,
Since the Treasury is in the midst of an important ad-
vance refunding operation, we should aim to promote stability
in the money market over the nex, week or ten days. There-
after it would be desirable, in my judgment, to take advantage
of the scmewhat greater scope for action provided us by the
steadily improving domestic business situation, and to seek
a slightly greater degree of firmness in money market con-
ditions and especially in Treasury bill rates. It seems to
me that this would be well worth doing in order to make it
clear that we "meant business" when we raised the discount
rate to 3-1/2 per cent and that we intended this move to
find pretty full reflection in market rates within a reason-
ably short span of time. In other words, I would hope that
the 90-day bill rate would move into a range close to 3-1/2
per cent--perhaps both above and below that figure. Our

9/10/63 -25-
efforts to achieve firmer bill rates should be helped by the
current relatively high level of dealer inventories and the
Treasury's avowed intention of relying heavily on bills for
their cash financing needs over the coming months. However,
because of the current high level of cash balances, they do
not expect to be able to help in this way in the near future.
I would hope that higher rates could be achieved without any
very substantial reduction in free reserve levels; but I
would let free reserves drop to the extent needed to attain
the slightly firmer tone I have suggested as a primary
objective.
If this policy receives the Committee's support, the
second paragraph of the directive might appropriately be
modified to reflect the Committee's wish to see a slightly
greater degree of firmness in the money market after the
Treasury financing is completed.
Looking a little further ahead, 1 am wondering whether
we are approaching a time when the Board might wish to con-
sider a reduction in reserve requirements as a means of
meeting a portion of seasonal reserve needs with a minimum
of downward pressure on short-term market rates.
Mr. Ellis reported that the economic climate in New England
did not seem to have changed greatly during the summer months. Em-
ployment, production, personal income, and consumer spending were
running slightly below the national trends, and only construction
activity was outpacing year-ago figures more decisively than the
improvement nationally. The summer vacation business had shown a
substantial gain over the year-ago experience, with the index of
tourist attractions showing a 13 per cent gain in attendance in
July. However, resort facilities reported a noticeable decline in
business done in Canadian currency, apparently reflecting the dis-
count on the Canadian dollar.

9/10/63 -26-
Turning to the banking picture, Mr. Ellis said that during
July and August First District weekly reporting member banks had been
readjusting their positions after the fairly rapid surge of loan
demand in May and June. They had sold off about a quarter of their
Government securities and, despite some deposit outflows, were able
to expand their loan portfolios and buy more municipals. Large
commercial banks in Rhode Island and Vermont had recently raised
their rates on savings deposits to 4 per cent to meet competition.
With respect to monetary policy, Mr. Ellis said two questions
were paramount. in his own analysis. One question was whether the
recent discount rate action was having an effect on short-term capi-
tal outflows, and the other was how the domestic economy was faring
in light of the recent changes in reserve availability and interest
rates. On the first question, it would be difficult to get a satis-
factory answer since one could not be sure what would have happened
in other circumstances. It was known that there had been some
increases in Canadian, British, and E:.ro-dollar rates, but the
short-term capital movement did not seem to have increased. The
effect of the interest equalization tax proposal on capital flows
could not be separated from other factors. On the second question,
Mr. Ellis was inclined to be fairly optimistic about the course of
the domestic economy. Output had increased during the summer in the
face of the steel inventory reduction. Retail demand seemed strong,

9/10/63 -27-
personal. income was up, reports on profits were favorable, stock mar-
ket prices had moved to a new high, the construction business was
better than expected, and the outlook for fall business was reported
to be good. Given these factors, a stronger demand for bank credit
might be anticipated this fall.
As to policy for the next three-week period, Mr. Ellis said
that the even-keel concept would seem to have pertinence during the
period of Treasury financing, which would preempt most of the forth-
coming period. Thereafter, there would appear to be some leeway
availabl.e for monetary policy. He would meet fully the reserve needs
occasioned by seasonal expansion, but perhaps with some reluctance
in order to support any tendency toward fimer rates. A zero net
free reserve figure, plus or minus, would be acceptable as a target,
with uncertainties resolved on the side of less ease. He would be
willing to see the bill rate in a range from 3.40-3.50 per cent,
with Federal funds regularly at 3-1/2 per cent. Such a course would
amount in effect to a slight further shift toward less ease, and
logically a change in the policy directive would seem to be indicated.
At times in the past, however, he recognized that the Committee had
preferred to avoid issuing directives that called for delayed shifts
of policy following the completion of pending Treasury financing
operations. This led him to conclude that the Committee could afford
to continue the present policy directive for another three weeks,

9/10/63 -28-
after which time there could be a further appraisal of the wisdom cf
following a slightly firmer policy.
Mr. Icons said that most indicators of Eleventh District eco-
nomic activity, including industrial production, employment, and
construction either were inching upward or holding at a high level
with seasonal coloration. Construction activity continued to be
strong. In the area of mortgage financing, brokers and mortgage men
who are regarded as leaders in the District do not admit that there
has been any deterioration in the quality of credit. However, they
agree that there has been a lengthening of maturities and lower down
payments. They also indicate that there has been too much mortgage
money available, and rather than reduce rates, there is a tendency
to extend terms and the mortgage coverage.
Turning to the District banking picture, Mr. Irons said that
loans were up in the last three weeks, with most of the increase in
the commercial and industrial loan categories although real estate
and consumer loans had also increased. District banks had not
heretofore been too active in mortgage financing, but there appeared
to be some tendency in that direction. Demand deposits were up,
particularly those of individuals, partnerships, and corporations,
and time deposits also had increased. Some of the banks in the
District had been quite active in Federal funds, particularly on
the buying side, and had been running fairly high figures on funds

9/10/63 -29-
purchased. Borrowing from the Reserve Bank had been nominal. On the
whole, District banks were rather aggressively looking for opportuni-
ties to lend. They were not as liquid as they had been, perhaps, but
they were reasonably liquid.
Mr. Irons said it seemed to him that monetary policy was
definitely limited to an even-keel position for the next two weeks,
in view of the Treasury advance refunding operation. Rather than
to try to split off a few days at the end of the forthcoming three-
week period, he would recommend no change in policy during the period
of Treasury financing and until market churning had ceased. Then,
at its next meeting, the Committee would be in a position to con-
sider whether any change in policy was appropriate. If there were
any deviatiors from an even keel, he would prefer to see them fall
on the side cf a little less ease, but in general he would suggest
an even-keel operation over the next three weeks. This would infer
a bill rate somewhere around 3.40 per cent, Federal funds trading at
3-1/2 per cent, dealer rates from 3-5/8 to 3-3/4 per cent, and free
reserves varying between $50 and $100 million, though without too
much emphasis on that figure. The tone and pattern of the market
was more significant than a free reserve figure. He would not
change the policy directive.
Mr. Swan said there had been little change in the general
economic picture in the Twelfth District during the past three weeks.

9/10/63 -30-
As preliminary data indicated at that time, the unemployment rate rose
slightly in July as additions to the labor force outran a slight in-
crease in total employment. Final department store sales figures
showed an inccease from June to July, and apparently department store
sales held up well in August. In the lumber industry, the anticipated
decline in prices upon cessation of the labor dispute had occurred,
with both lumber and plywood prices declining sharply by the end of
August.
For the three weeks ending August 28, weekly reporting mem-
ber banks showed an increase in total loans, but the gain was less
than half as Large as during the comparable period a year ago. Real
estate loan portfolios continued to rise; the smaller increase in
total loans than a year earlier was attributable to a decline in
business loans. There was still no particular indication of a
significant pickup in business loans. Major banks in the Twelfth
District remained substantial net seLLers of Federal funds; they had
continued in that position last week and were expected to be on the
same side during the current week.
Turning to policy, Mr. Swan said it seemed that in view of
the Treasury refunding an. even-keel policy was called for. Further,
he saw nothing in the domestic business or international situation
that would indicate the desirability of a change in present policy
before the next meeting of the Committee. Accordingly, his preference

9/10/63 -31-
would be to maintain the present position through the entire three-
week period, both because of the Treasury financing and the general
economic picture. He agreed substantially with the target figures
indicated by Mr. Irons. If the bill rate returned to a level of
about 3,40 per cent, he would consider that as being within the
scope of present policy, but he woulo doubt that an increase to 3.50
per cent should be regarded as falling within this general definition.
He hoped the existing general market position could be maintained,
with free reserves around the $100 million level.
With respect to the policy directive, Mr. Swan said he would
suggest no change, except perhaps the insection of a phrase such as
"in view of the current Treasury refunding" in the first part of
the second paragraph.
Mr. Deming reported that business sentiment in the Ninth Dis-
trict,as measured by the Reserve Bank's opinion survey of early Septem-
ber, was quite optimistic, with three out of four respondents seeing
improvement in the near-term future and most of the remainder looking
for continuation of present high-level activity. Only 6 per cent of
the respondents saw a possible decline ahead. This sentiment undoubtedly
reflected both a strong agricultural situation and a modestly expanding
nonfarm sector. The 1963 wheat crop was the largest since 1958, and
a near record. Both corn and soybeans were very good. Altogether,
total crop output might be second only to 1958. Range and pasture

9/10/63 -32-
conditions were favorable and conducive to normal fall livestock mar-
ketings. Nonagricultural employment was expanding modestly, and hours
worked in manufacturing in July averaged 42.1 per week, higher than
the national average. Bank debits were up strongly from year-ago
levels. Electric power use in industry was sharply higher in July,
and personal income in that month was 5 per cent ahead of a year
earlier. The major area of weakness continued to be mining.
The banking picture contrasted rather sharply with the over-
all economic situation in the District. In general, loan, investment,
and deposit trends in the first half of 1963 were strongly upward,
after allowing for seasonal factors. In July, bank credit behaved
about seasonally, but deposits declined more than seasonally,
reflecting mainly the reduction in Government balances and apparently
a consequent outflow from the District. In August, the deposit trend
of July continued and was accentuated as interbank balances were
reduced along with Government deposits. Time deposit growth, how-
ever, was fairly strong, and ordinary demand deposit behavior was
about normal. Bank credit at country banks was about as expected,
but at city banks loans dropped rather sharply and contraseasonally,
reflecting weakness in most loan categories and particularly in
business loans. This movement seemed to be carrying over into early
September and was accented. City bank investments were expanding,
but not enough to offset the loan decline.

9/10/63 -33-
As to policy, Mr. Deming expressed the view that with an even
keel indicated for most of the forthcoming three-week period, it. would
be well to follow such a course for the entire period. He was not
sure, however, exactly what was comprehended by an even-keel concept
during the three weeks. He would like to see the bill rate return
to the 3.40 per cent level, with free reserves around $100 million,
but he was not certain that both of these objectives could be
accomplished. If not, he would be inclined to let the free reserve
level drop a bit to insure that the bill rate did not fall signifi-
cantly. While he would not attempt to push the bill rate back to
3.40 per cent just for the sake of attaning that Level, it would
be undesirable if the rate fell much below the present level. In
view of his policy suggestions, quite obviously he would see no
reason to change the current economic policy directive.
Mr. Scanlon reported that business activity continued at a
favorable level in the Seventh Federal Reserve District and was
generally expected to show further improvement. Retail sales, at
least of nondurables, appeared to have reached another new high in
August, while unemployment insurance claims remained at a low level.
Production of steel probably reached its low in mid-August and was
now rising. Producers of autos and trucks were highly confident
that the new models soon to be offered for sale would be accorded
a favorable reception by buyers. Orders for most types of capital

9/10/63 -34-
goods and construction contracts had been at a high level, indicating
some further rise in activity in these lines.
Department store sales in the District apparently reached a
new seasonally adjusted high in August. The rate of net inflow of
savings to banks and savings and loan associations in the District
slackened appreciably in July. Withdrawals, while above the pre-
ceding month and July of last year, were generally in line with
earlier months this year.
Mortgage interest rates appeared not to have been affected
yet by any firming of money markets. A Reserve Bank survey showed
some further easing of rates in the Chicago area in July. The
average effective rate on new home mortgages was 5.8 per cent com-
pared with 6.0 per cent in July of last year.
Total credit at District banks declined in August as holdings
of Government securities were reduced rather sharply--about $250
million at Chicago banks since the end of July. Despite a reduction
in dealer loans, total loans rose moderately, as a result of increases
in both the business and consumer categories. Recent strength in
business loans reflected, in part, a large credit in the chemicals
category recorded early in the month. Durable goods manufacturers
and trade firms repaid bank loans on balance in August. Demand for
non-real estate farm loans at agricultural banks was very strong in
July, partly because of a heavy volume of purchases of feeder cattle

9/10/63 -35-
by farmers and partly because of renewals necessitated by delayed mar-
keting of fed cattle, drought conditions in some areas, and other
factors. The large Chicago banks reported a net decline in loans
since early August. This development, coupled with further sales
of Treasury bills, had contributed to an easier reserve position.
These banks had been able to cover their needs fully in the Federal
funds market, and borrowing by other District banks had been at a
low level.
Mr. Scanlon concurred in the view that an even-keel policy
was called for during the next three weeks. He would not be dis-
turbed by a short bill rate in the 3.40 per cent area, but in view
of the possibility of downward pressure during the next few weeks,
he would not press to achieve that rate. In the present circum-
stances, he would favor no change in the directive, and he would
not change the discount rate.
Mr. Clay expressed the view that during the next three weeks
it would appear logical to pursue essentially the same policy that
had been adopted at the Committee meeting three weeks earlier. The
most immediate reason for not changing policy was the Treasury
financing operation that would be under way during the period. Quite
apart from Treasury financing, however, he felt it would be in order
to continue the same policy. That policy posture constituted the

9/10/63 -36-
implementation of the change that was initiated with the discount rate
action in mid-July, and the System should continue to carry out the
decision represented by that action.
For the period ahead, Mr. Clay continued, pursuit of this
policy would appear to call for maintaining a degree of money market
firmness represented by a Treasury bill rate of about 3-3/8 per cent.
The current directive also called for accommodating moderate expan-
sion in bank reserves, and that also should be continued. In order
to facilitate the attainment of these objectives, the Account Manager
should conduct operations in various maturities as necessary, recog-
nizing that such operations might be limited by the Treasury's
financing activities in the interval ahead. The discount rate
should be left unchanged. With reference to the directive, considera-
tion should be given to rewording the second sentence of the first
paragraph, in view of money supply developments in August. The
last paragraph of the directive could be left unchanged.
Mr. Wayne said that signs of improvement in Fifth District
business were definitely more numerous than a few weeks earlier.
Although some of these favorable items described conditions a
number of weeks earlier, they added a significant impression of
strength to the current picture. In July, for instance, seasonally
adjusted nonfarm employment passed the five-million mark for the
first time as jobs in trade, contract construction, services, and

9/10/63 -37-
government all. reached record levels. Bank debits, manufacturing man-
hours, and cigarette production were also at all-time highs. In
August, rates of insured unemployment were mostly well below the
national average. Department store sales, at a high level in July,
showed further improvement in August. General business sentiment,
as revealed in the Reserve Bank's latest survey, remained moderately
optimistic. Manufacturers reported small gains in new orders, order
backlogs, shipments, wages, and prices, with employment and hours
virtually unchanged. The agricultural outlook, particularly for
pastures and late crops, had improved slightly as a result of
scattered rairs. Loan demand continued strong in the District,
perhaps a lit, le stronger than in the nation as a whole.
On the national front the most important news seemed to be no
news of any significant weakness in the vacation month of August. The
temporary solution of the rail dispute had removed one potentially
serious roadblock, and civil rights disturbances apparently had not
had any significant effects on business activity generally. On the
positive side, the little information available for August seemed to
indicate that the economy continued to operate at a high level with
perhaps some increases in particular areas. The continuing strength
in prices after significant rises in July apparently indicated con-
siderable strength in demand. Retail sales seemed to be holding their
own at a high level. Purchasing agents noted a small rise in new

9/10/63 -38-
orders, with production and employment remaining about steady. With
almost no definite movements to serve as guides, the sustained strength
of recent weeks could only be regarded as a possible indicator of a
satisfactory rate of activity in the weeks immediately ahead and maybe
a little better than seasonal rise during the fall months.
In the policy area, Mr. Wayne felt that the Desk had done a
good job in carrying out the current directive in the face of con-
siderable difficulties. He concurred in the view that an even keel
was indicated for the next two weeks, and in view of general condi-
tions he saw no reason to change policy during the entire three-week
period. As to targets, he agreed generally with the suggestions of
Mr. Deming. Accordingly, he would renew the present policy directive,
except for such change as might be deemed advisable in recognition of
the Treasury financing. He would not change the discount rate at
this time.
Mr. Rcbertson presented the following statement:
I am sure that all of us have been studying the recent
reports cn business developments with special care, looking
for the first clues as to the trend of business this fall--
now that we have passed the traditional Labor Day jumping-
off point. I have been doing so, but it seems to me the
flow of evidence is inconclusive at this point. The fall
business expansion is still more a matter of hope than any-
thing else, although a few more weeks of figures may remove
some of the doubts that now exist. I have watched particu-
larly closely the trend of prices in recent weeks, for the
succession of price increases being reported was a source

9/10/63 -39-
of real concern to me. Our general price stability is one
of the key achievements of recent years, and one that we
are going to have to maintain if we are to achieve any
orderly resolution of our domestic and international prob-
lems. If a general price upcreep were to start, I think
monetary policy would have to be prepared to do its part
to resist. Fortunately, the latest and most comprehensive
information on wholesale prices suggests that price increases
and decreases are still essentially offsetting, and that
means to me that we still are in a period when monetary
policy can be broadly stimulative in the interest of pro-
mot.ing greater employment of our resources.
I note with some satisfaction the apparent (though
inadequately explained) improvement in our over-all balance
of payments during the past two months, and I think we ought
to watch carefully to judge both the sources of that improve-
ment and how long it may continue. I doubt that little, if
any, of this improvement can be attributed to our changed
monetary policy, and I would not think any further change
in policy for balance of payments reasons would be in
order until the extent and duration cf the recent improve-
ment is more clear.
I am troubled by some of the domestic financial conse-
quences that may be developing as a result of both our
actions and the debt management operations of the Treasury.
I refer to the higher interest rates and more cautious tone
that have appeared in the capital markets, and the stepping
up of reserve pressures on banks to the point where they
have had to make substantial sales of Government securities.
I think it is unclear at this juncture how far such adjust-
ments will proceed, but at some point they must surely begin
to alter lender and investor attitudes towards additional
requests for loans, and at that point our policy of "less
ease" will, in my judgment, have gone too far. Indeed, we
may have passed that point already, although it is very
difficul: to judge. At the very least., I think we should
hold our policy course steady over the next few weeks,
watching carefully for cumulative consequences of the
firmer money and capital market conditions that have been
created. The huge Treasury advance refunding, of course,
is itself a factor tightening long-term markets, and should
lead us to maintain "even keel" considerations for the full
period of time during which the market is involved in this
operation. And in this case it is my view that "even keel"
should be judged more in terms of reserve positions, Federal

9/10/63 -40-
funds rates, and dealer needs than by the bill rate, which
may be selectively depressed by reinvestment demand from
investors uninterested in the advance refunding offering.
A selective remedy for such downward rate pressure is
readily at hand in the form of the sale of additional bills
by the Treasury. I think that is the appropriate tool for
doing any tinkering that is to be done with the bill rate
at this juncture. I would not want to see us again use the
general tool of increased reserve pressure to squeeze bills
out of the banking system, as we. have done over the past
six weeks. I think the full consequences of that course
of action are not yet known to us, and we may well regret
the eventual effects upon bank and public liquidity when
all the facts are in.
In conclusion, Mr. Robertson said that he would not favor
changing the policy directive. Neither would he favor changing the
discount rate at this time.
Mr. Shepardson said that economic developments seemed gener-
ally encouraging. However, the crawl of prices concerned him. Ad-
mittedly, it was not a great crawl, but it was a movement in the wrong.
direction if one expected to achieve economic growth and greater
utilization of resources. While he did.n ot know how to measure the
impact of the recent change in the minimum wage, it certainly would
be conducive to holding up prices. Whateve effect it might have
from the price standpoint would he in the wrong direction.
To repeat, he was concerned that if there continued to be a
crawl in prices, this would affect adversely both the trade balance
and the growth of the domestic economy.
However, in light of the Treasury financing, it seemed appro-
priate to Mr. Shepardson to continue the present monetary policy at

9/10/63 -41-
this time. He was inclined toward a position such as Mr. Ellis had
outlined, with the understanding, however, that because of the
Treasury financing, the present policy should be continued for the
full three-week period ahead. Accordingly, he would favor renewing
the policy directive without change.
Mr. King said that he agreed with the remarks of those who
favored no change in the policy for the forthcoming three-week
period. He doubted the necessity of changing the policy directive
to make reference to the current Treasury financing operation. At
times such a reference was necessary, but not on every occasion when
an even-keel policy was to be followed. He also felt there should
be no change in the discount rate. As he saw it, allaspects of
present policy should be continued.
Mr. Mi.tchell said that he thought no change in policy was the
course indicated for the coming period. He felt that the Desk should
not fight a modest lowering of the bill rate, because of technicalities
that might produce pressure. On the other hand, if market forces pro-
duced a rise in the bill rate, he would be agreeable to seeing the rate
move back up to 3.40 per cent.
Mr. Hickman commented that the flow of statistical information
since the last Committee meeting had been meager, but on the whole had
tended to support the forecast of a quiet August, followed by renewed
strength in the autumn. In the Fourth District in.August, underlying

9/10/63 -42-
strength was evidenced by brisk department store sales and by the con-
tinued large volume of residential building. A small increase in un-
employment in the District was limited to auto and steel centers.
The pickup in steel orders, the first indications of which
were noted at the previous Committee meeting, had strengthened in
recent weeks, at the same time that ingot output appeared to be
bottoming out, It was evident that the end of the reaction phase in
steel was near, with a fresh demonstration of the resilience of the
economy in having absorbed the steel downdrag.
When the steel industry had completed its turn, and when 1964
autos became available for sale, there might well be a question as to
whether the term "moderate" business expansion would continue to be
appropriate. A full-blown expansion similar to those experienced
during the 1950's could possibly be in the making. Any such develo-
ment would imply, either as cause or effect, a significant renewal of
rising commodity prices. So far the latter had not occurred, but
recent price developments had been showing some faint signs of an
upward stir. Paper had now joined steel, nonferrous metals, rubber
tires, and cigarettes on the up side. The industrial component of
the wholesale price index had edged up by a fraction of an index
point in each of three successive months through July, and an additional
slight nudge to prices might follow the recent statutory rise in the

9/10/63 -43-
minimum wage. Altogether, the price front would bear watching, although
it would be premature to conclude that a new phase had set in.
It seemed to Mr. Hickman that monetary policy had done about
all that could be expected of it over the past three weeks, and that
the Desk had done a skillful job. Since the discount rate action,
i.e., in the period from July 17 through August 28, total loan demand
at reporting banks had been stronger than in recent years, and with
their present reserve positions, banks had been forced to liquidate
investments to a greater extent than usual. Insofar as this greater-
than-seasonal loan demand continued, he would favor allowing the
pressures to be reflected in the market.. This might mean a level of
free reserves moderately below recent levels, and a growth of actual
required reserves below present staff targets.
It should be kept in mind, Mr. Hickman added, that price sta-
bility could no longer be taken for granted, that the economy was
poised for a possible takeoff, and that the volume of liquid assets
held by the public continued to rise vigorously and bore the highest
ratio to GNP since 1958.
Mr. Hilkert said that since the previous meeting of the
Committee, Third District business conditions had improved slightly
and tightness had become more evident on the banking scene. But
economic conditions had not improved sufficiently to help the Dis-
trict's lagging rate of economic growth.

9/10/63 -44-
Unemployment claims continued well below the totals of recent
years, and unemployment had decreased over the summer, but half the
District's labor markets still had unemployment rates higher than the
nation's. Some increases in output, evidenced by greater-than-seasonal
increases in electric power consumption in the District's manufactur-
ing industries, had not been reflected in manufacturing employment or
in the workweek. Construction contract awards had failed to exceed
1962 levels, while doing so nationally. Department store sales in
the latest four weeks improved a bit over 1962, but not enough to
change the Third District's year-to-date deficit of one per cent.
Conditions at Third District banks had tightened during the
past three weeks. Basic reserve positions were consistently on the
minus side, and District banks lost a little over $100 million in
deposits. Business loans fell by $8 million, thus contributing to
a total decline in these loans of $40 million since the beginning
of the year. Investments were also off, ar.d the total of loans and
investments fell by $17 million.
Mr. Patterson said that if the latest statistics for the
Sixth District showed anything new, it was the accumulation of
additional evidence to confirm the renewed vigor in economic expan-
sion that began to be evident toward the latter part of the summer.
The expansion was not of boom proportions, and was not shared equally
by all areas of the District, Nevertheless, it had been a pleasant
surprise to some persons who were expecting a slowdown during the

9/10/63 -45-
last half of 1963. Apparently, the District's economy was performing
slightly better than the nation's.
Construction, both residential and nonresidential, was one of
the brightest spots. A greater-than-usual part of residential con-
struction was taking place outside the major metropolitan areas. In
the nonresidential category, the impact of the expanded space program
was beginning to be felt with the awarding of a substantial contract
for the construction of a missile test center in Southern Mississippi
that might absorb some of the workers released by completion of a
$125 million oil refinery in the same area.
Manufacturing employment in the District was rising and retail.
spending had moved up. Although fall harvest activity was still light,
larger-than-usual crops of cotton, peanuts, and corn were expected.
There would be a bumper crop of pecans.
The step-up in economic activity was reflected in the latest
banking figures. Incomplete data suggested that total bank credit
rose in August, with substantial loan increases in Florida and
Georgia. With total deposits, reserves, and excess reserves up and
member bank borrowing off, there were no signs that recent Federal
Reserve policy had resulted in any credit stringency within the
District.
Mr. Shuford reported that the economy of the Eighth District
had continued to expand during the summer months. Employment in the

9/10/63 -46-
major metropolitan areas had risen about 4 per cent since last spring,
and there was a marked rise in the industrial use of electric power.
Other indicators also had evidenced what seemed to be a good solid
growth in the economy. Nationally, there had been a marked rise in
business activity that began early this year and appeared from pre-
liminary figures to have continued into August and perhaps early
September.
Mr. Shuford said he was inclined toward the view that the
economic improvement had been facilitated by the degree of availa-
bility of bank reserves and the monetary expansion that occurred
last fall and in the first part of this year. Over the past year
the System had been able to make some contribution both to the high
level of domestic business activity and the balance of payments
problem; the total demand for goods and services had been stimulated
or at least facilitated by bank reserve and monetary expansion at
moderate rates. At the same time, while it was too early to judge,
it appeared that the rise in short-term rates had, to some degree,
made a contribution from the standpoint of the balance of payments
problem.
Insofar as current policy was concerned, Mr. Shuford said he
would favor no change in view of the Treasury financing. He would
like to see the short-term rate at about the level that had prevailed
in recent weeks--somewhere around 3.37-3.40 per cent. While monetary

9/10/63 -47-
expansion might appropriately be more moderate than last fall, it
should be adequate enough to support a continuation of the business
improvement that had been experienced so far this year. He would
not favor any change in the discount rate at this time, and he saw
no reason to change the policy directive.
Mr. Balderston said that certain of his own concerns had been
set forth by Mr. Hickman and that he would also like to mention two
others. One was the continuing tendency to put savings and other
resources into mortgages, especially for the construction of income-
producing property. Of the total outstanding mortgage debt of $263
billion, which had been rising at a monthly rate of about $2 billion,
the debt on one-to-four family houses was now about $175 billion. One
indication of a lowering of lending standards that had attracted the
attention of Mr. Fisher of the Board's research staff was that in July
one-fourth of the conventional mortgages on new single-family dwellings
were for terms of 25 years or more.
Mr. Balderston went on to say that his other concern was over
the rail. strike issue. The country may have felt some sense of relief
in the postponement of the strike. However, the postponement was
accomplished only at the expense of interference with the process of
collective bargaining, which might lead eventually to interference in
price setting and other matters. In his view, there were worse things
than a strike, and the strike now remained for settlement during the
winter when any interference with the movement of coal was so important.

9/10/63 -48-
The central issue was how many jobs the union was willing to give up
as the result of automation, and thus far no criteria for the settle-
ment of that issue had been provided. Thus, Mr. Balderston said, the
exuberance of the moment must be tempered by thoughts of a deteriora-
tion in the quality of lending and by what might prove to have been a
misstep in the settlement of a labor dispute.
As to policy for the forthcoming period, Mr. Balderston said
he agreed with what had been said by others at this meeting. He felt
the policy of the previous period should be continued for the next
three weeks, but he hoped that events might permit pressing the bill
rate somewhat closer to the discount rate.
Chairman Martin said he continued of the view that both the
domestic business situation and the balance of payments situation
had been improved by the actions of the System this summer, which
had tended to take up some of the slack in the line. Reports of an
overabundance of mortgage money in some areas, as mentioned by Mr.
Irons, gave pause for concern.
The Chairman went on to say he had always been of the feeling
that, generally speaking, it was inadvisable to provide for a change
of policy within the course of a three-week period between Committee
meetings. Policy should be made at meetings of the Committee and
not be projected into a future time period. It seemed to him that
in the present situation it would be well to wait until the October 1

9/10/63 -49-
meeting, when the Treasury would have completed a major financing
operation, to decide on any change in policy that might seem to be
neeeded.
Chairman Martin suggested that the policy directive might be
changed to make reference to the Treasury refunding operation because
of its size, although such recognition might not be necessary on all
occasions of Treasury financing. This could be done, if the Committee
so desired, simply by inserting the words "and taking account of the
current Treasury refunding operation" in the first part of the second
paragraph. He proposed that a vote be taken on the directive in a
form in which it would otherwise be unchanged, with the understanding
that this would infer the maintenance of policy "as is" for the forth-
coming three-week period.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York was authorized and directed,
until otherwise directed by the Committee,
to execute transactions in the System
Account in accordance with the following
current economic policy directive:
It is the Committee's current policy to accommodate
moderate growth in bank credit, while putting increased
emphasis on money market conditions that would contribute
to an improvement in the capital account of the U.S.balance
of payments. This policy takes into consideration the con-
tinuing adverse balance of payments position and its cumula-
tive effects and the high level of domestic business activity,
as well as the increases in bank credit, money supply, and
the reserve base in recent months. At the same time, however,
it recognizes the continuing underutilization of resources.

9/10/63 -50-
To implement this policy, and taking account of the
current Treasury refunding operation, System open market
operations shall be conducted with a view to maintaining
the prevailing degree of firmness in the money market,
while accommodating moderate expansion in aggregate bank
reserves.
Votes for this action: Messrs.
Martin, Hayes, Balderston, Clay,
Irons, King, Mitchell, Robertson,
Scanlon, Shepardson, and Wayne.
Votes against this action: none.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Open Market Committee
would be held on Tuesday, October 1, 1963.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary