A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, May 28, 1963, at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bopp
Mr. Clay
Mr. Irons
Mr. King
Mr. Mills
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Scanlon
Mr. Shepardson
Messrs. Hickman, Wayne, Shuford, and Swan, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Ellis and Bryan, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Boston and Atlanta, respeccively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Baughman, Eastburn, Furth, Garvy, Green,
Koch, and Tow, Associate Economists
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market
Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of
Governors
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Yager, Chief, Governmen: Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors

5/28/63 -2
Mr. Rouse, Vice President and Senior Adviser,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Mann, Ratchford, Jones, Parsons, and
Grove, Vice Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Richmond, St.
Louis, Minreapolis, and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Brandt, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston
Mr. Sternlight, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit
tee held on May 7, 1963, were approved.
Under date of May 15, 1963, there had been distributed to the
members of the Federal Open Market Committee copies of the report of
audit of the System Open Market Account and of a report of audit of
foreign currency transactions, both made by the Board's Division of
Examinations as at the close of business January 25, 1963, and submitted
by the Chief Federal Reserve Examiner under date of March 1, 1963.
Copies of these reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote: the audit reports
were accepted.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the Committee
a report from the Special Manager of the System Open Market Account on
foreign exchange market conditions and on Open Market Account and Treasury
operations in foreign currencies for the period May 7 through May 22, 1963,
together with a supplementary report covering the period May 23 through
May 27, 1963. Copies of these reports have been placed in the files of
the Committee.

5/28/63 -3-
In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs
reviewed current and prospective developments in regard to the U. S.
gold stock along with the results of recent gold pool operations.
Continuing, he noted that the U. S. dollar was under increasing
pressure against various Continental European currencies. As spelled
out more fully in the written reports, there had been inflows of both
short- and long-term capital funds into Continental money markets,
attributable in some part to factors such as tight money market condi
tions, attractive possibilities for stock market as well as direct
investments, and window-dressing operations by foreign commercial banks
for midyear purposes. In addition, however, Mr. Coombs sensed some
deterioration of sentiment abroad with respect to the U. S. dollar.
The publication of the large first-quarter U. S. balance of payments
deficit had attracted attention. There seemed to be a growing feeling
in the money markets and in central banks that it might take several
years before the U. S. got its international payments position into
reasonable balance, which raised serious questions in the minds of
foreigners as to how the problem would be handled in the meantime, and
at this stage the announcement of even moderate gold losses caused an
immediate market reaction. In the absence of the cooperative arrange
ments that had been built up by the U. S. Treasury and the Federal
Reserve System over the past couple of years, the situation might now
be rather dangerous. Drawings under System swap arrangements and

5/28/63 -4
Treasury issues of bonds denominated in foreign currencies were
absorbing the major impact of currency flows and were limiting gold
losses.
After summarizing recent foreign exchange developments, including
System and Treasury operations, again as spelled out in more detail in
the distributed reports, Mr. Coombs noted that the total situation added
up to a rather disturbing picture. Since early April the System had
been drawing under several swap arrangements and operating in the market
with the proceeds of the drawings on the assumption that the develop
ments occasioning those operations would prove temporary. It was still
too early, he thought, to conclude that more basic forces were
responsible, and in his opinion the System would be well advised to
continue to resist market pressures against the dollar through drawings
on swap facilities. However, there was the risk of having to draw rather
heavily, and the System might face difficulty in making repayment if
the inflows of dollars into European capitals did not reverse themselves.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the System
Open Market Account transactions in foreign
currencies during the period May 7 through
May 27, 1963, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Turning to recommendations for the Committee's consideration,
Mr. Coombs called attention to a memorandum dated May 22, 1963, in
which he had discussed the question relating to the periods of time
for which drawings under System swap arrangements should be outstanding.

5/28/63 -5
The preparation of such a memorandum had been suggested at the
Committee meeting on May 7, 1963, in connection with a discussion
of problems incident to the repayment of Swiss franc drawings under
swap arrangements with the Swiss National Bank and the Bank for
International Settlements. In his memorandum, Mr. Coombs suggested
that the Committee establish a firm working rule (barring some unusual
development in a given instance) of paying off any swap drawings
outstanding if they had remained on the books for as long as a ful
year. In line with this suggestion, he recommended to the Committee
a decision, subject to review in case of the development of critical
circumstances, to repay in full the System's present $50 million
drawing of Swiss francs under the Swiss National Bank swap arrangement
on or before July 18, 1963, and similarly to repay the remaining $16
million drawing under the swap arrangement with the Bank for Interna
tional Settlements on or before October 31, 1963. Mr. Coombs indicated
that if the Committee accepted this recommendation he would negotiate
with the Swiss National Bank and the U. S. Treasury on various aspects
of the liquidation procedure. He stated that some of the problems
involved, and possible solutions, would be outlined in a subsequent
memorandum.
Following comments by Mr. Coombs regarding his memorandum and
the recommendations contained therein, there was a discussion during
which members of the Committee expressed general agreement with the

5/28/63 -6
proposed establishment of a working rule that swap drawings be paid
off if they had remained on the books for as long as a full year.
While concurring in the proposal that such a working rule be
established, Mr. Shepardson raised a question with regard to its
application to the repayment of the drawings under the swap arrange
ment with the Bank for International Settlements. He noted that there
had been originally a drawing of $60 million equivalent in July 1962
to help absorb a heavy flow of speculative funds to Switzerland after
the U. S. stock market break, that repayments of $25 million had been
made by late October, that the System then made a new drawing of $20
million to help absorb another heavy flow of speculative money into
Switzerland following announcement by the President of the United
States of the Cuban quarantine operation, and that $16 million remained
unpaid. His question was whether, under the proposed working rule,
the remaining $16 million should not be repaid by July 1963. Otherwise,
he foresaw the possibility of overlapping or leapfrogging operations,
so that even under the one-year rule swap drawings would never have to
be fully repaid.
Mr. Mills made the observation that while the swap arrangements
had served a good purpose up to this point, it would be wishful thinking
to feel that they constituted progress toward a fundamental solution
of this country's balance of payments problem. He wondered if more
positive actions must not be considered on the part of the U. S. Treasury,
with the Federal Reserve System taking only a secondary position.

5/28/63
Mr. Coombs concurred in the view that a solution to the
balance of payments problem required more fundamental measures. He
did not think, however, that the foreign central banks concerned
would be unhappy about a procedure such as proposed in his memorandum.
The possibility of leapfrogging, as referred to by Mr. Shepardson, had
not occurred to him. In the case of the drawings under the swap arrange
ment with the Bank for International Settlements, it seemed to him that
there had been clearly two separate drawings occasioned by speculative
flows of funds into Switzerland associated with with two major disturb
ing events. The drawing in July had been paid off entirely, and the
sum of $16 million remained to be paid off against the drawing that
had been made at the end of October 1962. As he saw it, repayment of
the remaining $16 million at or before the end of October 1963 would
be consistent with the terms of the proposed working rule.
In further discussion of this point, Chairman Martin suggested
that if Mr. Coombs' recommendations were adopted, such action be taken
with the understanding that leapfrogging operations, in the sense
referred to by Mr. Shepardson, were not contemplated and that the Open
Market Committee would not favor them.
Subject to this understanding, the
recommendations of Mr. Coombs as set forth
in his May 23 memorandum, including the
establishment of the proposed working rule
and the repayment of the Swiss franc drawings
according to the suggested time schedule,

5/28/63
were approved unanimously. Reflecting
the adoption of the working rule,
unanimous approval also was given to the
amendment of the Guidelines on System
Foreign Currency Operations, as reaffirmed
by the Committee on March 5, 1963, to
insert the following paragraph after the
third paragraph of Section 2 of the Guide
lines:
Drawings made by either party under a reciprocal arrange
ment shall be fully liquidated within 12 months after any
amount outstanding at that time was first drawn, unless the
Committee, because of exceptional circumstances, specifically
authorizes a delay.
Mr. Shepardson stated that while he would not vote against
adoption of the recommendations, in principle he felt that under the
working rule the remaining drawing outstanding under the swap arrange
ment with the Bank for International Settlements should not be allowed
to run until October and instead should be paid off not later than
July.
Mr. Coombs referred next to a memorandum of May 23, 1963, in
which he had discussed means of effecting liquidation of the drawings
of Swiss francs under the swap arrangements with the Swiss National
Bank and the Bank for International Settlements. With specific regard
to liquidation of the $50 million drawing from the Swiss National Bank
maturing on July 18, 1963, the memorandum noted that it might be
possible to acquire through small weekly purchases roughly $15 million
of Swiss francs, and to reduce the System's drawing correspondingly.
As to the remainder, the System could sell spot to the Bank for

5/28/63 -9
International Settlements perhaps $13 million equivalent of sterling
in exchange for an equivalent amount of Swiss francs. Simultaneously
the System would undertake to repurchase such sterling with Swiss
francs at the same rate of exchange 90 days hence, with the possibility
of renewal. The Bank for International Settlements would acquire the
Swiss francs by taking in deposits from the Swiss commercial banks and
would invest in British Treasury bills the sterling acquired from the
Federal Reserve System. This procedure would enable the Swiss National
Bank to avoid purchasing gold, while also absorbing the additional
liquidity injected into the Swiss market as a result of paying off the
swap. Mr. Coombs believed the U. S. Treasury would be prepared to
execute a similar swap of perhaps $13 million equivalent of its sterling
holdings against Swiss francs and simultaneously sell outright to the
System the Swiss francs so acquired at the prevailing market rate. The
remaining $9 million required to pay off completely the $50 million
swap drawing could be readily obtained by a direct System purchase of
Swiss francs against dollars from the Swiss National Bank, which might
then choose to hold the dollars temporarily or purchase a moderate
amount of gold from the U. S. Treasury.
Mr. Coombs pointed out in his memorandum that utilization of
the technique of swapping sterling for Swiss francs to liquidate the
System's swap drawing would provide a useful additional experiment in
System exchange operations. He noted that foreign countries can

5/28/63 -10
readily offset surpluses with one country against deficits with
another simply by transferring the dollars acquired from the deficit
country to the surplus country. The United States, however, faced
serious technical difficulties in effecting transfers from one foreign
currency to another, and the swap procedure suggested in the memorandum
would provide a temporary solution to the problem of transferability.
In effect the System would be employing a sterling asset to pay off a
Swiss franc debt. While it would simultaneously incur a Swiss franc
liability payable three months hence, it would retain an equivalent
sterling claim.
Following comments in amplification of his memorandum, Mr.
Coombs confirmed his recommendation that liquidation of the $50 million
Swiss franc drawing under the reciprocal currency agreement with the
Swiss National Bank be undertaken according to the procedure outlined
in the memorandum, and that he be authorized to enter into negotiations
with a view to liquidating the drawing in such manner.
Further, for reasons set forth in the memorandum, Mr. Coombs
felt that utilization of the technique outlined therein, involving the
swapping of System-held foreign currency assets to meet obligations in
other currencies, was likely to be found useful in other instances. He
suggested, therefore, that the Special Manager be authorized to arrange
such swaps of currencies as might seem desirable from time to time up
to a total of $50 million.

5/28/63 -11-
There ensued a general discussion during which Mr. Coombs
responded to a number of questions on the technicalities of the
recommended procedure for liquidation of the Swiss franc drawing
under the reciprocal currency arrangement with the Swiss National
Bank and on the nature of the more general authorization that he had
requested. He also stated, in response to a further question, that
he did not presently contemplate additional drawings of Swiss francs.
There might occur, of course, some unforeseen event comparable in
gravity to the fairly critical circumstances that had occasioned the
previous drawings.
Mr. Coombs brought out that the suggested procedure for
liquidating the drawing under the reciprocal agreement with the Swiss
National Bank would involve, among other things, a direct purchase by
the System from the U. S. Treasury of perhaps $13 million equivalent
of Swiss francs at the then prevailing market rate. He felt that a
direct purchase would be preferable to an indirect arrangement having
the same ultimate effect although an indirect arrangement might perhaps
be worked out, along lines that he mentioned, if the Committee so
desired.
Upon question by the Chairman, it was indicated that the members
of the Committee would not object to the direct purchase of the Swiss
francs from the U. S. Treasury subject to the understanding that the
francs would be acquired from the Treasury at the market rate prevail
ing at the time of purchase.

5/28/63 -12-
Accordingly, the procedure recommended
in Mr. Coombs' memorandum for liquidation
of the $50 million Swiss franc drawing, to
mature on July 18, 1963, under the swap
arrangement with the Swiss National Bank
was approved unanimously, and it was under
stood that Mr. Coombs would enter into
negotiations looking toward the liquidation
of the drawing in such manner.
In addition, the Special Manager was
authorized by unanimous vote to execute
swaps of System-held foreign currencies for
other foreign currencies in connection with
the liquidation of System obligations in the
latter currencies to such extent as might
seem desirable from time to time up to a
total of $50 million at any one time. To
reflect in the Guidelines on System Foreign
Currency Operations, as reaffirmed by the
Committee on March 5, 1963, not only this
action but also an action taken by the
Committee on March 5, 1963 (as included at
that time in the continuing authority directive
on foreign currency operations), unanimous
approval was given to the amendment of the
Guidelines to add the following two paragraphs
to Section 4 of the Guidelines:
The New York Bank may also, where authorized, purchase
currencies through forward transactiors for the purpose of
allowing greater flexibility in covering commitments under
reciprocal currency agreements.
The New York Bank may further, where authorized, purchase
and sell currencies through forward as well as spot transactions
for the purpose of settling commitments denominated in one cur
rency by means of utilizing the Bank's holdings of another
currency.
Mr. Coombs recommended next that the Committee authorize
renewal for a further three months of the $50 million swap arrangement
with the Netherlands Bank maturing June 13, 1963, and renewal for a

5/28/63 -13
further six-month period of the $50 million swap arrangement with
the National Bank of Belgium maturing June 20, 1963. He noted that the
drawing of $50 million equivalent of Belgian francs under the swap
arrangement with the National Bank of Belgium likewise would mature
June 20, 1963, and expressed the view that it would be desirable to
renew the drawing for six months.
Renewal of the swap arrangements with
the Netherlands Bank and the National Bank
of Belgium, as recommended by Mr. Coombs,
was authorized by unanimous vote, and the
proposed renewal of the drawing under the
swap arrangement with the National Bank of
Belgium was noted without objection.
Chairman Martin then called for consideration of the proposal
contained in a letter addressed to Mr. Hayes under date of May 10,
1963, by Lord Cromer, Governor of the Bank of England. For reasons
stated, Lord Cromer suggested the execution of a swap facility in the
amount of $500 million between the Bank of England and the Federal
Reserve System. He proposed that the facility be initially for a
period of 12 months and that, if it was availed of by either side,
actual swaps be for three months with the right to a further three
month extension.
The Chairman recalled that several months ago the Open Market
Committee had authorized negotiations with the Bank of England looking
toward enlargement of the existing $50 million swap arrangement with
the Bank to a figure as high as $250 million. The Bank of England had

5/28/63 -14
not heretofore expressed its willingness to enter into an enlarged
swap facility, but after further consideration it had now submitted
the proposal outlined in the letter from Lord Cromer, which seemed
to warrant full consideration by the Committee.
Chairman Martin brought out that there had been distributed
to the members of the Committee, along with copies of Lord Cromer's
letter: (1) a memorandum from Mr. Young dated May 23, 1963, citing
advantages and possible objections to the proposal, and expressing
the opinion that an expansion of swap arrangements between the System
and the Bank of England would be in the interest of the System and of
the international financial position of the United States in general;
(2) a memorandum from the staff of the Board's Division of International
Finance dated May 22, 1963, discussing economic conditions in the United
Kingdom; and (3) a memorandum from Mr. Coombs dated May 24, 1963, express
ing the opinion that an increase in the swap arrangement with the Bank
of England to $500 million would represent a major contribution to
international financial stability.
For discussion of the matter, the Chairman turned first to
Mr. Coombs, who explained and amplified the points in his memorandum
arguing in favor of acceptance of the Bank of England's proposal. Mr.
Coombs also identified two points in the proposal that would involve
technical deviations from the terms of the swap arrangements heretofore
entered into by the Federal Reserve System with foreign central banks.

5/28/63 -15
With regard to the first of these, a suggestion by the Bank of
England that the swap facility be initially on a twelve-month basis,
he recommended acceptance of the suggestion by the Committee. In fact,
he felt that it might be desirable over a period of time gradually to
shift the swap arrangements with other central banks to a similar basis,
thus obviating the necessity for renewals at three-month intervals. It
was his impression that most of the central banks would react favorably
to such a modification. Mr. Coombs brought out, as his second point,
that the Bank of England's proposal contemplated that drawings under
the swap facility would be limited to three months plus one three-month
renewal. For reasons that he explained, Mr. Coombs was of the opinion
that such a feature would introduce an unnecessary, and what in some
circumstances could be an undesirable, degree of rigidity. He would
prefer, therefore, to retain in this swap arrangement, as in the out
standing System swap arrangements, provision for three-month drawings
renewable after consultation between the central banks concerned and
upon mutual agreement. He had reason to believe that the Bank of England
would be agreeable to the retention of such a provision in the proposec
enlarged swap arrangement if it were indicated that this was favored
by the Federal Reserve. Mr. Coombs added the comment that under the
working rule adopted by the Committee earlier during this meeting with
respect to repayment of drawings under swap arrangements, there would
be an effective maximum limitation of three three-month renewals of an
original three-month drawing.

5/28/63 -16
Comments by the Committee reflected agreement with the views
expressed by Mr. Coombs concerning the technical points to which he
had referred in connection with the proposed enlarged swap arrange
ment with the Bank of England.
There ensued a general discussion by the Committee of the
broader aspects of the proposal submitted by the Bank of England,
with reference to numerous facets thereof including, among others,
the size of the proposed enlarged swap arrangement. In this connection,
reference was made for purpose of comparability to the $250 million
standby arrangement with the Bank of Canada as well as to the agreements
with such institutions as the Swiss National Bank, the Bank for Inter
national Settlements, the German Federal Bank, and the Bank of Italy.
It developed to be the consensus of the Co mittee that in the case of
the Bank of England a swap arrangement of the magnitude proposed could
be justified. In reply to a question along these lines, Mr. Coombs
indicated that he saw no way of measuring precisely the appropriate
ness of relationships between the siz of one swap arrangement and
another; in his judgment, no more than rough approximations could be
made. The existing relationships between the various swap lines had
evolved out of actual experience, and he thought this was perhaps the
best guide available.
During the discussion of the British proposal, reference also
was made to the possible public reaction to, and psychological impact

5/28/63 -17
of, the announcement of a swap arrangement of such magnitude between
the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England, along with the possible
reaction on the part of other foreign central banks having swap
arrangements outstanding with the Federal Reserve System. Considera
tion was given to the benefits that might accrue both to the Federal
Reserve and the Bank of England from the existence of the enlarged
swap arrangement under various assumed conditions. There was general
concurrence in the view that swap arrangements of this kind offered
no fundamental solution to the U. S. balance of payments problem; as
a temporary holding action, however, merit was seen in the defenses
provided from the network of swap arrangements.
Inquiry was made whether, in the event of a British
payments deficit vis-a-vis the Continent, the proposed swap facility
might not be drawn upon for the purpose of dealing with such deficit,
thereby placing more dollars in the hands of Continental holders and
leading eventually to the possibility of further demands on the U. S.
gold stock. In commenting on this question, Mr. Coombs pointed out
that the purpose of the proposed swap facility would be to provide
resources to counteract payments swings between the United Kingdom
and the United States, rather than between the United Kingdom and the
Continent. Drawings under the swap facility, and renewals thereof,
would be the subject of close consultation between the Bank of England
and the Federal Reserve System. It would be hoped that it would never

5/28/63 -18-
be necessary for either party to draw on the proposed swap facility
to the full amount. However, the facility would provide additional
standby protection.
At the conclusion of the discussion,
enlargement from $50 million to $500 mil
lion of the reciprocal currency arrange
ment between the Federal Reserve System
and the Bank of England was authorized by
unanimous vote, subject to the understand
ing that a modification of the proposal
submitted by the Bank of England would be
sought in the one technical respect
recommended earlier by Mr. Coombs.
Secretary's Note: There follows the
text of a statement released to the press
by the Federal Reserve on May 30, 1963:
The reciprocal currency arrangement between the Federal
Reserve and the Bank of England has been raised from $50
million to $500 million (from about 18 million pounds to
about 180 million pounds), the Federal Open Market Committee
announced today. Like the original arrangement with the
Bank of England of May 31, 1962, the new agreement provides
that forward cover, for any amount drawn, will be furnished
to each party.
The substantial increase in the British swap reflects
the desirability of enlarging the facilities for dealing
with temporary and reversible flows of funds between the two
largest centers of world finance. This agreement, together
with other recent examples of international cooperation among
central banks and treasuries, provides a major reinforcement
of the world payments system and of international liquidity
by increasing the availability of foreign exchange in case of
need.
The new agreement brings the total of Federal Reserve
reciprocal currency arrangements to $1,550,000,000. These
swap arrangements do not in themselves constitute outstanding
liabilities, but like the new British arrangement represent
reciprocal facilities on a standby basis that may be drawn
upon by either party from time to time,
In all such arrangements the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York acts on behalf of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks under the
direction of the Federal Open Market Committee.

5/28/63 -19
It was noted that the Committee's continuing authority
directive to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York on System foreign
currency operations contained a provision that total foreign cur
rencies held at any one time were not to exceed $1.3 billion. In
view of the authorization that had just been given for enlargement
of the swap facility with the Bank of England from $50 million to
$500 million, it was suggested that it would be appropriate to amend
the provision in the continuing directive relating to total foreign
currency holdings. This would be in addition to an amendment of the
directive reflecting the action taken earlier at this meeting authoriz
ing the use of System holdings of foreign currencies, within a
specified limit, for the settlement of commitments denominated in
other currencies.
Accordingly, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York was
authorized and directed, until otherwise
directed by the Committee, to execute
transactions in the System Account in
accordance with the following continuing
authority directive on System foreign
currency operations:
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is authorized and
directed to purchase and sell through spot transactions any
or all of the following currencies in accordance with the
Guidelines on System Foreign Currency Operations reaffirmed
by the Federal Open Market Committee on March 5, 1963, as
amended on May 28, 1963:

5/28/63 -20-
Pounds sterling
French francs
German marks
Italian lire
Netherlands guilders
Swiss francs
Belgian francs
Canadian dollars
Austrian schillings
Swedish kronor
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also authorized
and directed to purchase, in accordance with the Guidelines
and for the purpose of allowing greater flexibility in cover
ing commitments under reciprocal currency agreements, any or
all of the foregoing currencies through forward transactions,
up to a combined total of $25 million equivalent.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is further authorized
and directed to purchase and sell, in accordance with the Guide
lines and for the purpose of utilizing its holdings of one
currency for the settlement of commitments denominated in other
currencies, any or all of the foregoing currencies through for
ward as well as spot transactions, up to a combined total of
$50 million equivalent.
Total foreign currencies held at any one time shall not
exceed $1.75 billion.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report covering open market operations in U. S.
Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period May 7
through May 22, 1963, and a supplementary report covering the period
May 23 through May 27, 1963. Copies of these reports have been placed
in the files of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone commented
as follows:

5/28/63 -21-
The money market remained generally firm during the
first part of the period since the last meeting of the
Committee and after mid-May a somewhat greater degree of
firmness emerged as action was taken to implement the
policy decision of May 7. Federal funds traded consistently
at 3 per cent throughout the whole period and there were
varying margins of unsatisfied demand for reserves to be met
at the discount window, with those margins somewhat higher
after May 15 than before.
As it worked out, the slight shift in the System's
posture was accentuated because of the erratic behavior of
market factors in the latter part of the week ended May 22;
free reserves on May 22 alone fell some $300 million short
of expectations and the effect of this, together with
required reserve revisions carrying in from an earlier
period, was that average free reserves turned out to be about
$160 million in that week compared with an average level of
about $220 million that had been projected on the 22nd. The
related effect on member bank borrowing was a sharp bulge on
May 21 and 22 and a rise in weekly average borrowing to $281
million as compared with levels largely ranging between $100
million and $200 million earlier this year. Average borrowing
may be sizable again this week, if only because a number of
banks saw fit to borrow in size relatively early in the
reserve period and in some cases they apparently managed to
build reserve excesses over the week end.
The decline in published free reserve figures to $160
million for the week ended May 22, of course, helped to make
the point clear to the market that System policy was undergoing
a shift. Coming on the heels of a period of consistent firm
ness in the money market, a continuation of fairly good news
about the domestic economy, and not-so-good news about the
balance of payments, and further underlined by the System's
sales of bills in the market a week ago Friday and Monday,
market observers and participants now seem pretty well
convinced that there has been a change.
There is much less certainty as to how much of a change
has been made, however, and as to what impact any particular
change might have on short- and long-term interest rates. It
is noteworthy, for example, that through May 22, despite
persistent firmness in the money market, three-month bill rates
had worked up only to 2.94 per cent from 2.90 per cent before
the last meeting of the Committee. After news of the reserve
figures had interacted with other indications of a firmer
policy there was a further moderate rate increase--to about

5/28/63 -22-
2.97 per cent in yesterday's auction of three-month bills-
but there was good bidding interest as a result of the
higher rates that had emerged.
Thus far, the long-term market has reacted only mildly,
in terms of price and rate changes, to the shift in System
policy, In part this reflects, as in the bill area, a
considerable measure of uncertainty as to how far the System
intends to move. More particularly, however, the mild price
reaction reflects the substantial purchase orders that have
been executed at the Trading Desk on behalf of various
Government investment accounts. These market purchases
enable the Treasury to retire special issues held by the
trust funds, or to refrain from issuing such special obliga
tions, and thus to hold the over-all debt within the current
legal Limit. Since May 2, but mainly in the past week, a
total of over $550 million coupon-bearing securities has been
purchased for various Treasury investment accounts--including
about $155 million of 5- to 10-year issues and $143 million of
over-10-year maturities. And yesterday we tendered for $100
million six-month bills for Treasury account--also to deal with
the problem of the debt limit.
These substantial operations have eased the market's
adjustment process to a modified policy posture, although they
have not completely thwarted that process, for prices of inter
mediate and long-term issues have declined roughly 1/4 to 1/2
point and yields have risen by roughly 1 to 10 basis points in
the interim since the last meeting. The changed market outlook
is revealed more strikingly by the shift in dealer inventories
in intermediate and longer issues during this period of large
scale Treasury buying. Thus, at the end of April, dealers had
a net long position about $120 million in over-5-year maturities
while on May 24 there was a net short position of about $40
million.
Given this heavy volume of buying for the Treasury--and it
is not yet over, for we have somewhat over $100 million yet to
do by Friday--we have sought to meet most of this week's reserve
needs by running down the Treasury balance at the Reserve Banks
from its recent level of $900 million. And we anticipate meeting
a part of the even larger reserve needs of the next two weeks in
the same way. Otherwise, we would be heavy buyers in a market
that had been largely stripped of securities by Treasury buying,
and the rate impact of the policy shift would be largely undone.
Other segments of the capital market also seem to be still
in the process of adjustment. In the corporate market, sizable

5/28/63 -23-
unsold balances remain of the $250 million American Telephone
issue offered at 4.33 per cent just three weeks ago, and of
a few other high-grade issues that had been aggressively bid
for and too fully priced to whet investors' appetites. Some
lesser rated issues have moved out well, however, and with
the immediate calendar rather light it may be that the large
issues still in syndicate won't fare too badly. In contrast,
some congestion has again developed in the tax-exempt bond
area, and dealers' advertised inventories have been worked
down only with the help of price concessions. The conces
sions generally have not had to be very large, however, and
there is a background feeling in this market, too, that
underlying savings flows remain substantial and will tend to
cushion price and rate adjustments.
The immediate prospect for debt limit legislation is
still uncertain, but if the limit is lifted in time we under
stand that the Treasury may offer for cash an issue of
intermediate-term bonds in the amount of about $1 billion or
a little more--with announcement to occur next week and payment
about the middle of June. If the Treasury should attempt such
an offering, it may be confronted with a particularly difficult
job of pricing the issue--both because the market would not
have had sufficient time to appraise the extent of the System's
policy shift, and because the reaction on intermediate and
long-term prices and rates to that shift has thus far been
offset in good part by the Treasury's recent purchases on behalf
of the Government investment accounts. I might add, too, that
our estimates at the New York Bank do not indicate any real
cash need for the Treasury before late June. Debt limit permit
ting, the Treasury may be back again to borrow more near the
end of June, in order to get a further start on its large
financing needs in the second half of the year.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances
during the period May 7 through May 27,
1963, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
The staff economic and financial review at this meeting was
in the form of a visual-auditory presentation, for which Messrs.

5/28/63 -24-
Garfield, Hersey, Altmann, and Axilrod of the Board's staff joined
the meeting. Other participants included Messrs. Noyes and Koch.
Copies of the text of the presentation, and of the accompanying
charts, have been placed in the files of the Open Market Committee.
The introductory portion of the review, presented by Mr.
Noyes, was as follows:
The record of the past year shows wide swings in
expectations but only moderate changes in activity. Last
summer, after the sharp drop in common stock prices, fore
casts of recession--beginning in early 1963 or before-
were common enough to gain a hearing for an immediate
general tax cut. Even in the fall the so-called standard
forecast called for a mild recession that would be at its
low point right about now.
In the actual event, industrial production and prices
were substantially unchanged during the second half of 1962,
while gross national product rose moderately. Outlays for
plant and equipment stopped increasing, and with stocks of
steel and some consumer goods being liquidated, over-all
inventory accumulation was reduced to a low rate.
In the final quarter of 1962, however, sales of autos
and other goods to consumers increased substantially, and
this year retail trade has been maintained at the higher
level. Surveys of plans for plant and equipment outlays
taken early in 1963 indicated a renewed advance, and new
orders for durable goods have shown considerable strength.
Common stock prices have risen sharply since October, almost
regaining the record highs of December 1961. Industrial
production finally turned up, rising 3 per cent from January
to April.
As of April. the current period of recovery and expansion
was 26 months old. At the comparable point in time after the
1958 recession low, the expansion was over and production was
on the verge of decline. In the 1954-57 expansion, there was
an extended period of stability not unlike the one we have
recently experienced, and it was followed, after the 1956
steel strike, by a small further rise to a new high. Whatever
the apparent similarities so far between that period and the
current one, however, the differences seem at least as signifi
cant.

5/28/63 -25-
The stability in production after October 1955 was at
a level associated with an employment rate of 96 per cent,
or an unemployment rate of 4 per cent. Throughout the
current period, labor force use has been appreciably lower,
with unemployment between 5-1/2 and 6 per cent. Utilization
of manufacturing capacity also has been lower--for major
materials about 80 per cent in the first quarter, compared
with over 90 per cent in late 1955 and early 1956. Business
capital outlays, in contrast to the easing last winter,
continued to increase rapidly through 1956 while residential
building declined.
But perhaps the most striking difference between the two
periods is in the behavior of prices. Industrial prices are
no higher now than at the bottom of the recession in February
1961. By the autumn of 1956 industrial prices were up sub
stantially. With resource use relatively high in that period
and business investment demands booming, rising prices
probably contributed to a shift in resources away from consumer
goods industries to capital goods industries.
Significant differences appear also in interest rate
developments. Yields on long-term Governments, for example,
have risen little so far in this expansion, whereas at this
stage in the two preceding expansion periods they were up
substantially. The level of yields this time has been higher
than during 1955 and 1956 but lower than in 1959. Evidently,
considering developments in prices, capital outlays, and inter
est rates, no close parallel can be drawn with earlier postwar
periods of expansion.
There followed sections dealing with production and investment
in productive facilities, prices, resource utilization, the balance
of payments, and financial developments. The concluding portion of
the review, presented by Mr. Koch, was as follows:
Our review of economic developments this morning indicates
a marked pickup in activity in recent months. But, as at other
times during the last year or so, expectations and psychology
again appear to be outrunning the facts.
The unemployment rate continues disturbingly high, over
5-1/2 per cent. Machinery and plant facilities are still ample,
providing the basis for considerable further expansion of busi
ness sales. While consumer prices have shown some further rise,

5/28/63 -26-
wholesale commodity prices as a group have remained at
the level prevailing for the past five years.
In the months immediately ahead, a slackened pace
of steel buying will no doubt tend to slow down the over
all rate of economic expansion. A reduction in Federal
taxes would tend to stimulate buying and activity, but
the amount and timing of any reduction are still uncertain.
Financial developments have exhibited rather moderate
movements in recent months. Total commercial bank credit
has increased at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of about
6 per cent thus far this year, as compared with 9 per cent
last year. The narrowly--defined money supply has risen at
a 2 per cent rate since January, as compared with over 7
per cent late last year. New corporate and municipal security
financing has been running almost 10 per cent below last year's
pace.
Moreover, the private market appears to be taking some
steps, tentative as they may be, to correct some of the
financial excesses that have developed over recent years. It
is difficult, at best, to measure credit deterioration. One
very rough indication for commercial banks is the ratio of
substandard loans, as classified by examiners, to total loans.
Such a ratio--at a small sample of banks in three Reserve
districts--has tended to rise since 1959, but it is still at
a very low level. Banks are also in a more exposed position
now because of their more aggressive investment policies, but
some institutions are apparently becoming more cautious in the
face of the cost of attracting interest-bearing deposits,
potentially of considerable volatility.
Concern over excesses has been greatest in mortgage markets
in recent years. Delinquencies and foreclosures are on the
rise, but both still appear low. Investor interest in real
estate investment trusts and syndicates has greatly diminished,
apparently before a substantial amount of small savings was
drawn to them. Also, a number of savings and loan associations
in various sections of the country have recently announced
reductions in rates paid on shareholdings.
Turning to the role of monetary policy in recent develop
ments, the volume of required reserves behind total private
deposits is probably as good as any other single indicator of
the effects of policy on money and banking developments. As we
all know, monetary policy, expressed in a given degree of money
market ease or tightness, does not necessarily bring with it
the same required reserve expansion at all times. During the
second half of last year, when money market ease was slightly
less than in the first half, reserve expansion was considerably

5/28/63 -27-
larger. Thus far this year, in contrast, with ease
reduced a little more, the rate of reserve expansion has
also decreased, especially after the early weeks of the
year.
A cautious note is suggested for any short-run
interpretation of the total required reserves guideline.
For the past year and a half, although required reserves
behind total private deposits have increased at a seasonally
adjusted annual rate of about 3-1/3 per cent, almost all of
this expansion has gone to support the sharp growth in time
and savings deposits. Since the end of 1961, required
reserves behind demand deposits have increased at a seasonally
adjusted annual rate of less than 1 per cent. Of course, some
of the recent growth of time deposits has reflected the trans
fer of idle accounts out of the demand category. To the
extent that this has been so, money supply growth has under
stated the rise in transactions balances.
In the case of recent modest shifts in policy, the change
in the money supply apparently has depended mainly on the
strength of the demand for bank loans. As you recall, money
supply actually declined through August last year and then
expanded rapidly in the final months when the demand for
business loans was particularly strong. As banks seek to
satisfy their customers, the System--following a given free
reserve or tone of the money market guide to day-to-day open
market operations--tends to supply the reserves demanded by
banks at the prevailing interest rate structure. Thus, 1962
developments suggest that--assuming continuance of the moderate
lessening of monetary ease adopted at the May 7 meeting and a
continuation of the strong public preference for interest
bearing liquid assets--the money supply may not show any
significant growth until the demand for loans quickens in the
fall.
Of course, one's over-all assessment of the effects of
monetary policy on the economy in the weeks and months ahead
must look beyond the impact on bank reserves and money. In
particular, it must take into account effects of policy on
interest rates, and the likely effects, in turn, of changes in
interest rates on the cost and availability of domestic borrow
ing on the one hand and of international investing on the
other.
In the area of interest rates, short-term expectational
effects resulting from gradual market recognition of the recent
policy shift may lead to some further firming of rates, as has

5/28/63 -28-
been occurring in recent days in the Treasury bill market.
But any marked advance in rates, particularly in the longer
term area, would seem to depend on a fall-off in the flow of
savings or a substantial pickup in the demand for capital
financing, since present demand and supply relationships in
credit markets are not based on a high rate of monetary
expansion.
Unless the Committee is prepared to take much more
drastic action than it has thus far contemplated, it seems
likely that monetary policy will play an essentially neutral
role in the period immediately ahead. On the one hand, any
really significant lessening of credit availability, in the
face of the large flow of savings, might well require monetary
contraction. On the other hand, a move toward significantly
more ease would mean sacrificing the constraints of higher
short-term rates in tending to discourage capital flows abroad.
The Chairman then called for the usual go-around of comments
and views on economic developments and monetary policy beginning with
Mr. Hayes, who presented the following statement:
Most of the current statistics point to continuing
improvement in the general business situation. Production
and orders have risen not only in steel but in a number of
other industries. Housing figures look better than they did,
and automobile sales are remarkably strong. The dip in retail
sales in April may reflect inadequate adjustment for the date
of Easter this year; and consumer spending plans continue to
look encouraging. There is still no firm evidence of the
expected pick-up in plant and equipment spending. Despite
sizable advances in employment, the unemployment rate remains
about unchanged because of a very sharp rise in the labor force.
Although there have been a fair number of price increases
scattered through various industries in recent weeks, it is
not certain that all of them will "stick," and so far they
have not been reflected in any significant changes in the
general price indices. There is some uneasiness as to
inflationary threats in other areas, especially real estate
and securities prices. Stock prices are of course close to
their all-time high, and the volume of stock market credit has
reached a new peak.
On the basis of reporting bank data for the first three
weeks of May, bank credit rose more than seasonally. Much of
this was due to an unusual bulge in security loans connected
particularly with increased dealer inventories of slow-moving

5/28/63 -29-
securities and certificates of deposit. There are at
least a few tentative suggestions in the statistics as
well as in reports from loan officers at the larger New
York banks that business loan demand has gained some
momentum in the last month or two. High corporate liquidity
has been a dampening influence on such loan demand. While
this situation could change rapidly as economic activity
rises further, bank liquidity still seems fairly ample to
cope with such demands. Even though the growth of time
deposits picked up in May after the noticeably slower
growth rate in April, it seems quite possible that a renewed
slowdown may be ahead as rising market interest rates tend to
increase the attractiveness of bills vis-a-vis rates that
banks are willing to offer on time certificates of deposit.
In general, nonbank liquidity continues plentiful.
I have been much interested in the comments at recent
meetings of the Committee as to deterioration of lending and
investing standards in some areas of the financial structure.
There seems to be little doubt that some degree of deteriora
tion is occurring, principally because of pressure on
institutional lenders to find outlets for a large and perhaps
growing volume of savings funds. The real estate area seems
to be the principal one in which a lowering of standards
facilitates speculative activities. There is little evidence
of any general lowering of standards in banking.
Our balance of payments position remains grave, with our
deficit running at an annual rate of more than $3 billion. In
April the deficit was about $270 million, and during the first
half of May it may have been close to $200 million. It is
still unusually hard to analyze the trade figures because of
the uncertain impact of the longshoremen's strike; but it is
clear that foreign short-term and long-term borrowing in our
financial markets continues on a large scale. Because of our
relatively cheap rates, there has been a remarkable expansion
in the volume of dollar acceptance financing of merchandise
shipments between foreign countries, which now amounts to $1.1
billion, or more than two-fifths of all dollar acceptances
outstanding.
On the exchanges, the dollar has been under increased
strain recently, in part because of some tightening of money
market conditions in several European countries. With
inflationary tendencies rampant in several of these countries,
we can hardly count on declining interest rates abroad to help
in restraining or reversing capital outflows from the United
States.

5/28/63 -30-
For the time being the Treasury is out of the market,
insofar as new issues and refundings are concerned, so that
monetary policy need not be inhibited by "even keel"
considerations. Just how long this will last is problematical,
as the Treasury may wish to anticipate some of its July needs
during June. According to our calculations, they will not
actually need to obtain additional cash until toward the end
of June.
In view of the lack of progress in improving our balance
of payments situation and the evidence of renewed questioning
abroad of our policies and intentions, and against the back
ground of better domestic business prospects, I feel that the
Committee clearly made the right decision at the last meeting.
With respect to specific goals, it would be prudent to seek a
90-day Treasury bill rate of about 3 per cent, perhaps occasion
ally above and occasionally below, and a Federal funds rate
consistently, as it has been, at 3 per cent. The problem of
maintaining a firm bill rate may be rendered more difficult by
the current need to add reserves up to the time of the mid-June
float bulge, by the continuing demand for bills from nonbank
sources, and by the complex maneuvers to which the Treasury has
had to resort to cope with the debt ceiling problem. Under
these conditions, achievement of our goal with respect to the
bill rate may at times require lower free reserves, perhaps
around the $100 million level, with correspondingly increased
borrowings. On the other hand, a fuller realization in the
market of a shift of monetary policy may make for higher short
term rates without requiring much change in recent levels of
free reserves. Free reserve levels may therefore be an
especially poor indicator of policy at the present time.
It seems to me that the time is fast approaching when a
clear signal will be appropriate in the form of an increase
in the discount rate, probably by 1/2 per cent. Our directors
have felt for some time that the System should be doing more
to defend the dollar's international position. I believe that
some further period of "paving the way" through open market
operations seems desirable; but it is perhaps not too soon to
be thinking of the best timing for this more definite step,
with due consideration of the timing of Treasury financing
plans--and always provided, of course, that underlying condi
tions remain substantially as they are.
As for the directive, I would like to see wording that
would accommodate the specific objectives I have already out
lined. This would probably call for only a minor change in
the present wording.

5/28/63 -31
Mr. Shuford reported that economic activity in the major
cities of the Eighth District had regained the ground lost in the
latter part of 1962. Employment had recovered from the decline of
last fall and now stood about one per cent above a year ago; the
industrial use of electric power had moved up after showing some
weakness in the last half of 1962; and department store sales moved
up in March and April to levels substantially above a year earlier.
Economic gains had been particularly marked in the St. Louis area,
probably attributable largely to the increase in defense and space
undertakings by one large firm in the area.
Turning to the national scene, Mr. Shuford commented that
apparently the quickening of business activity this year had been
quite similar to the quickening that occurred in the early part of
last year. In both instances activity probably had been stimulated
in considerable measure by the steel situation. In both instances
the quickening was preceded by a marked expansion of the money supply.
This year the industrial production index rose 3 points from Januar,
to April, about the same as last year. Employment and durable goods
orders had risen more rapidly this year than in the like period of
1962. On the other hand, personal income and retail sales suggested
less strength now than last year. Price indices had been relatively
stable for quite a long period of time.
With regard to monetary policy considerations, Mr. Shuford

5/28/63 -32
said he was impressed by the continued worsening of the balance of
payments situation and of dollar relationships on an international
basis. Consequently, he was inclined to feel that perhaps it was
time to begin thinking of some discount rate move. He also was
inclined to feel that when the System made a policy move, perhaps it
should be somewhat more significant than the policy moves in the
recent past. In his opinion the policy decision made at the May 7
Committee meeting to achieve a slightly greater degree of firmness
in the money market was a salutary one to the extent that short-term
rates had moved up moderately. It might still be too early, he noted,
to appraise the full effect of that policy change. For the present,
therefore, he would favor no change in existing policy. If this should
be the decision of the Committee, certain technical changes in the
policy directive would seem necessary.
Mr. Bryan said that Sixth District statistics did not appear
to require detailed comment. In brief, nonfarm employment was up,
manufacturing employment was up, unemployment was down, and most other
District statistics looked quite good. For the longer run, the most
significant events now occurring in the District seemed to be those in
the sociological field. Undoubtedly these events would have substantial
economic repercussions at some point.
Turning to policy considerations, Mr. Bryan recalled that he
had felt at the May 7 meeting that the Committee should adopt a

5/28/63 -33
moderately less easy policy. That having been decided upon, he would
advocate no change in policy at the present. He would not provide
for much more than seasonal adjustment in supplying reserves,
certainly not more than a 2 per cent annual growth rate in terms of
required reserves against private deposits.
Mr. Bopp reported that economic activity continued to be
fairly strong in the Third District. Measurements of unemployment
were showing consistent improvement, above seasonal expectations.
Unemployment claims had reached low levels. Continued claims in
Pennsylvania had dropped more than seasonally since mid-January, and
new claims had decreased more than seasonally since mid-April. The
rise in seasonally adjusted unemployment rates that began late in
1962 had aborted, and declines had ensued. The Philadelphia help
wanted index, which dropped steeply in 1962, had increased irregularly
all through the winter and early spring. Output was holding up,
though there was as yet no evidence of strong gains except in steel.
Department store sales, however, were below year-ago levels.
There had been few significant developments in District banking
in recent weeks. Bank credit at reporting banks declined in the first
half of May by the same amount as in the comparable period last year.
Time deposits continued to increase, while demand deposits fell. There
seemed to be little, if any, pressure on the reserve positions of
District banks.

5/28/63 -34
The improved business climate, both nationally and in the
Third District, was encouraging, Mr. Bopp observed. However, one
should not lose sight of the fact that the rate of unemployment was
likely to remain unsatisfactorily high in coming months even though
the economy moved ahead. It was largely for this reason that he
would have preferred to see money and credit somewhat easier than
it had been very recently. While he would not now advocate a return
to the Committee's earlier position, he did feel strongly that there
should not be a further move toward less ease. It would be well at
this point, he believed, to pause and observe the effects of some
what higher rates and less ample reserves. In the meantime, he would
like to see the flow of funds through the capital markets proceed
as smoothly as possible. If necessary to avoid further congestion,
he would advocate substantial purchases of longer-term issues. No
change in the discount rate seemed to him to be called for at this
time. The policy directive should call for operations with a view to
maintaining, but not increasing, the slightly greater degree of money
market firmness that had been sought pursuant to the decision reached
by the Committee at the May 7 meeting.
Mr. Hickman noted that national business developments had
continued favorable in recent weeks, with both performance and outlook
sentiment strengthening further. Recent gains in production had been
at a rate from one-half to two-thirds as large as those registered in

5/28/63 -35
the spring of 1961, a time of particularly vigorous upward thrust.
Most measures of manufacturing activity confirmed this recent
briskness, including new orders, order backlogs, payrolls, and
employment; even such a limping indicator as freight carloadings
had recently shown some signs of life.
Developments in the Fourth District confirmed the favorable
tone of business generally, Mr. Hickman said. Since the preceding
Committee meeting, the insured unemployment rate had declined
further in all major labor market areas in the District, with the
most pronounced improvement in Toledo and in the steel-producing
centers. At mid-May, insured unemployment in the District, after
seasonal adjustment, reached its lowest point in more than three
years, and for the first time in three years stood below the national
average.
New car sales continued at a strong pace in May, both in the
nation and the District, although down slightly from the contest
supported levels of April. New car inventories declined in the first
20 days of May, partly because of the high sales rate and partly
because of work stoppages. Auto production was now expected to
exceed 2 million in the second quarter, bringing total output for
the first half of the year to a near record of 4 million cars.
Estimates of production of domestic cars for the year were running
at a rate of 7.1 to 7.3 million.

5/28/63 -36
Steel production in May, after seasonal adjustment, was
estimated at an annual rate of 135 million tons, which could not be
maintained. Analysts in the Fourth District currently were estimat
ing 1963 steel production between 105 and 108 million ingot tons.
The timing of the decline in output, after due allowance for seasonal
adjustments, would hinge upon the timing of the labor settlement,
which at the moment was still highly uncertain.
Raising of sights by forecasters was illustrated by recent
projections of a group of business economists representing 25 large
manufacturing and utility concerns mainly headquartered in the Fourth
District. At a meeting at the Cleveland Reserve Bank on May 24, this
group's median forecast of the industrial production index showed a
maintenance of the present level expected for the third quarter of
this year, followed by rises in the final quarter and in the first two
quarters of next year. The change in attitudes was indicated by the
fact that only 5 of the 25 participants foresaw any decline in general
business within the next six months, whereas at the previous meeting
last November as many as 17 expected a decline within the ensuing six
months.
In evaluating the financial scene, Mr. Hickman expressed
concern over the fact that risk assets held by commercial banks
continued to edge upward steadily. At the end of April, the risk
asset ratio for all commercial banks stood 3 percentage points higher

5/28/63 -37
than a year earlier, and 4 percentage points higher than two years
earlier, thus providing further evidence of the vigorous competition
for less liquid types of assets and the steady surrender of liquidity
by banks to maintain earnings. Moreover, within the "non-risk"
category, the liquidity of U. S. Government securities portfolios of
weekly reporting member banks continued to decline, with the propor
tion of Governments due to mature in less than one year down
appreciably from a year ago.
The balance of payments statistics showed no evidence of
improvement, Mr. Hickman noted. The weakness of the dollar against
most major foreign currencies was too widespread to be explained by
purely technical factors. It thus seemed to him that the Committee
should continue to press towards still greater firmness in money and
capital markets than had prevailed in recent weeks. The System should
help to resolve market indecision, and its actions should confirm a
definite change in official policy toward less ease.
The portion of the current policy directive that referred to
Treasury financing should be deleted, and the directive--as amended-
should be interpreted, in Mr. Hickman's opinion, to mean that less
ease would be permitted in the next three weeks than during the past
three weeks. If sufficient upward pressure were applied to the term
structure of interest rates, he felt that an increase in the discount
rate might appropriately be considered at the Committee's next meeting.

5/28/63 -38-
Mr. Mitchell presented the following statement:
Last week's probe, not too adroitly executed because of
the nature of things, was in my judgment a more serious gamble
with expectations and underlying trends in the economy than
appears on the surface.
It was intended as a move toward less ease accompanied by
a discernible upward movement in short rates. In my judgment,
neither the domestic situation nor the balance of payments
justified it.
We have been asserting that our posture is aimed at keeping
U. S. short-term rates competitive; apart from temporary vagaries,
they have not been less competitive in recent weeks. And we have
very little, if any, evidence that a few basis points one way
or the other can induce international flows.
I could only rationalize this move by interpreting it as
being aimed at some other objective. One posture that has been
urged on the Committee is to make some overt sign that it is
willing to yield to "international monetary discipline." If
this was the purpose of the recent action, it seems to me to
have been a serious mistake. We have evidence from reports of
discussions in OECD that our domestic monetary situation is not
well understood by those who are pushing hardest for a firming
of interest rates here. In particular, what is not understood
is the effect on domestic expenditures of a move to tighten
monetary policy,
Another purpose of the recent shift in policy might be to
restrict the supply of long-term funds in order to make long
term interest rates more competitive with rates abroad. Here,
it seems to me, the argument is on very weak grounds. Long
term rates are now high by historical or analytical standards.
Despite the claim that the economy is overly liquid, long-term
yields are high by comparison with any period in this century ex
cept for a few unusual episodes such as 1920 and late 1959-early
1960. Long-term rates are far above levels historically asso
ciated with even moderately easy money. Furthermore, existing
and prospective flows--on both the demand and supply sides-
are likely to be exerting downward pressures on long-term rates,
or at most to balance out at a steady yield level. And market
expectations are attuned to such stability. In these conditions,
an effort by the System to boost long-term interest rates
against the market can be successful only at the risk of slowing
the expansion in domestic economic activity.
In this connection, I want to stress again that money
creation has been making only a small contribution to the financ
ing of expenditures, For the most part, voluntary saving has

5/28/63 -39-
been flowing through financial institutions, including
commercial banks, and into credit markets. In order to
reduce this supply of funds significantly, we would have
to halt monetary expansion completely at a time when it
has already been much slower than the growth of incomes
and output. Thus, if an increase in long rates was the
objective of the shift in policy, it involves a serious
gamble.
The only remaining possible justification for a move
toward less ease concerns the quality of credit . Is it
appropriate to deal with the credit quality problem, to
the extent that it exists today, by restricting the supply
of credit through tighter monetary policy?
In seeking an answer to this question, we must recognize
that lenders have choices regarding the manner in which they
respond when the flow of funds at their command inreases
faster than the investment outlets visible to them. Lenders
may reduce the interest rates they pay; they may lower the
interest rates they charge to borrowers; they may liberalize
credit standards and terms other than interest rates; or they
may offer a combination of these responses. The point to be
emphasized is that the choices that lenders adopt among these
techniques of making their product more attractive to borrowers
ought not to be a major determinant of monetary policy.
If lenders ease credit standards as an alternative to
lowering interest charges, they choose in effect to increase
their risk exposure. Perhaps this is what has been happening
in mortgage markets. Despite the reported plethora of
mortgage funds, mortgage yields in the past year have declined
only 20 basis points for FHA's and perhaps 15 basis points for
conventionals.
This distinction between relaxing credit standards on the
one hand and interest costs on the other should be familiar to
all in the Federal Reserve. We frequently distinguish between
cost and availability of credit, recognizing that in some
credit markets availability may increase substantially with
little downward movement in interest rates. As this happens,
some terms of the credit contract are inevitably eased, for
lenders are pushing on the flexible margin between eligible
and ineligible borrowers.
When lenders push on this margin, they are narrowing the
spread between their interest earnings and the cost of lend
ing (unless the price paid for their funds also declines).
This narrowing in spread occurs whether lenders lower the
interest rates they charge or relax other credit terms, thereby

5/28/63 -40
increasing risk exposure. An increase in risk exposure
constitutes a potential increase in cost, and lenders
may need to be reminded of this fact.
Lenders may choose either to reduce rates or to
liberalize credit standards in seeking marginal borrowers
for the additional credit that is being made available to
the economy. The main question for this Committee is
whether that volume of credit is appropriate. A decision
to restrict the supply of credit in order to eliminate
flows of funds into outlets that are enjoying easier credit
standards would undoubtedly affect expenditures and dis
courage economic expansion.
As long as output and employment remain well below full
utilization, as at present, there are no economic grounds
domestically for restricting the supply of funds. When and
if total demands need to be restrained, it will be appro
priate to restrict the supply of credit, regardless of the
choice lenders have been making between adjusting interest
rates and adjusting other terms of the credit bargain.
In further comments, Mr. Mitchell said there were certain
questions about current economic developments that he felt ought to
be resolved before the Committee made any overt move in the direction
of tightening monetary policy. One of them related to the steel
situation. Looking behind the figures, it was obvious that a factor
underlying the recent strength was the attempt to hoard inventories.
Certainly there was going to be a contraction of steel output in the
next three or four months, depending somewhat on how the question of
a strike was resolved. In a delicately balanced economy, developments
in this connection might have an important impact, and he believed
that more information should be available before any decision was made
to move in the direction of more monetary restraint. Also, he believed
that the automobile industry might be in a somewhat exposed position

5/28/63 -41
after two years of output at quite a high level. Further, there
was a lack of sufficient assurance of expansion of business plant and
equipment to feel that this was going to provide a boost to the economy.
For these reasons, he would favor trying to get back to the policy
posture that had prevailed prior to the May 7 meeting and staying in
such a posture until the domestic economic situation showed more signs
of continuing life.
Mr. King expressed the view that it was too early to make any
further move toward a tightening of monetary policy. It would take a
little time to observe the effects of the slight policy move made
three weeks ago. Accordingly, he would recommend that System policy
remain approximately the same as during the past three weeks, and he
would restrict changes in the policy directive to technical corrections.
He would not favor a change in the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Shepardson mentioned that he had attended yesterday a
meeting of institutional lenders to agriculture during which a sub
stantial period of time was devoted to the question of the quality of
credit. There were numerous comments by lenders in various categories
about a deterioration that they believed they observed in the quality
of credit being extended by other types of lenders. This deterioration
was said to take the form of higher loans on higher appraisals and
easier credit terms without too much appraisal of the borrowers. In
short, there was reported to be evidence of widespread deterioration
in the quality of agricultural lending.

5/28/63 -42
As to monetary policy, Mr. Shepacdson expressed the view
that the shift in policy made at the May 7 meeting was appropriate.
He would favor a continuation of the slightly greater degree of money
market firmness called for by that policy decision. It would seem
appropriate to make certain technical changes in the policy directive.
Mr. Mills commented that as he interpreted the information
presented in today's chart show, the gist of it was that the national
economy had improved but had not moved either upward or outward
impressively. This raised a question as to the posture monetary and
credit policy ought to assume within the context of that kind of
situation. The concluding statement in the staff discussion, as he
recalled it, was to the effect that possibly the Open Market Committee
should consider following a neutral policy, one that might give suf
ficient stimulus to the economy to encourage economic growth and at
the some time serve as a buffer against the balance of payments deficit.
A neutral policy, Mr. Mills observed, is essentially a passive policy,
and it did not seem to him prudent for the System--and the Committee-
to take a passive attitude against the background of the present economic
situation, as compared with an active posture that would serve to
encourage a reasonable degree of credit expansion.
In Mr. Mills' opinion, the Committee had allowed its thinking
to be progressively overshadowed by the balance of payments problem,
which in a sense was intractable of treatment by monetary policy.

5/28/63 -43
Illustrative of the folly of attempting to use monetary policy as
the sole weapon to attack the balance of payments problem were the
memoranda supplied to the Committee regarding the situation in the
United Kingdom. As he recalled, it was indicated that if the balance
of payments situation became difficult, the United Kingdom would be
likely to move to bring up short- and long-term interest rates as a
defensive measure. This suggested that not only the United Kingdom
but other Western European countries could be expected to look to
their own interests first; and if dangerous situations required, to
meet the problem through the interest rate approach. The only recourse
left to the United States would be to bring up its own interest rates,
with the foreknowledge that they would never be allowed to be raised
to levels that foreign countries felt it was necessary for them to
adopt defensively.
But to him the worst difficulty stemming out of the policy
decided upon at the May 7 meeting, Mr. Mills said, was that cumulatively
and through lagged effects such a policy was going to involve a reduc
tion of credit availability at a time when reasonable credit availability
was needed to foster the economic growth and liveliness that the System
should have as a policy objective. If this policy was continued and
strengthened, and resulted in a contraction of credit availability,
that would not exert a corrective influence on the trend among commercial
banks to be less careful in their extensions of credit. Instead, as

5/28/63 -44
credit became cumulatively tighter the banks would find loans
becoming substandard, for the reason that the businessman depends
on the support of credit not only for his own operations but through
the general economic and financial scheme of things. If credit were
less available, that would exert an adverse influence on his position,
and consequently on the general structure of credit. Pursuing that
line of reasoning, the Committee would do well to think seriously as
to whether a general tightening of credit was the most appropriate
policy. The Committee should consider whether that was the kind of
policy most conducive to maintaining a thriving U. S. economy, one
that would provide a general protection to the standards of world
economic activity. He continued to believe that the economy of the
United States was the anchor to which all other economies were tied.
The System's first and last effort should be to use monetary policy
to encourage strength and activity at home.
Mr. Wayne reported that Fifth District business was apparently
still expanding, on balance, although the statistical evidence was
somewhat more mixed than three weeks ago. Seasonally adjusted bank
debits hit a new high in April, and nonfarm employment also rose to
a record level, due largely to strong gains in trade and contract
construction. Insured unemployment had continued to decline more than
seasonally. The April increase in nonagricultural employment was
actually quite modest because the small net gain achieved by

5/28/63 -45
nonmanufacturing enterprises was partially offset by declines in
factory jobs. Reductions in factory man-hours were, in fact, rather
widespread in April and were particularly sharp in textiles, but in
most other cases the strong March gains were only partly offset. In
the Reserve Bank's latest survey, manufacturers--including textile
producers--reported a distinct upward trend in new and unfilled orders
and shipments, but virtually no change in employment or hours. Survey
respondents also indicated that retail sale.; were still improving
slightly, and that construction activity remained strong.
In the country as a whole, Mr. Wayne continued, the improvement
in economic activity had continued long enough to indicate that it was
not an erratic short-term fluctuation. Two other characteristics of
the expansion were equally apparent; it was of moderate proportions,
and it had resulted to a significant extent from the build-up of steel
inventories. In addition, inventory figures for the first quarter
showed a general and significant accumulation of inventories of non
durable goods. Current statistics on the production and use of steel
suggested that the economy probably had already felt substantially all
of the upward impetus to be derived from the steel build-up, and that
at some point not far in the future the inevitable reversal in this
relationship would exert a downward pull. Currently, the failure of
retail sales to maintain the encouraging gains of the first quarter
and the sluggishness of outlays for construction and producers' durable

5/28/63 -46
equipment did not inspire confidence that these areas would provide
the spark to keep the economy rising. Mr. Wayne's conclusion was
that after three months of significant gains the economy faced
uncertainties in continuing the present rate of improvement.
In the policy area, Mr. Wayne pointed out that for nearly three
years the System had been moving by very small steps, such as the one
taken at the May 7 Committee meeting. Except for such psychological
effect as they might have on attitudes abroad, he was skeptical of the
effects of such moves on this country's international position. In
any event, it seemed to him that a position had been reached in which
any substantial further tightening would have to be accomplished by
a larger and more dramatic move; that is, an increase in the discount
rate. The bill rate was now approaching the discount rate, and any
further substantial reduction of reserves through open market opera
tions could put the bill rate on top. If the differential should be
significant and continue for more than a few days, it would almost
certainly be interpreted by the market as a forerunner of an increase
in the discount rate and would also cause unpredictable and probably
very disturbing effects on the market for Federal funds, which now
played an important role in the money market. He believed the System
should not assume the risks that would be involved in such a situation.
In the same way, an increase in the discount rate, by its very nature,
would be interpreted as a major change of policy toward tight money.

5/28/63 -47
He did not believe that the condition of the domestic economy either
required or could stand such a move at this time.
Mr. Wayne assumed that the degree of firmness in the market
at the end of last week was reached inadvertently; it seemed to him
that it was a little more tightness than the Committee desired in
framing the directive. For the next three weeks, he would favor a
continuation of present policy, which he would interpret to mean about
the degree of firmness which prevailed on the average over the past
three weeks--which would be a little less than had prevailed in the
past few days. He would suggest amending the directive to specify
that degree of firmness. He would strongly oppose raising the discount
rate at this time.
Mr. Clay advised that farm production prospects in the Tenth
District had deteriorated substantially in recent weeks. Weather
conditions had been extremely unfavorable for both crop and pasture
production. Precipitation throughout most of the winter wheat area
of the District was less than 25 per cent of normal in April, with
much of the area receiving no measurable precipitation during this
crucial month for the wheat crop, and conditions during the first half
of May showed little improvement in the worst drought areas. Variable
showers last week provided the most beneficial precipitation received
in the southern High Plains area since last September. This moisture
came too late to save much of the winter wheat crop, and more than half

5/28/63 -48
of the seeded acreage of wheat had been abandoned in southwestern
Kansas, southeastern and east-central Colorado, and the Oklahoma
Panhandle. Supplies of irrigation water also were inadequate through
out most of Colorado and New Mexico. While last week's moisture
would be most beneficial in helping pastures start growing, pasture
conditions were extremely poor in Colorado, western Kansas, the Oklahoma
Panhandle, and New Mexico. Considerably more moisture would be needed
soon if pastures were to develop normally in this area. In Nebraska
and Wyoming, pasture conditions were somewhat better than normal.
Meat animal prices continued to remain under pressure, with
both cattle and hog prices below year-earlier levels. Unless weather
conditions improved substantially, a reduced volume of crop production,
combined with a lower level of meat animal prices, was likely to cause
a significant reduction in farm income in the region.
Tenth District nonfarm economic developments, as suggested by
employment trends, had differed from the national pattern. The District
appeared somewhat stronger than the nation during the last half of 1962,
but it had shown little gain thus far in 1963. The national sequence
was just the reverse of this pattern, with the early months of 1963
showing new evidence of expansion. In the District, manufacturing
employment declined somewhat less than nationally during the last half
of 1962, but it had continued soft in early 1963. As a consequence,
District manufacturing employment, seasonally adjusted, was down about

5/28/63 -49
2 per cent from last summer, while U. S. manufacturing employment
regained last summer's level in April.
At the meeting of the Kansas City Bank's Board of Directors
two weeks ago, Mr. Clay continued, the directors engaged in an extended
discussion of domestic business conditions and prospects, with particular
reference to price developments. The discussion was initiated by the
position taken by one director at the executive committee meeting a
week earlier, arguing for the need for prompt credit restraint and
citing the rapid expansion of the economy and the developing threat of
price inflation as the basis for such action. The most active partic
ipants in the discussion were six businessmen, including one visiting
branch director who was asked by the chairman for his views. While
most of these men were involved in several business undertakings, their
principal businesses included electric power, petroleum, chemicals,
nonferous metals, natural gas, foods, and construction. Most of the
businesses were large regional or national firms, and three were inter
national in scope. The general view expressed was that most business
firms were unable to find enough customers at current prices and that
they were not in a position to make significant advances in prices.
Speaking both for their own firms and others with which they were
familiar, they contended that competition and below-capacity operations
simply would not permit much upward movement in prices. It was the
consensus of the group that, so far as domestic business activity was

5/28/63 -50
concerned, there was no need to place restraint on the national
economy but that restraint rather ought to be avoided. Concern was
expressed over the upward push on costs from wage rate increases. It
was indicated that these wage rate developments would put a squeeze on
business profits in the form of costs that could not be passed on under
present market conditions. In the long run, however, it was thought
these cost increases would lead to higher prices.
Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Clay noted that the Committee
had decided upon a slight shift in policy at its last meeting. While
all of the secondary effects of that policy change had not permeated
the financial structure, the basic action already had been largely
implemented by the Account Manager during the past two weeks. The
importance of this shift in policy depended upon whether it was the
forerunner to further action now or shortly hereafter. It was hard to
argue that this change by itself would prove a perceptible deterrent
to the national economy. There also might be some question as to how
much effect it would have on the international flow of funds.
Recent domestic economic developments had been encouraging,
Mr. Clay added, but they were not such as to call for restraint. Credit
tightening sufficient to affect international capital flows substantially
would seem to be of that order. Without passing judgment as to appro
priate credit action at some later date, it appeared to him that no
further credit tightening should be underaken at this time. Accordingly,

5/28/63 -51
the discount rate should be left unchanged. The wording of the
directive should be changed so as to remove the reference to Treasury
financing and also so as to prevent cumulative credit tightening as a
result of the language adopted at the last meeting. Operations in
longer maturities should be undertaken by the Manager as necessary to
facilitate attainment of the Committee's goal with respect to the short
term rate.
Mr. Scanlon reported that business and banking sentiment in the
Seventh District remained optimistic, although he heard of elements in
the picture that suggested caution.
As others had noted previously, steel output was likely to
decline fairly soon. In the past few weeks the rate of new orders for
one local producer had been only half as great as in the previous two
or three months, when orders were "well in excess of capacity." Retail
trade in April and May, in the District, had been somewhat below the
rate of the two previous months. According to merchants, cold weather
had had an adverse effect on the sale of soft goods in recent weeks.
The rate of growth of time deposits at member banks in the
District appeared to have declined further in the first half of May
but was still at a high level. The seasonally adjusted inflow rate
declined in April both for regular savings and individuals' holdings
of time certificates, while the withdrawal rate for regular savings

5/28/63 -52
deposits continued near the high March rate. At savings and loan
associations there was a rise in withdrawals in March similar to
that noted for bank savings deposits and probably attributable to the
same causes, i.e., increased spending for durables and greater use of
past savings for payment of income and real estate taxes. There had
been a renewed rise in time certificates of deposit issued to corpora
tions in recent weeks.
Deliveries of domestically-produced cars to U. S. customers
continued high. Output of 1963 models was now about set at 7,250,000-
a new record exceeding the previous high of 7,130,000 in the 1955 model
year. Reportedly, there would be about 90,000 1963 models produced in
August. Then, following the changeover shut down, it was expected that
about 100,000 1964 models will be produced during the remainder of the
month.
Total bank credit declined relatively more in the first two
weeks of May in the District than in the nation. Both loans and invest
ments were reduced. The loan decline was traceable largely to repayments
by finance companies and security dealers. However, business loans did
not rise in this period as in most other recent years, notwithstanding
the rise of steel inventories.
As to policy, Mr. Scanlon recalled having felt three weeks ago
that if the Committee were to change policy, as the directive indicated,
to "putting increased emphasis on money market conditions that would

5/28/63 -53
contribute to an improvement in the capital account of the U. S.
balance of payments," the change should be more than a "probing"
action. It should be a clear signal, obvious to everybody. For this
and other reasons, he would have preferred to wait for somewhat clearer
evidence of the strength of current expansionary forces. However,
inasmuch as a slight shift in policy had been made, he would favor
maintaining the current posture for the present and observing its
effects during the next three-week period. He would not change the
discount rate just yet. He would change the directive to the extent
of making technical corrections and providing against a cumulatively
greater money market firmness.
Mr. Swan, in summarizing developments in the Twelfth District,
noted that the primary metal industries were doing quite well and that
even in the lumber industry there had been a slightly improved relation
ship between orders, production, and inventories in early May. However,
the unemployment rate in the Pacific Coast States increased sharply in
April to a 15-month high on a seasonally adjusted basis, apparently
largely because of adverse weather, which affected employment in
agriculture, construction, and lumber, and because of some further
reduction of employment in defense industries. One major labor market
area (San Jose) had been reclassified from the category of moderate to
substantial unemployment, making a total of five major areas in the
District so classified. Department store sales in the District declined

5/28/63 -54
in April but improved somewhat in the first half of May. In late
April and early May, the possibility of a strike at a major aircraft
firm in the Seattle area was reflected in a substantial cut-back in
consumer spending until the strike threat disappeared. Weather in
the District in April and early May was marked by excessive rainfall,
which had affected fruit crop prospects adversely.
As to District banking developments, Mr. Swan noted that while
the large banks continued to be net sellers of Federal funds, borrowing
from the Federal Reserve Bank had increased, especially in the weeks
ended May 15 and May 22. There had been considerable discussion
recently of the possibility of a reduction in rates paid by savings and
loan associations for savings funds. The largest savings and loan
institution in Arizona had announced a reduced dividend rate on share
accounts effective the middle of this year.
Mr. Swan expressed the view that the business situation did not
justify any further tightening of monetary policy at this point and
that System policy should continue in its present posture. Since
policy shift had been decided upon at the May 7 meeting, he would not
advocate going back to greater ease at this time. However, he questioned
whether the degree of firmness achieved in the past two weeks was fully
intended within the scope of the policy decision three weeks ago. He
had understood the emphasis at that time to be on "slightly" less ease.
The situation since May 15 left the impression that the word "slightly"

5/28/63 -55
had been stretched quite far, although he gathered this was partly
inadvertent. In summary, it would be his feeling that the Committee
should continue the policy it had instituted at the May 7 meeting,
which in his view would call for slightly more ease than had obtained
in the past ten days. He would not favor changing the discount rate
at this time, and he felt the directive should be so worded as to avoid
the possibility of cumulative tightening.
Mr. Irons noted a gradual strengthening in most of the areas of
business activity in the Eleventh District. The industrial production
index was up a couple of points in April and probably another point in
May, with fairly broad participation in the increase. The petroleum
situation had been a little stronger in May, and construction activity
continued strong. Employment continued to rise, and unemployment stood
at about 4.5 per cent of the labor force. Retail trade figures were
well above year-ago levels.
The over-all position of District banks was not tight; in
general, the banks apparently were able to meet any foreseeable loan
requirements. Both demand and time deposits had risen during the past
three weeks.
Mr. Irons expressed satisfaction with the operations of the
Desk during the past three weeks, stating that he thought the Desk had
done what was called for by the Committee's May 7 action, namely, to
achieve a slightly greater degree of firmness in the money market.

5/28/63 -56
There seemed to have been no lack of availability of reserves,
although member bank borrowings had increased somewhat. At the same
time, he felt that the movements of the past three weeks were bringing
the Committee quite close to the point of major decision, and he was
not sure that he was ready for such a decision at this time. In other
words, there had been a slightly greater degree of firmness, of which
he approved, but if this were made cumulative the Committee soon would
be at a point where it would almost have to make a decision to move on
the discount rate and shift to a policy of real firmness, in contrast
to a moderate degree of firmness. He would not be prepared to raise the
discount rate today, and therefore would favor continuing the level of
firmness reached during the past two weeks rather than to proceed in a
cumulative manner.
As a target, Mr. Irons suggested that the short-term rate be at
about 3 per cent. Free reserves, though not a reliable measure under
present conditions, might be somewhere in the area of $150-$200 million.
Federal funds should be at 3 per cent and at times not adequately avail
able, thus giving rise to some member bank borrowing. On that basis, he
would want to observe developments for at least a further three-week
period.
Mr. Ellis noted that the New England economy was falling short
of the pickup of business activity evident in the national figures.
While consumer spending was higher than a year ago--as evidenced by

5/28/63 -57
activity in auto show rooms, department stores, and resort areas-
and business investment was increasing, the increases were not occur
ring at the national rate. The level of residential construction was
above a year ago, but again the increase had not been as significant
as the improvement nationally. Manufacturing output was just about
on a par with a year earlier. Initial claims for unemployment
compensation were about equal to those of a year ago, while the
unemployment rate stood at approximately year-ago levels. There had
been an increase in loan demand at District banks since the March tax
date and business loans had risen better than seasonally, especially
since the past few weeks. Savings growth slowed down in April, but
seemed to have quickened since that time.
Mr. Ellis indicated that he would continue to regard the
present posture of System policy as one of ease. As he understood
the decision at the May 7 meeting, the Committee was experimenting
with a slightly lesser degree of ease. He had not viewed the shift
of policy as a decision to undertake an uninterrupted and progressive
tightening, and he would not expect another 7 basis-point rise in the
bill rate during the forthcoming two weeks or on a cumulative basis
thereafter. Instead, he saw this as a time for the Committee to be
consolidating its position, allowing the market to obtain an under
standing that the System was not engaged in a full-fledged continuing
move toward a restrictive monetary policy. It was too early, in his

5/28/63 -58
opinion, to start considering discount rate action. For the forth
coming three weeks, he agreed with the targets expressed by Mr. Irons.
As to the directive, he would suggest language indicative of no further
shift of policy at present.
Mr. Balderston said that the comments of Messrs. Irons and
Ellis as to monetary policy reflected his own point of view. He would
favor continuing open market operations along the same lines as con
ducted by the Desk during the past three weeks. In composing the policy
directive, he hoped that the Committee could avoid expressions signifying
a tightening of monetary policy at this time. As he looked at the
increase in the money supply during the past year and the way in which
reserves had mounted, it seemed to him that System policy continued to
be one of ease, although somewhat less ease.
Mr. Balderston then referred to the series of observations at
the May 7 meeting concerning the quality of lending and said he hoped
the Reserve Bank Presidents would explore this question more fully.
While he was not sure that a great deal of help could come from review
ing reports of examination of member banks, this was one source that
could be used. In addition, he hoped the Presidents would ask the
Reserve Bank directors what evidences they found in their business
activities of deterioration in lending standards. Real estate lending
probably was one area to examine closely. He suspected that lending

5/28/63 -59
standards were being reduced more by savings and loan associations
and others than by commercial banks. In any case, however, it was
important for the Committee and the System as a whole to know what
was going on rather than to be surprised at a later date.
Chairman Martin noted that sometimes there tended to be comments
at Committee meetings that sounded as though the economy was going to be
made or broken by shifts of, say, $50 or $100 million in free reserves.
This, of course, was not the case. At the same time, as he had stressed
at the May 7 meeting, he felt that the posture of the Federal Reserve
System was very important at this juncture. On the whole, and through
the years, he believed that the posture of the System had been quite
sound. He believed, also, that the policy developed recently was good,
provided it did not get ahead of itself. The Committee was dealing with
short periods of time in its policy discussions, he pointed out, since
it met every three weeks.
The Chairman went on to say that two matters seemed to him of
paramount importance at the moment. First, there was the problem of
the Treasury in relation to the debt ceiling. The impact of this
situation on the money market should not be overlooked. The problem
was important from the standpoint of monetary policy as well as debt
management. Second, Chairman Martin referred to developments in the
foreign exchange market as critical. It might be months or years
before the situation reached the point of serious trouble but develop
ments seemed to him to be moving in that direction.

5/28/63 -60-
In view of the problems to which he had referred, the
Chairman expressed the view that this would be an unfortunate time
for the Federal Reserve System to be making relatively unimportant
moves in the money market. At the same time, the posture developed
by the Federal Reserve was highly important.
Continuing, the Chairman noted that at last week's meeting
of the Federal Advisory Council with the Board of Governors the President
of the Council had pointed out that in a situation of slightly less
easy credit some forms of credit, such as for hotel speculation, might
be deferred in favor of more sound loans. Shortly after that meeting,
he (Chairman Martin) had heard of a specific instance where a large
real estate transaction was deferred because the bank concerned had
found a more constructive outlet for its funds. While this coincidental
occurrence should not be overemphasized, he thought it was interesting.
The availability of credit, the Chairman added, inevitably has some
bearing on the quality of credit. It is virtually impossible, likewise,
to separate completely the cost of credit and its availability. Similarly,
despite Federal Reserve actions, interest rates must be viewed against
the shifting background of the economy as a whole. Generally speaking,
when the economy moves downward, rates move down and vice versa. When
the economy is on a plateau, rates tend to be stationary.
Chairman Martin expressed the view that current Federal Reserve
policy was appropriate and said he would favor a continuation of the

5/28/63 -61-
status quo. He hoped that was the posture the System would assume
at this time.
It was then suggested that a vote be taken on no change of
policy during the forthcoming three weeks to determine whether that
was the consensus of the Committee, and language for a revised second
paragraph of the current economic policy directive that would reflect
such a decision by the Committee was suggested.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York was authorized and directed,
until otherwise directed by the Committee,
to execute transactions in the System
Open Market Account in accordance with
the following current economic policy
directive:
It is the Committee's current policy to accommodate
moderate growth in bank credit, while putting increased
emphasis on money market conditions that would contribute
to an improvement in the capital account of the U. S. balance
of payments. This policy takes into consideration the
continuing adverse balance of payments position and its
cumulative effects and the improved domestic business outlook,
as well as the increases in bank credit, money supply, and
the reserve base in recent months. At the same time, however,
it recognizes the continuing underutilization of resources.
To implement this policy, System open market operations
shall be conducted with a view to continuing the degree of
firmness in the money market that has prevailed recently,
while accommodating moderate reserve expansion.
Votes for this action: Messrs.
Martin, Hayes, Balderston, Bopp, Clay,
Irons, King, Mills, Scanlon, and
Shepardson. Vote against this action:
Mr. Mitchell.

5/28/63 -62
In a comment made with respect to his vote, Mr. Mills brought
out that his views were not in agreement with the shift in policy
that had been decided upon at the May 7 Committee meeting. However,
he voted in favor of the policy directive approved at this meeting
because he felt that a shifting of policy back and forth at this
time would be more harmful than helpful.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, June 18, 1963.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary