A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on
Tuesday, November 26, 1963, at 11:30 a.m., EST. This was a telephone
conference meeting and each individual was in Washington except as
otherwise indicated in parentheses in the ollowing list of those
participating:
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman (New York)
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bopp '(Philadelphia)
Mr. Clay (Kansas City)
Mr. Irons (Dallas)
Mr. Mills
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Scanlon (Chicago)
Mr. Shepardson (College Station, Texas)
Messrs. Hickman (Cleveland), Wayne (Richmond),
Shuford (St. Louis), and Swan (San Francisco),
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Ellis (Boston), and Deming (Minneapolis),
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Boston and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Brill, Furth, Holland, and Koch,
Associate Economists
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Account
(New York)
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market
Account (New York)
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of Governors
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary, Board of Governors

11/26/63
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Patterson, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Atlanta
This meeting was held on the first business day of the Board
of Governors and several of the Federal Reserve Banks following the
death of President Kennedy on November 22, 1963.
At the request of the Chairman, Mr. Stone made a statement in
which he reported that the Government securities market had opened on
a firm and confident tone this morning. There was some buying through-
out the maturity scale but little, if any, selling by investors. There
were no signs of selling pressure--panicky or otherwise. Prices on
Treasury coupon issues maturing in 1966 and later had risen slightly,
and those on shorter maturity coupon issues were about unchanged.
Treasury bill rates were unchanged to one basis point lower, with the
rate declines centered in the issues maturing in late February and in
March. The market was giving an excellent account of itself.
Corporate stock prices were making a good recovery, Mr. Stone
continued, from the depressed levels they had reached on Friday after-
noon after news of the attack on the President had been received. At
11:00 a.m. the Dow-Jones average was up 10.47 points on a heavy volume
of trading. (Subsequently, Mr. Stone reported a gain of 14.64 points
in the Dow-Jones average by 11:30 a.m.)

11/26/63 -3-
Mr. Stone commented that market ideas concerning the bidding
in the Treasury bill auction scheduled for later in the day ranged
around rates of 3.50-3.52 per cent on the three-month bill and 3.64-
3.66 per cent on the six-month bill. These bidding ideas were close
to the rates on outstanding bills of comparable maturities.
The current outlook for member bank reserves was still in need
of clarification, Mr. Stone said. The latest estimates for the
statement week ending November 27 indicated net borrowed reserves of
$5 million, but it was not clear how firm this figure was. The money
market had opened with a comfortable tone. In view of the indicated
need for reserves and the uncertainty prevailing in the money market,
the Desk was buying Treasury bills for delivery on the same day to
insure that there would be enough reserves in the banking system to
prevent the money market from becoming unduly tight and generally to
maintain the steady atmosphere that had prevailed recently. Mr. Stone
recalled that the Desk had planned to buy bills on the preceding Friday
and ha been engaged in a market "go-around" when the news of the
attack on the President was received. The Desk was now indicating to
the market that it was picking up where it had left off on Friday, to
avoid conveying a feeling of concern about market developments or any
ideas regarding rate levels. Friday's estimates had pointed to net
borrowed reserves of $333 million for the statement week ahead. If
the market situation should turn adverse, Mr. Stone said, it would be

11/26/63 -4-
necessary only to step into the market a day early to supply reserves
that in any case would be needed for the following week. (Later in
the meeting Mr. Stone noted that new reserve estimates still indicated
net borrowed reserves of $5 million for the current statement week,
but that the estimate for the next statement week now stood at net
borrowed reserves of $446 million. He reported that the Desk had just
bought about $220 million Treasury bills in the market and would take
additional bills being sold by foreign accounts into the System's port-
folio.)
Mr. Stone concluded by saying that in view of the market's
good performance he did not feel that any special instructions from
the Committee were needed to deal with the present situation. In his
judgment there was ample room within the Committee's existing instruc-
tions and leeway to deal with any turn in the market that seemed likely.
Mr. Coombs supplemented his telegraphic report of the preceding
day, a copy of which has been placed is the files of the Committee, by
noting that the foreign exchange markets had remained quiet and orderly
this morning. Exchange rates were being held by the foreign central
banks, where necessary, at the same levels as those that had prevailed
on Friday and Monday, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York planned
to do the same in the New York market after the European markets
closed.

11/26/63 -5-
In the case of the Swiss franc, Mr. Coombs continued, the
dollar had moved off the floor to a level of 4.3160 while the dollar
rate on the guilder had also moved above the temporary support point
of 3.5990 introduced by the Netherlands Bank on Monday. The mark
continued in demand, however, with the Bundesbank taking in $4 million
on Monday and $28 million today. The New York Bank planned to absorb
one-half of the latter amount through a swap drawing.
Mr. Coombs observed that the London gold market was quiet
this morning, with small volume and a fixing price identical with
that of Monday. Prices subsequently moved down to $35.08-.09. Far
from losing gold, the London gold pool had gained $44 million since
Friday, primarily owing to Russian sales. He had no recommendations
to make to the Committee.
Chairman Martin commented that in his judgment the Account
Management had handled things well during this period with respect
to both foreign exchange and domestic transactions. He described
the purpose of this meeting as purely precautionary. Observing
that it seemed desirable for the Committee to consider whether any
change was appropriate in its current economic policy directiveto
reflect the death of the President, the Chairman read a draft para-
graph that had been suggested as a possible replacement for the
second paragraph of the directive adopted et the preceding meeting of
the Committee (November 12, 1963) and asked for comments.

11/26/63
The Committee members favored revising the directive along
the general lines of the proposal, and the discussion was concerned
primarily with specific phrasing.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York was authorized and directed,
until otherwise directed by the Committee,
to execute transactions in the System
Account in accordance with the following
current economic policy directive:
It is the Federal Open Market Committee's current policy
to accommodate moderate growth in bank credit, while maintain-
ing conditions in the money market that would contribute to
continued improvement in the capital account of the U. S.
balance of payments. This policy takes into consideration
the fact that domestic economic activity is expanding further,
although with a margin of underutilized resources; and the
fact that the balance of payments position is still adverse
despite a tendency to reduced deficits. It also recognizes
the increases in bank credit, money supply, and the reserve
base of recent months.
To implement this policy, System open market operations
shall be conducted with a view to cushioning any unsettlement
that might arise in money markets stemming from the death of
President Kennedy and to maintaining about the same conditions
in the money market as have prevailed in recent weeks, while
accommodating moderate expansion in aggregate bank reserves.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin
Hayes, Balderston, Bopp, Clay, Irons, Mitchell,
Robertson, Scanlon, and Shepardson. Vote
against this action: Mr. Mills.
Mr. Mills dissented for the same reasons he had dissented from
the directive adopted at the meeting of November 12, 1963; he thought
the Committee should modify its policy to one of greater ease.

11/26/63 -7-
Mr. Robertson, while voting favorably on the directive, indi-
cated that he would have preferred to continue the previous directive
and to issue a supplementary instruction to the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York to cushion any unsettlement in financial markets that
might stem from the President's death.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary