A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, January 29, 1963, at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. M artin, Chairman
Mr. H ayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. B alderston
Mr. Bryan
Mr. Deming
Mr. E llis
Mr. F ulton
Mr. M ills
Mr. M itchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Messrs. Bopp, Clay, and Irons, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Wayne, Shuford, and Swan, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis,
and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Brandt, Brill, Garvy, Holland, Koch,
and Parsons, Associate Economists
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of
Governors
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors

1/29/63
Mr. Helmer, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago
Messrs. Sanford, Eastburn, Ratchford, Baughnan,
Jones, Tow, and Green, Vice Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of New York,
Philadelphia, Richmond, Chicago, St. Louis,
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively
Mr. Lynn, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Mr. Eisenmenger, Acting Director of Researcn,
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Mr. Cooper, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Mann, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
December 18, 1962, were approved.
The staff economic review at this meeting was in the form of a
visual-auditory presentation, for which Messrs. Garfield, Altmann,
Axilrod, and Reynolds of the Board's staff joined the meeting.
The text of the introductory portion of the economic review,
presented by Mr. Noyes, was as follows:
The record for 1962, domestic and international, is now
largely at hand--subject of course to revision. In consider
ing the record, one problem that has already emerged is the
seemingly divergent figures for the amount of advance actually
achieved. Averaging the four quarters of each of the past two
years together, GNP measured in current dollars was up 7 per
cent from 1961 to 1962. But if one compares the fourth quarter
of 1962 with the fourth quarter of 1961, the rate is only 4 per
cent. While 1962 was a year of little change in prices, there
was some upcreep, especially in the cost of services. If one
adjusts for these price changes, the two figures decline to 5
and 3 per cent, respectively. And, of course, the population
continued to grow, so that if one thinks of advance in terms
of per capita GNP still another slice of the gain melts away,
and we find ourselves with an improvement during 1962 of only

1/29/63
1 per cent in the real GNP per capita. It is relatively
easy for anyone to find a perfectly good, honest figure
that permits him to view the year with satisfaction,
complacency, or concern. But it is worth noting that this
is true largely because 1962 was a year of moderate advance
following a period of rapid recovery.
The second half of 1962 was a period of unusually little
change, especially for industrial production, nonagricultural
employment, and unemployment. Industrial prices continued to
move within a very narrow range, as they had since early 1959.
Despite little change in industrial activity and
corporate profits in the second half, common stock prices
advanced and now, with a further rise in January, they are
two-thirds of the way back to their December 1961 high. In
markets for funds, although the forces of demand and supply
were so evenly balanced that interest rates changed little
in 1962 as a whole, the volume of bank loans and mortgages
rose sharply.
There followed sections on the current domestic demand situation
by Mr. Garfield, financial developments by Mr. Axilrod, balance of pay
ments problems by Mr. Reynolds, and resource utilization, productivity,
costs, and prices by Mr. Altmann. The text of the concluding portion of
the review, presented by Mr. Koch, was as follows:
The President's new tax cut proposal, taken by itself,
would increase the deficit regardless of the budget concept
used, When completed in 1965, the proposed three-stage tax
program would likely reduce revenues by an estimated $10
billion or so a year, the bulk of which would be in individ
ual taxes. In considering the appropriateness of this tax
cut under current conditions, it should be borne in mind
that time and a growing economy tend automatically to raise
revenues at current tax rates, and that current tax rates
would likely produce a sizable budget surplus under condi
tions of reasonable full employment if current levels of
Government spending did not increase.
The part of the tax cut to be realized in fiscal 1964
would in itself likely reduce revenues by over $5 billion.
This would be offset to a considerable extent in its effects
on the cash budget by a proposed speed-up in corporate tax
payments as well as by anticipated increased revenues arising

1/29/63
out of higher income levels. The net loss in revenues in
fiscal 1964 is thus estimated at something like $2-3/4
billion, This loss in revenue, together with other elements
influencing the cash budget, would entail a rise in the cash
deficit from a projected $8-1/4 billion in the current fiscal
year to about $10-1/4 billion in fiscal 1964.
In the first half of the current calendar year the
budget document projects a small cash surplus, but in the
second half the deficit would be quite large since it would
reflect not only the first stages of the new tax program
but also the usual seasonal imbalance of receipts and
expenditures.
The surplus in the first half of this year would be
accompanied by somewhat larger net debt repayments if the
Treasury draws down its current relatively high cash balances.
In the second half of the year, assuming little change in the
cash balance, net cash borrowing would no doubt be consider
ably larger than the $6.2 billion in the last half of calendar
1962 and might well exceed the postwar record of $9.2 billion
in the last half of 1961.
What are the implications for monetary policy of an
enlarged deficit? This depends very much on the impact that
the new fiscal program would have on economic developments.
If there is a significant stimulative impact, we can expect
enlarged credit demands from the private as well as the
public sector, and consequent upward pressures on interest
rates, even though financial savings are also likely to
increase. How rapidly bank reserves should expand under
those circumstances cannot be readily foretold for it depends
on general economic conditions at the time, including the
strength of private demands and developments in the balance
of payments. It also depends on the lagged effects of the
substantial bank credit and monetary expansion that has
occurred in the last four months.
One's over-all assessment of recent monetary policy
must, as always, depend on his fundamental concept of the
workings of the financial system. If he believes that for
support of maximum sustainable growth in economic activity
it is necessary, in the financial area, for the money supply
to increase consistently in relation to the advance in
activity, then he might well be satisfied with the financial
performance of recent months. In fact, in the light of the
recent rapid monetary expansion, he might feel that its pace
ought to be tempered somewhat.

1/29/63
As another point of view, one's emphasis might be on
interest rates and credit availability and their relation
to the present state of economic activity. Accordingly,
he might feel that monetary policy should operate to keep
interest rates, particularly longer-term rates, under sus
tained downward pressure and to make bank credit even more
readily available until progress toward reasonably full
utilization of resources is more clearly assured.
Finally, one who feels that our persistent international
payments imbalance has the danger of precipitating a dollar
crisis in world markets may well emphasize the need for
higher interest rates and reduced bank credit availability
in order to curb significantly the outflow of funds abroad.
He might also feel that the domestic economy is strong
enough to absorb, and function satisfactorily under, con
ditions of less monetary ease.
As for current prospects, the indicators are mixed.
Those that measure output and demand are not performing in
a fashion that suggests any gathering upsurge in activity.
On balance, the outlook seems to be for continued moderate
expansion--with caution dictated by the fact that some of
the strong elements in the economy that have sustained
activity thus far, for example, autos and housing, are not
likely to show any further increases in the near-term future.
Key financial indicators, in contrast, are showing a
strength that on occasion in the past has foreshadowed a
pick-up in underlying economic activity. Recent heavy
credit expansion, of course, may be serving mainly to keep
the economy from actually turning down. As for the
stimulative effects of any tax cut, these are not likely
to appear for many months and the magnitude then is un
certain. The over-all balance of payments progress has been
below earlier optimistic hopes, partly because of the heavy
longer term capital outflow. Very recently, payments
disequilibrium has shown a fresh deterioration that thus
far cannot be fully explained.
These are the economic facts upon which current monetary
policy must be based. Although there are differences of
view on the staff as to the most appropriate policy for the
near future, generally speaking it is felt that from the
standpoint of domestic considerations a stimulative policy
posture continues to be appropriate. At the same time, the
staff recognizes that continuing adverse balance of payments
developments are a matter of grave concern and that these
developments work as a constraint on pursuit of a monetary
policy course shaped solely to the needs of the domestic
economy.

1/29/63
Thus, there does not appear to us anything in the
developments of the last three weeks which dictates that
a change in policy in either direction is urgent. This
view is underlined by the heavy Treasury financing sched
ule in prospect. Since maintenance of an even keel in
money markets during this period is to be desired, any
significant change in policy at this meeting would present
difficult problems.
Copies of the script of the economic presentation and of the
accompanying charts have been placed in the files of the Open Market
Committee.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the Committee
a report from the Special Manager of the System Open Market Account
on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open Market Account and
Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the period January 8
through January 23, 1963, together with a supplementary report cover
ing the period January 24 through January 28, 1963. Copies of these
reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.
In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Sanford
noted that the exchange markets had in general been relatively quiet
since the previous meeting of the Committee, although the pound ster
ling and Canadian dollar markets were at times quite active. Sterling
had shown strength early in the period, but this normal seasonal
strength was subsequently offset by the difficulties encountered with
regard to British entry into the European Common Market. In the first
part of the period the Bank of England acquired dollars in the process
of moderating the rise in the sterling rate, but since then the British

1/29/63 -7
had lost dollars. The covered interest arbitrage differential moved
from a position in favor of British Treasury bills to a slight dif
ferential in favor of U. S. Treasury bills. At no stage, however,
was there any particular incentive to move funds into or out of
U. S. bills. Money, though, was continuing to move to London for the
acquisition of hire-purchase paper, and to Canada for the purchase
of finance and commercial paper. Also, loans by U. S. banks to foreign
banks and acceptance credits continued to be reported in sizable
volume. Foreign borrowers continued to tap the U. S. market with new
issues, and more such borrowing was scheduled for the future.
The Canadian dollar eased off in the early days of the past
period, apparently reflecting market response to a speech by an
opposition spokesman in which concern was expressed about the long-run
success of the Government's economic program, as well as the Canadian
interest and dividend payments to nonresidents customary at this time
of year. Subsequently, the market for Canadian dollars firmed
considerably, although the rate was still somewhat below the December
high. The more recent advance in the Canadian dollar rate was associated
with reports of large impending Canadian long-term financing in the
United States.
Mr. Sanford also noted that the Swiss franc and Dutch guilder
rates had shown little net change for the past three-week period,
while the French franc and the Italian lira hovered close to or at

1/29/63 -8
their upper limits. The German mark, after showing a considerable
decline from its year-end peak, had moved irregularly higher from the
level reached in early January.
The price of gold in the London market had fluctuated remark
ably little. In general the market had been quiet, and on January 10
the price of gold dropped to the lowest point since December 1959.
The announcement in early January of a series of new Indian controls
on the buying, selling, and holding of gold had apparently dampened
demand in the market. The gold pool had accumulated a moderately
large quantity of gold during January.
Turning to System foreign currency operations during the past
three-week period, Mr. Sanford noted that on January 15 the Federal
Reserve drew $25 million equivalent of sterling under its standby
swap with the Bank of England in anticipation of seasonal strength of
sterling and a possible need for System intervention in the market.
On January 25 the Bank of England offered $5.6 million, which the
System took up out of its drawing under the swap, at a rate slightly
better than the rate at which the pounds were acquired in the swap
drawing.
With regard to negotiations with the Bank of England about the
possibility of enlarging the swap agreement between the Federal Reserve
and that institution to perhaps $250 million, as discussed at the
Committee meeting on January 8, Mr. Sanford reported that the matter

1/29/63 -9
was being actively considered by the Bark of England. However, the
present situation with regard to the Common Market had injected a
factor that undoubtedly was being taken into account in the Bank's
thinking.
Mr. Sanford commented that the swap arrangement with the
National Bank of Belgium had been an example of use of a swap on a
two-way basis. In the middle of the month the Belgians, apparently
anticipating dollar needs, redeemed $5 million of the $50 million
Treasury certificate of indebtedness that they held by virtue of the
Federal Reserve drawing of an equivalent amount of Belgian francs in
June 1962. Yesterday, however, the Belgians developed some surplus
dollars, and for value January 31 were reconstituting their Treasury
certificate investment. In addition, they were selling the Federal
Reserve $5 million against Belgian francs held abroad.
On January 17, Mr. Sanford noted, the Federal Reserve System
and the Bank of Sweden entered into a $50 million three-month standby
swap the negotiation of which was authorized by the Open Market Com
mittee at the meeting on December 4, 1962. On January 17, also, the
standby swap between the Federal Reserve and the German Federal Bank
was increased from $50 million to $150 million, as authorized at the
Committee meeting on January 8, 1963. Pursuant to another authorization
at that meeting, on January 18 the Federal Reserve renewed for three
months each the $100 million swap arrangements with the Swiss National

1/29/63 -10
Bank and the Bank for International Settlements. It also renewed the
outstanding drawings under those swaps in the amounts of $50 million
and $35 million, respectively. In addition, pursuant to a further
authorization given at the January 8 meeting, on January 18 the
Federal Reserve renewed for three months the $150 million swap arrange
ment with the Bank of Italy. On January 21 the System purchased a
total of $50 million equivalent of lire and immediately applied the
lire to the repayment of the $50 million drawing under the swap with
the Bank of Italy. The swap, therefore, was now fully on a standby
basis.
Continuing, Mr. Sanford said that on January 24 the System
purchased $50 million equivalent of Austrian schillings from the
Austrian National Bank and used the proceeds to pay off the maturing
drawing of $50 million under the swap arrangement with the National
Bank. Thus, the swap arrangement shifted to a standby basis, and it
was renewed for three months on that basis. The National Bank of
Austria had now indicated that it wished to buy $50 million of go.d
over the period of approximately the next four months.
In response to a question by Mr. Mills about disposition of
gold in the gold pool, Mr. Sanford commented that in December there
had been an accumulation which in January was distributed among the
participants. This month there would be a further accumulation, and
in February there would probably be another distribution among the

1/29/63 -11
members of the pool. Mr. Mills recalled that at the January 8 Committee
meeting it was stated that the U. S. Treasury had relinquished its
interest in the gold previously redistributed. He inquired as to the
current intent of the Treasury. In reply, Mr. Sanford and Chairman
Martin stated that this matter was presently under consideration by
the Treasury, which had not yet made a decision.
Mr. Mills inquired what amount of System swap drawings had in
effect been funded by the Treasury. Mr. Sanford replied that the
repayment of the $50 million drawing under the Italian swap had been
made possible by a reversal of the previous flow of funds into Italy,
and had coincided with an issue of U. S. Treasury securities associated
with Italian financing of military purchases in the United States but
even in this case there could not be said to have been direct Treasury
funding of System swap drawings and to his knowledge there were no
other Treasury fundings of swap drawings.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the System Open Market Account trans
actions in foreign currencies during
the period January 8 through January 28,
1963, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
It was noted that on January 17, 1963, the New York Reserve
Bank advised that pursuant to action of the Open Market Committee on
December 4, 1962, authorizing negotiations for a currency swap arrange
ment with the Bank of Sweden, such an arrangement had been concluded
for public announcement. Accordingly, Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary,
notified the Committee members by telegram on that date that the

1/29/63 -12
Committee's continuing authority directive on System foreign currency
operations was amended by adding Swedish kronor to the list of cur
rencies that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and
directed to purchase and sell through spot transactions in accordance
with the Guidelines on System Foreign Currency Operations issued by
the Federal Open Market Committee on February 13, 1962, and amended
on November 13, 1962. As revised; the continuing authority directive
read as follows:
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is authorized and
directed to purchase and sell through spot transactions any
or all of the following currencies in accordance with the
Guidelines on System Foreign Currency Operations issued by
the Federal Open Market Committee on February 13, 1962, and
amended November 13, 1962:
Pounds sterling
French francs
German marks
Italian lire
Netherlands guilders
Swiss francs
Belgian francs
Canadian dollars
Austrian schillings
Swedish kronor
Total foreign currencies held at any one time shall not
exceed $1.3 billion.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the action taken
in sending the aforementioned telegram
was ratified.
Mr. Sanford then presented certain recommendations for the
Committee's consideration.

1/29/63 -13
First, he pointed out that the swap arrangements with the
German Federal Bank and the Bank of France in the amounts of $150
million and $50 million, respectively, would mature February 4, 1963.
He recommended their renewal on a standby basis for a further three
months.
Without objection, renewal of the swap
agreements with the German Federal Bank and
the Bank of France, as recommended by
Mr. Sanford, was authorized.
Second, Mr. Sanford recommended that the Committee authorize
the sale, when timely and appropriate, of German marks now held in
System Account to the Treasury for its Stabilization Fund at a pr.ce
not less than the average price of acquisition by the Federal Reserve
System. He pointed out that at present the System held $27 million
equivalent of marks out of a total of $32 million acquired from the
Stabilization Fund in February 1962. Provided the mark rate firmed
a bit further from its present level--which was about 24.98 cents
against an average acquisition price of slightly over 25 cents--he
believed it would be desirable to sell a block of these marks--just
how much he could not say at the moment--to the Treasury. The Treasury
could then use those marks in making swaps with the Bank for Inter
national Settlements for the purpose of acquiring Swiss francs, which
were needed to meet obligations in the Swiss currency; or at least it
would have the marks as cover against its Swiss franc obligations.

1/29/63 -14
In discussion, Mr. Mitchell suggested that the Open Market
Committee should not be bound by profit and loss considerations in
a matter of this kind. If the Treasury believed it could work out
of the Swiss situation by utilizing Germar marks, he would feel
that the System should be prepared to make the marks available to
the Treasury, irrespective of whether the mark rate moved up or not.
There was indication of concurrence in this view.
Accordingly, authorization was given
to sell to the Treasury quantities of
German marks out of the System's present
holdings of $27 million equivalent if such
marks should be desired by the Treasury.
The meeting of the Committee then recessed in order that the
members of the Board of Governors and the Reserve Bank Presidents
might meet with the members of the House Banking and Currency Committee
pursuant to arrangements made at the request of the Chairman of that
Committee. The meeting reconvened at 12:20 p.m. with the same
attendance.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report on open market operations in United States
Government securities covering the period January 8 through January 23,
1963, and a supplementary report covering the period January 24 through
January 28, 1963. Copies of both reports have been placed in the files
of the Committee.
Mr. Stone commented in supplementation of the written reports
as follows:

1/29/63 -15-
The highlight of the bond market since the last meeting
was the Treasury's sale on January 8 of $250 million long-term
bonds at competitive bidding by underwriting syndicates. The
thirty-year bonds were awarded to the winning group at an
interest cost of a shade over 4 per cent and were publicly
reoffered to investors at par to yield 4 per cent. The issue
was quickly oversubscribed and rose to a premium in the
market that same afternoon. This accomplishment was highly
gratifying, both in terms of the keen competition generated
among the bidders and the rapid distribution of the securities
to investors. Most market participarts were much impressed
by the results and are prepared for further trials of the
technique, under varying circumstances, as the Treasury seeks
to determine its usefulness as an additional means of market
ing long-term obligations.
Stimulated by the success of the auction, Treasury bond
prices generally rose during the first part of the three-week
period and the new 4 per cent bonds temporarily reached a bid
quotation of almost 100-3/8. Around mid-January, however, a
more cautious attitude pervaded the market under the influence
of the President's tax and budget messages and the news that a
continuing erosion of the gold stock might be expected to occur
in early 1963 because of the persisting balance of payments
deficit. Prices edged lower and most intermediate and long
term issues were down 2/32 to 22/32 for the period, with the
new 4 per cent bonds closing last night at 100-2/32 bid.
The invigorating atmosphere produced by the Treasury's
successful bond auction also carried over into the markets
for corporate and municipal bonds. Bidding for new issues was
fairly aggressive and a new Aa-rated corporate utility issue
was reoffered to investors on January 15 at a yield of 4.20
per cent, the lowest yield on a comparable issue since mid
1958. Investors offered some resistance to the lower rate
levels, however, and during the latter half of the month the
corporate and municipal sectors, responding to the same
developments that affected the Treasury bond market, became
rather hesitant. Moreover, there have been several sizable
new issues scheduled for the months ahead, although the
immediate calendar of forthcoming offerings is not particularly
heavy.
In the short-term market, rates on Treasury bills
fluctuated narrowly over the period, closing the interval
very close to those prevailing at the start despite the fact that
they typically undergo some seasonal downward movement during
the early weeks of the year. In yesterday's auction the three
month bills were sold at an average rate of 2.92 per cent--the

1/29/63 -16-
same as the average established in the auction three weeks
ago. This relative stability of bill rates was the outcome
of opposite forces of roughly equal strength. Tending to
push rates lower was a generally good demand which, although
it was not always vigorous enough to meet the market's hopes
and expectations, was sufficient to reduce dealer bill
positions noticeably. Offsetting the downward influence on
rates, exerted by this demand, however, was an addition of
$500 million to the roll-over of the January 15 bills and
the announcement of a new issue of $1 billion June tax
anticipation bills to be sold at auction tomorrow, with
commercial banks not permitted to pay for the bills through
credits to tax and loan accounts. In addition, the short
term market, in company with the longer term sector, evidenced
renewed concern over the balance of payments and the budgetary
outlook.
The availability of reserves since the last meeting
turned out to be somewhat greater than in the preceding
three-week period, owing in good part to the erratic behavior
of float, which rose unusually high and stayed up unusually
long. The money market nevertheless remained generally firm,
and Federal funds traded at 3 per cent most of the time.
Meanwhile, the expansion in seasonally adjusted total and
required reserves continued.
In closing I should note that the Treasury financing
calendar will be full between now and the next meeting of the
Committee. I have already mentioned the prospective sale of
$1 billion June tax bills tomorrow. And later this week the
Treasury will announce the terms under which it will refund
its $9.5 billion February 15 maturities, of which $5.5
billion are publicly held.
In discussion based on Mr. Stone's comments, Mr. Swan referred
to the seasonal downward pressure on Treasury bill rates in the early
weeks of the calendar year. He had noticed that a year ago such
downward pressure appeared practically to have terminated by about the
end of January. He inquired whether that would appear also to be true
this year.

1/29/63 -17-
Mr. Stone replied that he thought the seasonal downward
pressure did tend to terminate by about the end of January. Although
a precise dating was difficult, the downward pressure tended to ease
off after the first couple of weeks of the calendar year.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the
open market transactions in Government
securities during the period January 8
through January 28, 1963, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Under date of January 24, 1963, there had been distributed to
the Committee a memorandum from Mr. Stone and Mr. Farrell, Director
of the Board's Division of Bank Operations, suggesting a revision in
procedures for allocation of participations in the System Open Market
Account. The memorandum noted that when the present formula was adopted
on March 6, 1962, it was pointed out that although the new procedure
for reallocating participations at quarterly intervals (February, May,
August, November) would tend more nearly to equalize gold reserve ratios
(against notes and deposits combined) of the various Reserve Banks,
occasional adjustments might still be necessary if, because of temporary
conditions, a Bank's ratio should fall below 30 per cent just before a
Federal Reserve weekly statement date or a month-end date. It was also
noted that further deterioration in the combined reserve ratios of the
twelve Banks might make it desirable to reduce the 30 per cent guidepost
specified in the procedures. This point was mentioned again by the
Account Manager at the Committee meeting on September 12, 1962. Reserve

1/29/63 -18
ratios had in fact continued to decline; on one day in December the ratio
for all Banks combined reached as low as 31.4 per cent. Individual banks
had had ratios below 30 per cent on a number of Tuesdays and days pre
ceding monthends; on Monday, January 14, one Reserve Bank had a ratio
of only 25.7 per cent, the lowest in recent history. Since the adoption
of the current plan last March, there had been 21 reallocations, 11
since the last regular quarterly reallocation on November 1, 1962. Some
of the special reallocations could not be quickly reversed since the
ratios of the Banks concerned remained relatively low for extended
periods. The reserve ratio situation was most acute over the year end.
Since then, there had been some improvement, but individual Banks
continued to experience low ratios and special reallocations continued
to be necessary. With the gold stock undergoing further erosion, it
seemed likely that rather frequent special reallocations might still be
necessary despite the seasonal drop in note and deposit liabilities.
When that seasonal decline came to an end in the spring, the making of
special reallocations could become virtually a continuous process.
In order to reduce to a practicable minimum the number of
special reallocations, it was proposed that sections 2 and 3 of the
current procedures be amended by substituting 28 per cent wherever 30
per cent appeared in those sections. It was felt that such action
would reduce, and for a few months perhaps eliminate, special reallocating
of the Account. If 28 per cent had been in effect since the new
procedures were adopted last March, no special reallocation would have

1/29/63 -19-
been required. Setting the figure at 28 per cent should not, at least
for the next few months, preclude any Bank from having leeway to avoid
a situation in which its ratio fell below 25 per cent on a statement
date, although this possibility could not be entirely dismissed no
matter what procedures were used for allocating participations in the
Account. It was recommended that the foregoing proposal be adopted by
the Open Market Committee.
In supplementation of the distributed memorandum, Mr. Stone
commented as follows:
The proposal to reduce from 30 per cent to 28 per cent
the reserve ratio that must be reached before a special re
allocation of the Account is undertaken grew out of the
series of 21 such reallocations that were made as a conse
quence of the further deterioration in reserve ratios over
the past few months. As note and deposit liabilities expand
with the growth of the economy, and with the gold stock
continuing to decline, there is every likelihood that as the
year goes on the technical accounting problems connected
with low reserve ratios will become more pressing. Moreover,
we recently experienced a different kind of problem in that
two of the Reserve Banks, on separate occasions, found them
selves with virtually all of their participations in the
System Account pledged against Federal Reserve notes. On
one of those occasions, I should note, the reserve ratio of
the Bank concerned was very close to 25 per cent, and in
reallocating the Account to raise that Bank's reserve ratio
we found there were not enough unpledged securities to enable
us to put the ratio up to the System average. This kind of
problem may also recur. As the Committee knows, both the
approach to the problem of reallocating the Account and the
plan for pledging Reserve Bank participations against Federal
Reserve notes were evolved at a time when the problems I have
just described were regarded only as remote possibilities.
Those problems, however, are now with us, and hence it seems
appropriate to take a fresh look at the entire gamut of pro
cedures involving the reallocation of the Account and the
pledging of participations against Federal Reserve notes.

1/29/63 -20
Accordingly, we have constituted, in the New York Bank, a
three-man group to take a close look at these procedures
and to determine whether they are fully adequate to the
present circumstances in which reserve ratios are pushing
toward 25 per cent and in which a Reserve Bank's participa
tion in the Account is barely adequate to cover its note
issue. I understand that a similar group is being con
stituted within the Board staff, and we anticipate that the
two groups, working cooperatively, will have some conclusions
to lay before the Committee and the Reserve Banks within the
next few weeks. Given the statutory requirements governing
reserve ratios and the pledging of collateral behind the
note issue, it may well turn out that present procedures,
with a patch here and there, are about as good as can be
devised. But we think it is worthwhile to make the study
before jumping to the conclusion that this is so.
In discussion of the matter, Mr. Ellis endorsed the proposed
change from 30 per cent to 28 per cent. He went on to point out,
however, that the amended procedures would provide that if a Bank's
reserve ratio should be reduced below 28 per cent as a result of a
reallocation, or should fall below 28 per cent on the next to last
business day (as observed by the Agent Bank) of a statement week or
month, its holdings as of the close of business that day would be
adjusted the following day by an amount sufficient to raise its
reserve ratio to the average reserve ratio of the twelve Banks com
bined on the preceding day; and that any such adjustment would be
reversed on the first succeeding Thursday (before the next quarterly
reallocation) when it could be accomplished without reducing the
Bank's reserve ratio below 28 per cent. It was the suggestion of
Mr. Ellis that the rigidity of the language providing for reversal
of any such adjustment be relaxed somewhat. If it appeared that a

1/29/63 -21-
reversal was going to force a Bank below 30 per cent, and lead to
another adjustment the following week, he felt it would be helpful
if the reversal could be postponed at the discretion of the Manager
of the Open Market Account. This seemed particularly true during a
period when, as Mr. Stone had stated, a comprehensive staff study was
being made of existing procedures.
There was unanimous agreement that the proposed procedures
should be amended in a manner reflecting the suggestion of Mr. Ellis.
Accordingly, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the
procedures with respect to allocations
of the System Open Market Account, as
approved by the Open Marke: Committee on
March 6, 1962, were amended to read as
follows:
1. Securities in the System Open Market Account shall
be reallocated on the first business day of February, May,
August, and November of each year by means of adjustments
proportionate to the adjustments that would have been re
quired to equalize the average ratios of the 12 Reserve Banks
over the first 85 days of the preceding three calendar months.
2. If a Bank's reserve ratio should be reduced below
28 per cent as a result of the reallocation, or should fall
below 28 per cent on the next to the last business day (as
observed by the Agent Bank) of a statement week or month, its
holdings as of the close of business that day shall be adjusted
the following day by an amount sufficient to raise its reserve
ratio to the average reserve ratio of the 12 Banks combined on
the preceding day. Such securities shall be allocated to the
Bank in a position to absorb the largest additional amount with
out reducing its reserve ratio below the ratio of the 12 Banks
combined. If that Bank is unable to take the entire amount,
the excess shall be allocated to the Bank which can absorb the
next largest amount without reducing its reserve ratio below
the average for the System.
Any such adjustment will be reversed, at the dis
cretion of the Manager of the System Open Market Account and the

1/29/63 -22-
Bank, on the first succeeding Thursday or thereafter (before
the next quarterly reallocation) when it appears that it can
be accomplished without reducing the Bank's reserve ratio
below 28 per cent, except that if the Thursday is a holiday
or the last business day of a month the reversal will be made
the following business day. A reversal will restore individual
Bank holdings to their established participation percentages
before the adjustment occurred, except to the extent that a
Bank may have been involved in another adjustment in the interim.
3. If a Bank's reserve ratio should fall below 28 per
cent on any other day, or if a Bank anticipates that its
reserve ratio will fall below that figure, it may arrange with
the Manager of the System Open Market Account for an adjust
ment similar to those provided for in paragraph No. 2 so as
to increase the Bank's reserve ratio to the average of the 12
Banks combined.
4. The Account shall be apportioned during the succeed
ing quarter on the basis of the ratios determined in Para
graph 1, after allowing for any adjustments as provided for
in Paragraphs 2 and 3.
5. Profits and losses on the sale of securities from
the Account shall be allocated on the day of delivery of the
securities sold on the basis of each Bank's current holdings
at the opening of business on that day.
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel, joined the meeting
during the discussion of the foregoing topic and withdrew at its con
clusion.
The Chairman then called for the usual go-around of comments
and views on current economic developments and monetary policy. He
turned first to Mr. Hayes, who presented the following statement:
As we compare the latest available statistics with those
of three weeks ago, or six weeks ago, we find that the domestic
business situation remains virtually unchanged, whereas there
has been further clear deterioration in our balance of inter
national payments and, potentially at least, in the status of
the dollar.
Retail sales are exhibiting considerable strength so far
in January, and consumer confidence appears high. However,
the cautious appraisal of the Council of Economic Advisers,

1/29/63 -23-
with which most business economists seem to concur, suggests
no likelihood of any great upsurge in 1963; and the attain
ment of a significant drop in unemployment still appears
decidedly remote.
Business sentiment continues to be strong, even though
recent weeks have not produced any tangible evidence of the
emergence of additional factors of strength. With the details
of the President's tax reduction and reform proposals now on
the table, in the coming weeks the business community and the
public at large will try to appraise the chances and the
actual timetable of their enactment.
As for the balance of payments, unusually large capital
outflows, both long and short term, seem to have been mainly
responsible for a sharp rise in the over-all deficit to some
thing over half a billion dollars so far in January. Also
it is now apparent that very sizable loans and acceptance
credits to foreign banks explain why the December surplus was
only $80 million despite about S400 million of receipts from
special transactions. The sale of some $150 million of new
Canadian securities in our capital market in January, together
with the $97 million Chrysler purchase of Simca shares, serve
as a dramatic reminder of the major contribution of long-ter
capital outflows to our balance of payments problem, while
the placing of some $75 million of new U. S. dollar time
deposits in Canadian banks emphasizes the continuing inability
of U. S. banks to compete on even terms with Canadian and
European banks in attracting and holding dollar balances.
Additional large new foreign bond issues are in prospect for
the coming months. Despite the fact that the gold and ex
change markets remain generally calm, we face a large loss
of gold in the first half of 1963 even on the basis of exist
ing orders alone. Further sizable losses could easily occur
as a result of the weight of existing heavy dollar balances,
without taking into account the effect of additional future
payments deficits. Moreover, there is an ever-present danger
of serious loss of confidence as the size of our monetary gold
stock shrinks further and approaches the $15 billion level.
Under these conditions, I find especially disturbing an
apparent tendency in some Government circles to accept continu
ing large payments deficits as inevitable. It is also discourag
ing to note the considerable shrinkage in our export surplus
in the last quarter of 1962. Although the immediate export
outlook seems moderately cheerful, at least if we consider our
exports to Japan and Canada, there is an ominous note in the
growing evidence of the nation's apparent inability to hold
the line effectively on wage costs at a time when this is of

1/29/63 -24-
greater importance than ever. In the recent dock strike
settlement, for instance, there seemed to be, on the surface
at least, little or no stress on the general aim, so widely
publicized a year ago, of trying to keep wage increases
within the limits of gains in national productivity.
As has been true now for several months, recent data on
bank credit raise a question whether we have not been perhaps
excessively liberal in providing reserves to the banking
system. I am thinking of the fact that total credit at weekly
reporting banks declined in the first three weeks of January
much less than is typical for this season. Thus, in effect,
the strong bank credit upsurge of the last few months of 1962
has continued. The dollar rise in bank credit in December,
and indeed for the fourth quarter as a whole, as well as for
the full year 1962, was the largest for any similar period on
record. After a sluggish performance during most of 1962, the
money supply came to life in the last quarter and rose again
sharply in the first half of January. Required reserves against
private deposits have been running some $300 million above the
3 per cent guideline.
Of course the imminence of the Treasury's refunding pro
gram sets severe limits on our freedcm of action in the
monetary sphere for the next two weeks. But I should think
the least we should do is to maintain the increased firmness
of market atmosphere decided upon at the two last meetings.
The directive might appropriately be modified to give
recognition to the forthcoming Treasury financing, the further
deterioration this month in the balance of payments situation,
and the fact that policy will apply to a two-week period; but
I would think that otherwise the directive could be left
unchanged.
While no overt move, such as a discount rate increase,
can be undertaken during this period of Treasury financing,
I think the Committee would do well to be thinking a little
further ahead concerning the appropriate role of monetary
policy in the light of the increasingly serious threat to the
dollar's international standing. As you know, I have long
favored a change of policy mix, with increasing reliance on
fiscal policy to provide the needed stimulus to the domestic
economy, while monetary policy would thereby achieve greater
scope to help meet our international responsibilities. While
there is some question whether the proposed tax reductions will
in fact provide the hoped-for incentive effects, and the pro
posals are obviously far from final enactment, the question
can be fairly raised whether the Administration has not already
gone a long way toward a change of mix as far as fiscal policy

1/29/63 -25-
is concerned. Certainly several years of heavy budget
deficits are now widely expected both in this country and
by foreign observers. Would it be unreasonable to suggest
that monetary policy consider in the fairly near future a
positive step of its own toward a new "mix"? Such a step
in itself might well hasten effective tax reduction, first,
as a demonstration that fiscal measures rather than continu
ing monetary ease must be looked to as a means of stimulating
more rapid economic growth; second, by convincing those who
are inclined to fear tax reduction as "irresponsible" that
the monetary authorities intend to see that the prospective
deficits are prudently financed.
As I have said, these are matters for future deter
mination; but perhaps it is none too soon to explore them:
if only in the most tentative and preliminary fashion. In
the meantime, it seems to me that there is one technical
area in which the Board could be helpful at any time in the
near future without interfering with our "even keel" policy.
I refer to the desirability of raising the maximum permis
sible interest rate payable on 90-day time deposits to remedy
the present inability of the American banks to quote reasol
ably competitive rates for maturities under six months.
Mr. Shuford said that observations made at the past several
Committee meetings concerning the Eighth District continued to nold
true. There had been no significant changes in economic activity.
Employment in St. Louis and in each brarch city had declined slightly
since July 1962, while industrial use of electric power showed no
appreciable change. Business loans outstanding at weekly reporting
banks fluctuated within a narrow range, and bank debits had increased
only slightly. Department store sales showed some improvement during
the past four months, which improvement apparently was continuing in
January. Total deposits of weekly reporting member banks increased
markedly in 1962, and this trend continued in the first part of January,
with the increase again in the time and savings deposit category.

1/29/63 -26
Mr. Shuford commented that the national economic picture had
been covered well by the staff presentation this morning and also by
Mr. Hayes. As Mr. Shuford saw it, there was no clear trend, develop
ments appearing to be mixed. Since last August, however, total bank
reserves had risen at an annual rate of 7 per cent, reserves available
in support of private demand deposits had increased at an annual rate
of 5 per cent, and the money supply had increased at an annual rate
of 7 per cent. While he regarded the growth in these areas as having
been desirable in the past few months, continued growth at such rates-
certainly for any appreciable period of time--would appear to be
undesirable. In view of the recent increase in reserves and the
money supply, coupled with the expansion of bank credit, he believed
that monetary operations such as conducted during the past six weeks
continued to be appropriate. This seemed particularly true in view
of the forthcoming Treasury financing. In short, he would continue
existing policy. He saw no need to change the directive, although it
might be modified along the lines mentioned by Mr. Hayes. He would
not consider it appropriate to change the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Bryan commented as follows:
The biggest news from the Sixth District has been the
unseasonably cold weather. The freezes have lowered the
outlook for citrus production by an estimated 25 per cent.
Vegetable production will probably match the production of
last year except for tomatoes. The longer run damage to
citrus production cannot yet be reliably estimated because
damage to the trees will not be known for some time. In the
meantime, citrus prices have gone up sharply, and total in
come from the crop may be largely unaffected.

1/29/63 -27-
The Sixth District has followed the national pattern in
the consumer, agricultural, and banking sectors. It has
shown somewhat more weakness than the nation in employment
and production. District employment in December declined
appreciably for the first time in 1962 as did the length of
the work week and manufacturing payrolls. Insured unemploy
ment was slightly lower in December; but it was still higher
than at any time since February 1962. Bank credit has risen
further in December, and seems to have receded less than
seasonally in January. The expansion of bank credit in 1962
has been much greater than in 1961. All in all, the Sixth
District, like the nation as a whole, seems to me to be going
nowhere in a great rush, but to be making a slow, steady up
ward movement with little evidence of a downward turn in the
business cycle.
As for monetary policy, it seems to me that we have made
a satisfactory year-to-year gain in terms of money supply
conventionally defined. If all or, indeed, some part of time
deposits are included in our estimate of money supply, then I
judge the year-to-year increase in the money supply to be not
only satisfactory but stimulative. Further, liquid assets
held by the public as a ratio to the gross national product
have risen to 80.8 per cent, the highest since the 81.0 per
cent of third quarter 1959.
Meanwhile, the reserves of the banking system, whether
measured in terms of total reserves, nonborrowed reserves, or
required reserves, have been running higher than my judgment
of an appropriate guideline. The long-term trend line that I
have from time to time used was for January a little less than
$19.6 billion. On a daily average basis, up to my most recent
figure, our actual reserves in January have run at $20.17
billion, a substantial excess over a 3 per cent growth rate.
At the same time, we have exceeded the projections of the
Board's staff, both on total reserves and required reserves.
In the light of these circumstances, I believe we should at
least move downward in actual reserves to something more
nearly like the 3 per cent guideline.
Since we are going into February with a large oversupply
of reserves, according to the latest figures available to me,
and face a large seasonal in February, approximating $450
million, I believe the Desk is approaching an unusually dif
ficult period. It is made the more difficult in view of
prospective Treasury financing. The central target on total
reserves for February, using, for all its distempers, a total
reserve trend line that I have from time to time sponsored-
albeit with some misgivings--is $19.6 billion for February.

1/29/63 -28
In the light of the factors as they appear to me, I should
suggest that figure as a rational central target for total
reserves on a daily average basis. Of course, the Desk
must have an ample latitude for random factors. It remains
for me to note that the figure I suggest reconciles with a
much lower daily average of free reserves than we have had
thus far in January.
I would not change the discount rate.
Mr. Bopp reported that business in the Third District
deteriorated somewhat in December. Unemployment claims declined, but
only seasonally; help wanted indexes were off in Philadelphia; electric
power consumption by manufacturers dropped; and manufacturing employ
ment decreased in 6 of 10 reporting areas. Available weekly informa
tion for January showed no exceptional movements.
In banking, the picture was mixed. Loans had been declining,
largely for seasonal reasons, but this year's drop was about 50 per
cent greater than last year. Deposits are off, and reserve positons
had reflected some tightness.
Mr. Bopp saw no reason for any change in monetary policy at
this time, particularly in view of the Treasury financing schedule.
As to the directive, he felt that it might be appropriate to delete
the reference to "seasonal" downward pressures on short-term interest
rates.
Mr. Bopp also commented that within the past week or so he had
received a call from an official of a large local bank that was consider
ing the possibility of entering into foreign lending to take advantage
of interest rate differentials. The banker inquired whether such

1/29/63 -29
activity would be against public policy or Federal Reserve policy,
particularly since representatives of the bank who had talked with
European central bankers got the impression from some of them that
perhaps some day central banks might have to do something about such
decisions. Mr. Bopp said his comments to the banker were to the
effect that such lending would obviously have repercussions on the
U. S. balance of payments, which was already in a serious state.
At this time, however, there were in this country no specific laws
or regulations to control such matters. He did not propose to make
a decision for the banker, although the latter might want to keep
in mind the problem that existed with regard to the international
balance of payments.
Mr. Fulton reported a slight to moderate expansion of business
and industrial activity in the Fourth District during the first three
weeks of January, representing in part a short-term pick-up from
weather-retarded activity in December and in part a continuation of
longer-term recovery from 1962 setbacks. During the past week, however,
intense cold and more snow had halted this betterment.
Steel output showed significant improvement during the first
three weeks of January but suffered a modest relapse in the past week,
probably due to weather conditions. New orders were showing strength,
One mill dealing largely with the auto industry showed substantially
increased orders, with lead times extending to April. Another mill
not so dependent on autos reported a good order book from a wide

1/29/63 -30
variety of users. While there seemed to be no pronounced indication
of inventory accumulation, the situation could be interpreted as
heralding an end to inventory liquidation, with orders representing
needs for current production.
There was no opinion presently as to whether or not the
steel wage contract would be reopened on May 1; the union could make
a demand for reconsideration of wages, insurance, and pensions on
that date. It was said that a better atmosphere existed between
management and labor at this time due to the efforts of the Human
Relations Committee (composed of top men from management and labor),
which had been effective in interpreting mutual problems, but one
could not foretell what might develop. Steel executives were saying
that it was imperative that there be no increase in employment costs
this year. Otherwise, steel would be at a greater disadvantage
competitively. Steel workers now cost $4.30 per hour, including
fringe benefits.
In the machine tool industry, there was a general feeling
that if the level of manufacturing was maintained the industry could
count on an increase in orders of 10 to 12 per cent in 1963 over 1962.
New machines were being developed that would radically reduce pro
duction costs, which should encourage manufacturers to invest in them.
Insured unemployment in the District remained above the
national average, ranging from 10.5 per cent in Pittsburgh to 3.5 per
cent in Dayton, with a District average of 6.9 per cent. Centers of

1/29/63 -31
high unemployment were predominantly in steel manufacturing areas.
In the first three weeks of January, increases were approximately in
line with the seasonal pattern, but the past week of severe winter
cold and snow had disturbed this relationship.
Department store sales continued at the expanded level of
late 1962. In the four weeks to January 19, sales were 9 per cent
over the year-ago period. Auto sales remained at a relatively high
level, after allowance for seasonal decline, even through the latest
week of bad weather. Used car sales suffered from the weather, but
prices remained firm and sales were expected to rebound. Construction
permits were substantially reduced from the same period last year.
In Cleveland, apartment house building was still strong and accounted
for 40 per cent of the construction volume in that city in the first
three weeks of 1963.
Loans at District reporting member banks declined more in the
past three weeks than in any like period of the past three years.
Bank debits for the District for December remained virtually unchanged
from November.
Mr. Fulton said he could discern nothing on the economic
horizon that would warrant a change from the monetary policy now
being followed. He felt that the Desk had ably followed the instruc
tions of the Committee during the past three weeks. He would not
change the discount rate, feeling that an increase in the rate would

1/29/63 -32
be a measure that might be regarded as slanted toward deflation. In
this connection, he noted that mention had not been made of the effect,
which could not yet be assessed, of the increases in rates of employer-
employee contributions to the Social Security System that became
effective at the first of the year. This would take more money away
from pay envelopes and therefore would have a deflationary bias. As
to the directive, he would eliminate from the second sentence of the
first paragraph the references to economic and financial factors
relating to 1962.
The meeting then recessed for lunch and reconvened at 2:05 p.m.
with the same attendance.
Continuing the go-around, Mr. Mitchell said that in view of
the imminence of Treasury financing any remarks on short-run monetary
policy at this time would seem largely academic. As to the business
outlook., he recalled having mentioned at the Committee meeting six
weeks ago that he sensed some stirrings in the economy, largely of
psychological origin, that might possibly lead to a rise in real
activity at a greater rate than had recently been experienced. He had
thought at the time that such a possibility was rather remote. How
ever, subsequent developments suggested to him that the likelihood was
increasing. In his opinion the developments to which he referred
really began to take shape about the time of the relief from the
Cuban crisis, a truly exogenous factor. It may also have been
attributable in some degree to the reduction of reserve requirements

1/29/63 -33
against time and savings deposits, a move that he had thought at the
time should be construed as an easing action. Anticipation of a tax
cut was another factor. In sum, there had been a change in the
economic environment. The stock market picture had changed, there
had been a reaction in consumer spending, and consumer attitudes had
changed. Although the staff economic presentation today seemed to
indicate that not much was happening in real terms, he felt that
much had been happening in psychological terms and perhaps in real
terms also, particularly in the area of consumer demand. Business
demand for plant and inventories admittedly was not strong, but this
might appear later in light of developments such as he thought were
now taking place. It was his feeling that there was a tendency to
downgrade the likelihood of an upturn in activity at significantly
greater rates than in 1962. This was one reason for sitting tight
in terms of monetary policy.
Mr. Mitchell then referred to the change in money supply and
in reserves that had occurred over the past several months. He
detected a tendency to act as though this was an accomplishment of
which to be proud, yet he believed that actually the Committee did
not anticipate what would happen. In his opinion it happened because
the economy had reacted to exogenous factors, primarily psychological.
The kind of monetary policy pursued was conducive to monetary expansion
under these changed conditions, and it had occurred. In any event, he

1/29/63 -34
believed the business outlook was better than it had been for a long
time and that monetary factors were better than they had been for a
long time. Accordingly, he would be content to maintain the status
quo in terms of policy.
Mr. Shepardson remarked that it seemed rather odd that the
discussion of the national economy had proceeded thus far without
more pointed reference to the dampening effects of the severe winter
weather that had prevailed in many areas of the country. Of itself,
this might have accounted for some of the slowdown observed in
certain segments of the economy. Nevertheless, as Mr. Mitchell had
said, things did not look too bad. This, together with the Treasury
financing program, would argue for a continuance of the policy that
had been in effect during the past three or six weeks.
Mr. Shepardson said that he had not had in mind, particularly,
suggesting a change in the directive. However, his attention was
drawn during the discussion to a phrase that had been creating a
question on his part for some time. Especially in view of the terms
of the recent dock strike settlement, he was inclined to question the
reference to an absence of inflationary pressures. In terms of prices
that statement might still have validity, even though there had been
a consistent upward crawl in consumer prices. According to reports,
however, the terms of the dock strike settlement were excessive, and
this appeared to him a definite indication of a building up of in
flationary pressures that at some point might break out in more

1/29/63 -35
noticeable fashion. Such pressures may have been less pronounced
than at other times, but he did not agree that there was an absence
of them.
In summary, Mr. Shepardson said, he would continue present
policy. If there was a change in the directive, he would hope that
consideration might be given to modifying the reference to an absence
of inflationary pressures.
Mr. Robertson said it seemed obvious that in view of the
impending Treasury refunding offer there was no option today except
to maintain an even keel position in the absence of overriding
considerations, none of which were apparent in the business and
financial information presented to the Committee this morning. The
position from which the Committee would be moving was much better than
he had thought it would be on the basis of the directives adopted at
the previous two meetings of the Committee. Events had belied a
progressively tighter policy such as he had thought would eventuate
under those directives. If it seemed important, he would be agreeable
to changing the directive along lines such as suggested by Mr. Fulton.
However, he did not think such changes were too important, assuming
that the consensus of the Committee would be to maintain an even keel
and make no change in policy at the moment.
Mr. Mills presented the following statement:
Broadly speaking, the experience gained in 1962 seems
to indicate that the over-all expansion that occurred in
commercial bank credit was financed out of a massive increase

1/29/63 -36-
in time and savings deposits that, in turn, was supported by
reserves supplied by Federal Reserve System actions. The
System also provided reserves in addition to those required
to backstop the increase in time and savings deposits, but in
doing so without inducing a further and economically con
structive expansion in commercial bank credit of the kind
normally associated with a vigorous growth in the national
economy. In the presence of a sluggish economy and in the
absence of a dynamic demand for commercial bank credit, the
additional increments of reserves at the disposal of the
commercial banking system failed to serve any useful purpose
and, in fact, were harmful by encouraging an abnormal growth
in loans on the collateral of U. S. Government securities and
in fostering speculative inventorying on the part of U. S.
Government securities dealers.
Under these circumstances, and there being no foresee
able increase in the legitimate demand for commercial bank
credit, it is in order to reduce the volume of free reserves
to a level in keeping with the visible demand for commercial
bank credit, say, $350-$300 million. The fact that such a
policy would tend to hold up short-term interest rates as a
deterrent to the outflow df United States dollars and gold
must be considered as a secondary effect of a monetary and
credit policy that seeks to keep an appropriate balance
between the supply of reserves and the legitimate demand for
commercial bank credit. Inasmuch as a continuing and com
pounding reduction in the supply of reserves inevitably would
contract the credit base, with damage to the money supply,
extreme caution must be exercised in bringing down the level
of free reserves to be certain that only those reserves are
withdrawn that are demonstrably superfluous to the legitimate
credit needs of the national economy and, therefore, that
adequate credit availability is maintained.
Mr. Mills added that he believed the present stance of the
Committee in the conduct of monetary policy was in line with the
reasoning he had expressed, and that no change was required. He did
not think that the discount rate should be raised at this time, but
he continued of the belief that if a crisis should materialize out
of balance of payments problems it would be necessary to take prompt

1/29/63 -37
and dramatic action, with joint determination, decision, and action
by the System and the Treasury.
Mr. Wayne reported that recent business developments in the
Fifth District had occurred mainly within usual seasonal patterns.
Construction, trade, services--in fact all nonmanufacturing areas
except mining--had apparently retained recent strength. Manufacturing
activity, however, had continued the very gradual declines in employ
ment and man-hours that first appeared last August. The Reserve Bank's
latest survey indicated slight further declines in new orders, employ
ment, and hours in textiles and in durable goods industries except
furniture. In nondurables other than textiles the survey showed new
orders, employment, and hours virtually unchahged. Furniture
manufacturers in the survey indicated that their already prosperous
industry was still moving ahead, and the winter markets in progress
last week at furniture centers in North Carolina and Virginia were
reported to have generated the largest volume of forward buying in
many marketing seasons. District banks had experienced a substantial
drop in gross loans, particularly in the business classification,
while real estate loans continued to gain. In the first and final
weeks of the period, District banks were heavy net sellers of Federal
funds.
Mr. Wayne commented that he found himself at a loss to say
much new or exciting about the national situation. Such important

1/29/63 -38
indicators as manufacturing wages and salaries, nonagricultural
employment, and industrial production had remained virtually constant
since July. At the two preceding Committee meetings a flurry of good
signs suggested that the economy could be moving off its plateau.
The strength in retail sales in January also pointed in this direction.
On the other hand, some of the old uncertainties reappeared in
December. Housing starts fell, new orders for durable goods dropped,
the average workweek shortened, and commercial and industrial con:ract
awards slipped badly. A perhaps even darker cloud loomed from the
possibility that debate over the proposed budget and tax reforms
would be long and acrimonious. Consequently, Mr. Wayne said, he would
not be at all surprised if the clear skies everyone had been seeking
were not some way off.
In the area of policy, Mr. Wayne believed that System
operations--together with some favorable market developments--had been
fully successful in combatting the downward pressures on short-term
rates that usually prevail during this season. Recently bill rates
had been firm with a slight upward trend. The rate for Federal funds
had quite consistently been at or near the discount rate, and in the
Fifth District a number of sales had been reported at 3-1/8 per cent.
These trends had helped to eliminate, or in a few instances even to
reverse, the covered spreads favorable to London and Canada on
Treasury bills. It seemed to him these results were as much as could

1/29/63 -39
reasonably be expected from monetary policy in the international area
at this time. Domestically, the healthy growth in bank credit and
the money supply in recent months seemed to indicate that the policy
the Committee had been following had provided all the funds needed to
encourage business expansion. For the next two weeks, with the
Treasury in the market, only one course of action--an even keel policy-
seemed open. In any event, however, he would favor a continuation
of present policy, with perhaps a minor change in the wording of the
directive to drop the reference to "seasoral" downward pressures on
short-term rates. He would not change the discount rate.
Mr. Clay commented that it would appear appropriate to
continue until the next meeting of the Committee essentially the same
monetary policy adopted at the last meeting. For one thing, the large
Treasury financing activities in the period immediately ahead sug.
gested no change in policy unless circumstances were compelling.
Moreover, seasonal financial developments of the early weeks of the
year had not proceeded for enough to establish a clear pattern of the
basic trend. Additionally, whatever clarification the Committee might
have hoped to receive on fiscal matters following the various
Presidential messages and Congressional reaction to them as an aid to
its own policy deliberations had not yet become apparent--nor was
there any indication as to when there would be such clarification.
In any event, it was only two weeks until the Committee would meet

1/29/63 -40
again and could take another look at the economic situation and
monetary policy.
This view on monetary policy for the period immediately ahead,
Mr. Clay added, would call for about the same degree of firmness in
the money market as was envisaged in the current directive, a Federal
funds rate ranging between 2-3/4 and 3 per cent, a Treasury bill rate
of 2.85 to 2.95 per cent, and a continuation of the Reserve Bank dis
count rate at. 3 per cent. The directive should be modified, he
thought, so as to avoid giving an instruction for a progressive
tightening of bank credit on a seasonally adjusted basis.
Mr. Helmer reported that economic activity in the Seventh
District continued to display a mild rate of improvement. Businessmen
and bankers showed increased confidence that the trend would continue.
Production by manufacturifiningr ms major cities in which electric
power series were available reflected modest increases in December.
Retail sales apparently continued strong in January, but probably
suffered a setback in the mrwoeescetek n t because of the severe cold
weather. Auto sales were strong Production of some makes and lines
of cars had been cut back to keep inventories in line with planned
levels, but inventories of most new cars were not out of line with
sales. Employment showed seasonal changes, but should continue to
rise in steel-producing centers where production was rising gradually,
partially as a hedge against a possible strike. Capital expenditure

1/29/63 -41
plans were being increased in several important industries, and
Midwest businessmen were showing greater interest in the new depreciation
guidelines.
Banking developments were roughly in line with the rest of the
country. Business loans were down relatively less since year end than
in the nation. However, the large tanks had added to their holdings
of short-term Governments and were showing some improvement in basic
reserve positions as compared with December averages. The demand for
credit was perhaps somewhat stronger than seasonal. The acquisition
of short-term Governments and the large volume of loans might indirectly
reflect corporate needs for funds. There had been a moderate increase
in the number of member banks borrowing in recent weeks, but over all
there appeared to be no difficulty in accommodating credit demands.
Mr. Deming noted that mid-winter was not a particularly good
time to appraise Ninth District economic performance and prospects.
Agriculture, mining, lumbering, construction, and other outdoor
activities were at or close to their seasonal lows, which also were
reflected in seasonally low employment levels. Add what seemed to
be an almost seasonal "first quarter blues" and an abnormally cold
January, and the result was a somewhat less exuberant outlook from
the Reserve Bank's opinion panel on economic prospects for the next
several weeks. The most recent survey, taken as of January 23,
indicated that about 46 per cent of respondents saw improvement as

1/29/63 -42
fairly certain or probable, 42 per cent looked for stability at
present levels, and 12 per cent saw decline likely. The latter
group comprised about the same number as in all surveys since early
last fall. The big shift in the latest survey was from those who had
been forecasting improvement right along into the camp of those who
had foreseen stability equally long. It must be noted that indus
trial power use, manufacturing employment, and personal income at
year end were off a shade more than seasonally, although this may
have reflected no more than a less than perfect statistical adjustment
and/or the cold weather. Still there seemed to be little concrete
evidence of any real deterioration in the District economy, and most
measures showed District performance as relatively better than the
nation. Thus, he attributed a good part, if not most, of the shift
in opinion to what he had called the "first quarter blues."
District banking developments continued along the same lines
as in recent months and about paralleled developments in the nation's
banking. After abstracting from seasonal factors, District banks,
both city and country, exhibited continued strong deposit growth and
loan demand. Deposit trends remained stronger than loan trends, how
ever, so loan-deposit ratios showed little change. As he had observed
before, though, he had a mildly uneasy feeling that the loan-deposit
ratios implied a somewhat higher liquidity level than might actually
prevail. He thought it necessary to watch this factor with some care.

1/29/63 -43
Turning to the national scene, Mr. Deming noted the absence
of exuberance in the economic forecasts for 1963 and the apparently
paradoxical behavior of the stock market. He saw prospective
stimulation from growing Government spending and a very large deficit
both this fiscal year and next. As he analyzed the President's tax
program, however, he saw little, if any, stimulation of the private
sector from that factor, at least over this year, even assuming that
the program was enacted. Finally, he was disturbed by what seemed to
be developing in this country's international payments position. It
looked to him as though the difference between commercial exports
and imports was narrowing and as though efforts to promote commercial
exports, to "tie" more of this country's aid, and to offset part of
its military expenditures abroad had not even kept the trade balance
as large as it was, let alone enlarged it. If this was so, he
supposed it was even more important to insure against capital outflow,
but he believed the problem of payments balance would need far more
than central bank-Treasury holding action re short-term funds.
Mr. Deming recalled having mentioned at the January 8 meeting
that the problem mix was not much different from that of a year ago:
underutilized capacity and a payments deficit. He was not so sure now
that this was an accurate statement; the problem mix might be worse at
present. For the immediate future, however, he believed the Committee
should continue the present course of monetary policy, which he

1/29/63 -44
categorized as ease with an eye on short-term rates. Therefore, he
would recommend no change in policy and no change in discount rate
during the next two weeks. He supposed that this should mean no more
than technical changes in the directive, but the directive's phrasing
continued to bother him, particularly the references to money supply
and bank credit. These had not moderated in growth rate, and he saw
no reason to provide critics with free ammunition by expressing
objectives that the Committee might not achieve. He could live with
the second paragraph, although he noted that the firm tone in the
market referred to by the Manager was expressed in terms of rates and
"feel and color" rather than in reserves (either total or free) or in
borrowings. He did not imply any criticism of the Desk in this
comment; he had been on the daily telephone call during this period
and thought the Desk had done very well. At the same time, this did
underline his concern about trying to write directives in very
specific terms.
Mr. Swan reported increasing concern in the Twelfth District
over the lack of rain and particularly the lack of any significant
snowpack in the mountains. There had been some damage to the citrus
crop, but otherwise the economic situation continued to be favorable
in the District. Preliminary data indicated that total employment
rose about 4/10 per cent in December, although there was little or no
increase in mining, manufacturing, or transportation employment. The

1/29/63 -45
seasonally unadjusted unemployment rate in the Pacific Coast states
was down sli;htly in December. Construction activity and retail sales
held up well, and department store sales for the first part of January
continued strong. For the first time since early 1961 a major labor
market area (Spokane) had been reclassified from the moderate to sub
stantial unemployment category.
Weekly reporting banks showed much less than the usual seasonal
decline in loans during the first two weeks of January. They were
faced at the same time with some deposit decline, and there was some
reduction in their holdings of Governments. Also, the banks were net
buyers of Federal funds. On at least one day (January 23) a number of
the banks were rather heavy borrowers from the Reserve Bank.
With respect to policy, Mr. Swan said he came out at about the
same place as most of those who had already spoken. Given the lack of
change in the business situation, the fact that the downward seasonal
pressure on the bill rate seemed to have been successfully offset: and
the imminence of Treasury financing, there seemed nothing to do except
continue on even keel. As to the directive, he agreed that at this
point the question was again confined to technical changes. However,
he would like to see a change made by omitting the reference to
"seasonal" downward pressures on bill rates. Also, he continued to be
bothered a little by the reference to a current policy of accommodating
further, though more moderate, growth in bank credit. He realized that

1/29/63 -46
this expression was presumed to refer back to the growth over
several months, but he felt that readers of the policy record might
interpret the directive as making a comparison with the previous
three-week period. It would seem to him a little clearer if the
directive referred to "further growth, though more moderate than has
occurred in recent months, in bank credit and the money supply." He
would not change the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Irons reported a mixture of small pluses and minuses in
Eleventh District economic indicators. Several indicators had moved
up modestly, including crude oil production. Employment was up about
one per cent in the latest period for which figures were available,
while unemployment was at a rate of about 4.9 per cent on a seasonally
unadjusted basis. Retail trade had been good over the holiday season
and into the first three weeks of January.
As to banking, investments were up and there had been a rather
substantial increase in time deposits. Loans were down a little less
than seasonally, including commercial and industrial loans. District
banks had been net purchasers of Federal funds for the past three
weeks.
All in all, Mr. Irons said, conditions in the District tended
to continue at a high level. The extent of damage to agriculture as
the result of the recent series of cold spells was not known, but
evidence beginning to seep through indicated that the damage probably

1/29/63 -47
was not as bad as at first expected. Construction activity was still
at very high levels in and around the major cities.
Mr. Irons said that he saw no need to elaborate on national
economic developments. From the standpoint of the economic situation
as it was evolving and from the standpoint of the forthcoming Treasury
financing, he saw no choice but to continue to maintain the same
policy posture as had prevailed over the past six weeks or so. He
shared some of the concern voiced by Messrs. Hayes and Deming with
respect to what might eventuate in the area of the balance of inter
national payments. He would not recommend changing the discount rate,
and he would not change the directive in any basic respect, although
he would be agreeable to some of the technical changes that had been
suggested.
Mr. Irons suggested that the Federal funds rate should continue
around the discount rate level, with the bill rate at 2.90 per cent,
plus or minus., and free reserves somewhere from $250 to $350 million.
He was not too concerned about where free reserves might move as long
as other factors continued about as they had been. If there should
be indications of a trend toward more market ease, he felt it would
be desirable to take offsetting action.
Mr. Ellis reported that New England economic measures, includ
ing employment, unemployment, construction, manufacturing output, and
new orders, all built up to a picture indicating that the regional

1/29/63 -48
economy was now somewhat weaker than in the late fall, on a seasonally
adjusted basis, and relatively weaker than the national economy. How
ever, available measures of consumption seemed to point toward a
somewhat more healthy situation. The weakening of business activity
was reflected at member banks, where commercial and industrial loans
were down more than seasonally in December and on into January. The
reaction on the part of the banks was to step up their loans to brokers
and dealers and to expand their holdings of Government securities; also,
to interrupt their liquidation of other securities, including State
and local Government issues.
Mr. Ellis commented that he had been gratified by the continued
strength of the short-term rate. This strength was somewhat surprising
to him in view of the anticipated seasonal weakening and the relatively
large volume of free reserves. Perhaps this suggested that float
generated reserves tended to have a lesser impact on rates than others.
In any event, it was clear that the money supply had expanded further
and that the level of required reser;es against private demand deposits
had held substantially above the 3 per cent guideline. Thus it did
not appear that the slight shift of monetary policy had interfered
with the objective of a continued growth of bank reserves and the money
supply. It might be that the growth rate was still too high to be
sustainable or desirable. However, at this time of year the under
lying trends were so obscured as to prevent obtaining a reliable

1/29/63 -49
reading of the impact of policy. The need for an even keel during the
Treasury financing led him to recommend no change in policy for the
next two weeks. Due to seasonal factors, the Desk would be required
to supply perhaps $1/2 billion of reserves during the next few weeks.
To contain the effect on the short-term rate, some of these reserves
might be released through operations in the medium and longer term
areas of the market.
Mr. Ellis said as targets for monetary policy he would think
in terms of a bill rate of around 2,90 per cent, perhaps tilted toward
3 per cent, with free reserves around $300 million. He did not feel
that discount rate action would be appropriate at this time. In his
belief, this kind of policy could be carried-out within the terminology
of the present policy directive. Yet he understood that the directive
was intended to be flexible and to reflect shades of change in the
intervals between meetings, and there seemed to him to be at least
three places at which changes might be suitable at this time. The
first ;ould be to strike the reference to downward "seasonal" pressure
on short-term rates; the second would be to refer to the forthcoming
two-week, rather than three-week, period. The third involved the
question whether the policy of accommodating further, though more
moderate, growth in reserves and the money supply should be related
to some period of time in the past.
Mr. Balderston described as cogent the reasons that had been
advanced during the discussion for maintenance of the status quo. He

1/29/63 -50
indicated that he had been impressed by the observations suggesting
that possibly severe international payments troubles were closer at
hand than one might think. He continued of the opinion that perhaps
the Board of Governors should increase the maximum permissible rate
on time deposits with maturities from 90 days to 6 months so that the
banks could pay, if desired up to 3-1/2 per cent. Funds apparently
had been flowing to Canada recently on an uncovered basis, and it
seemed none too soon to take such countervailing action as possible.
As to the directive, he would be agreeable to the minor changes that
had been suggested. Two weeks from now, when the Committee met
again, he felt that the directive might need more fundamental
modification.
Chairman Martin noted that this was a rather easy meeting to
summarize. He would not take time for personal observations except to
say that he concurred in Mr. Mills' comments about the international
situation and that he thought the remarks of Mr. Bopp about the bnker
in the Third District were significant. He had felt for a long time
that at some point this country was going to be confronted with a
crucial international payments problem. He did not pretend to know
when this would come to a head, and he might be just seeing ghosts,
but he believed the trend was clearly in that direction. At some
point, in his opinion, this country would have to come to grips with
the problem in a more direct way than had been done to date.

1/29/63 -51-
Chairman Martin then remarked that, as at the January 8
meeting, Mr. Young had prepared a draft of economic background state
ment. He would not ask Mr. Young to read that statement, but it would
be included in the minutes so that the Committee members would have an
opportunity to review the summary.
Secretary's Note: The draft of economic
background statement to which the Chairman
referred, as revised in the light of sub
sequent comment, was as follows:
Information on the domestic economy becoming available
since the preceding meeting of the Committee on January 8
indicated a continuation of little change through December
in industrial activity, employment, and wholesale prices,
but commercial bank lending was showing evidence of stronger
credit demands and financial markets were reflecting a more
optimistic climate generally. Bank credit and the money
supply had expanded considerably over the preceding 3 months,
while deposit velocity continued to climb.
The unemployment rate rose in January, but remained
within the narrow range of other recent months. Incomplete
weekly data for January indicate increases in output of
steel but no change in production of autos. The number of
housing units started and the volume of new orders received
by producers of machinery and other durable goods declined
in December from very high levels.
Personal income and retail sales rose further to record
levels in December. Partial ,data for January suggest a
further increase in retail sales, with both new cars and
department stores showing cortinuing strength. Consumer
prices edged down slightly in December, reflecting mainly
seasonal influences. The slowing down in the rate of rise
of the service component was again in evidence.
In the financial area, the three major Administration
messages--budget, economic, and tax--emphasized fiscal and
other efforts to stimulate economic growth, and this emphasis
contributed a note of caution to bond markets. Yields on
U. S. Government and some other fixed return securities rose
a little, on balance, from their levels in early January.
Corporate security financing in Jaruary was indicated to be
considerably smaller than in December while municipal
financing was estimated substantially higher. Common stock

1/29/63 -52-
prices rose further in recent weeks on sizable trading
volume and stock prices had now recovered two-thirds of
their decline from December 1961 to June 1962.
There was a further sharp rise in the seasonally
adjusted money supply in the first half of January, but
indications for the second half were for some cutback in
the increase. Time deposits also rose substantially
further in the first half of the month. Required
reserves of member banks against private deposits were
averaging somewhat higher during January than in
December. Free reserves also were averaging higher,
with both excess reserves and borrowing lower. The
money market developed a slightly firmer tone after the
first week of January, with the 3-month bill rate hold
ing slightly above the 2.90 per cent level at a time
when seasonal downward pressures are typically strong.
The U. S. balance of payments position deteriorated
in January. Weekly indicators of U. S. monetary reserves
and liquid liabilities suggested an over-all deficit for
the month of around $500 million. The prolonged dock
strike possibly contributed to this deficit and there was
a record volume of new foreign security issues in this
country in January, largely Canadian issues. Exchange
markets remained quiet and the London gold price stayed
virtually unchanged near its low point.
Chairman Martin went on to say that he interpreted recent
Committee discussions as reflecting a view that the policy directive
should focus attention on whether some change in policy was indicated.
Minor changes in language might be perfectly appropriate, but attention
should focus on whether the Committee was making any change in policy.
The Chairman noted that there had been several suggestions for
minor changes in the directive adopted at the meeting on January 8,
1963. He then stated that he would call upon Mr. Young to read a
draft of directive that would take account of some of those changes.
It was clear, the Chairman pointed out, that no member of the Committee

1/29/63 -53
wanted a change in policy at this time. In his opinion, it would be
possible to operate satisfactorily during the coming two weeks under
the directive as it now stood, without any change at all. On the
other hand, he would have no objection to making minor changes. He
did feel, however, that the focus ought to be on whether any change
in policy was indicated.
Mr. Young then read the draft of proposed directive, with
comments on the changes from the present directive.
In discussion of the draft directive, Mr. Mitchell raisea the
question whether so many minor changes in wording were necessary or
desirable when the consensus was clearly for no change in policy.
Mr. Young then reviewed the changes and stated why he felt they would
be appropriate, after which Chairman Martin called for comments by
other members of the Committee. Mr. Hayes indicated that personally
he favored changing the directives in minor respects from meeting to
meeting, thus preserving the idea that the directive was reasonably
flexible, not rigid. Although the consensus for this meeting was for
no change in policy, he thought it appropriate to recognize factual
changes in the directive. It was true, for example, that the balance
of payments position had deteriorated recently.
As the discussion proceeded, Mr. Mitchell referred to the
language of the second paragraph of the directive that called for
providing for moderate reserve expansion. It was his thought that
this kind of language needed some reference point. On the other hand,

1/29/63 -54
the view was expressed that any significant amendment to the second
paragraph of the directive might be taken to indicate some change in
policy, whereas no change was sought by the Committee for the next
two weeks. As an alternative, it was suggested that the first sentence
of the first paragraph be modified to make clear that the Committee's
current policy was to accommodate growth in bank credit and money
supply, though more moderate than in recent months. It was also
suggested that, consistent with maintenance of the status quo, the
last sentence of the second paragraph might call for providing for
"continued" moderate reserve expansion.
Mr. Deming expressed the view that if there was no change in
policy the Committee should make only minimal changes in the directive,
He would regard the changes Mr. Young had suggested as factual or
technical corrections with the exception that he thought the wording
of the first part of the directive might be interpreted to reflect
some shift in policy. In line with the views he had expressed at the
two previous Committee meetings, Mr. Deming said his basic point,
however, was that he did not like to see the directive set forth, as
a current policy of the Committee, an accommodation of growth in the
money supply.
Certain additional minor changes in the draft directive were
then suggested, following which Mr. Young read the directive in a form
intended to reflect the several changes that had been tentatively
agreed upon during the discussion.

1/29/63 -55-
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York was authorized and directed, until
otherwise directed by the Committee, to
execute transactions in the System Open
Market Account in accordance with the fol
lowing current economic policy directive:
It is the Committee's current policy to accommodate
growth in bank credit and the money supply more moderate
than in recent months, while aiming at money market condi
tions that would minimize capital outflows internationally.
This policy takes into account the recent deterioration in
the United States balance of payments and the recent sub
stantial increases in bank credit, demand deposits, and the
reserve base, but at the same time recognizes the limited
progress of the domestic economy in recent months, the
continuing underutilization of resources, and the absence
of inflationary pressures.
To implement this policy, and in view of the forth
coming Treasury financing, System open market operations
during the next two weeks shall be conducted with a view
to maintaining about the same degree of firmness in the
money market that has prevailed in recent weeks and to
offsetting downward pressures on short-term interest
rates, while providing for continued moderate reserve
expansion.
Votes for this action: Messrs.
Martin, Hayes, Balderston, Bryan, Deming,
Ellis, Fulton, Mills, Mitchell, Robertson,
and Shepardson. Votes against this
action: none.
Chairman Martin commented that he hoped the members of the
Committee would continue to devote thought to the formulation of the
policy directives. It was important to try to put them in as good a
form as possible because the directives, when published, would provide
the core of the record of Committee policy.

1/29/63 -56
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, February 12, 1963.
The meeting then adjourned.
Secretary