A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, May 26, 1964, at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Balderston, Acting Chairman
Mr. Daane
Mr. Hickman
Mr. Mills
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Shuford
Mr. Swan
Mr. Wayne
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Ellis, Bryan, Scanlon, and Deming, Alter:ate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bopp and Clay, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Kansas City,
respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Brill, Furth, Grove, Holland, Jones,
Koch, Mann, and Ratchford, Associate
Economists
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Accout
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Messrs. Partee and Williams, Advisers, Division
of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Mr. Axilrod, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors

5/26/64 -2
Mr. Coldwell, First Vice President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas
Messrs. Holmes, Sanford, Eastburn, Baughman, Tow,
and Green, Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of New York, New York, Philadelphia, Chicago,
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively
Messrs. Fousek, Brandt, and Litterer, Assistant Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York,
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Meek, Manager, Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Arena, Financial Economist, Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, Mr. Balderston was elected Acting
Chairman for this meeting.
Upon motion duly nade and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the minutes of the meetings of
the Federal Open Market Committee held on April 14
and May 5, 1964, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of the
Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open Market Account
on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open Market Account and Treasury
operations in foreign currencies for the period May 5 through May 20, 196 ,
and a supplementary report covering the period May 21 through May 25, 1964.
Copies of these reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.
Supplementing the written reports, Mr. Sanford said that no change
was expected in the gold stock this week for the fifteenth consecutive week.
The Stabilization Fund now held $268 million in gold. Expected later this
week was the usual French order for 30 tons, and the Spaniards wanted to
purchase the small amount of $2 million by June 15. With only a compara
tively small distribution from the Gold Pool for May, some reduction in the
Fund's large holdings over the next few weeks was anticipated.

5/26/64
As Mr. Coombs informed the Committee at the two previous meetings,
the heavy demand for Swiss francs during April and early in the period
just closed had led to an increase rather than a reduction in the System's
Swiss franc commitments and a rise in the Swiss National Bank's surplus
dollars. Extensive discussions with the Swiss had been continued to find
means, along the lines indicated earlier, to reduce the System's Swiss franc
obligations (now totaling $200 million), and those of the Treasury, as well
as the Swiss National Bank's current surplus dollar holdings. Not all of
the suggested arrangements had been completed, but Mr. Sanford could report
some progress. The U. S. Treasury yesterday had issued to the Bank for
International Settlements a 15-month Swiss franc-denominated bond for about
$70 million equivalent and then had sold the franc proceeds to the System.
The System immediately used the Swiss francs to liquidate $70 million of its
$100 million equivalent swap drawings on the BIS. In addition, it was hoped
that the proposed credit arrangement between the Swiss National Bank and
the Bank of Italy for $100 million wor:h of Swiss francs would be entered
into this week or next week. In accordance with earlier plans, the Bank of
Italy would then sell the Swiss francs to the System and use the do lars
to liquidate its outstanding drawings of $100 million from the System. The
System, on its part, would immediately use the Swiss francs to pay off its
$100 million equivalent of drawings on the Swiss National Bank. These
transactions would still leave the System with $30 million of Swiss franc
swap drawings outstanding (on the BIS); the Treasury with $120 million of

5/26/64 -4
forward market commitments; and the Swiss National Bank with some $30 million
of surplus dollars on its books. Discussions on a package to deal with
these amounts currently envisaged an additional issue by the Treasury of a
Swiss franc bond to the Swiss National Bank, an increase in the amount of
dollars the Swiss were prepared to hold outright, and possibly some sale of
gold to the Swiss; the Swiss were watching their money market closely and
considering what action was desirable and when.
The foreign exchange markets had posed no special problems during
the past three weeks and there had been no Exchange transactions for System
account except for the $70 million Swiss franc liquidation referred to before
and a sale of $500,000 worth of Belgian francs to the Treasury to cover
interest payments. Although the New York exchange market had been quiet,
there had been some fairly sizable flows of funds on the Continent. The
Germans had continued to lose funds as a result of the proposed 25 per cent
withholding tax on interest payments to foreigners, with the money being
pulled back from the German bond market to Switzerland and Belgium, in
particular. Ir, addition, the Dutch money market had been extremely firm.
As a result, Dutch commercial banks had been repatriating liquid assets held
abroad as well as borrowing in the Euro-currency market. This inflow of
funds had provided foreign exchange needed to cover the growing Dutch trade
deficit. The Dutch money market might be expected to remain firm over the
coming months, and the Dutch anticipated that they would be in and out of
the exchange market as both buyers and sellers of dollars as these payments
ebbed and flowed.

5/26/64
Meanwhile, the continued firmness ir sterling despite the unsatis
factory trade position seemed to be the result primarily of the covering
of the short pcsitions taken by many traders earlier in the year. It was
still necessary to anticipate some possible difficulties for sterlirg later
in the summer. In mid-May, after 2-1/2 months of no change, the British
Treasury bill rate rose almost 10 basis points. The covered interest rate
differential in terms of Treasury bills was now just about zero, but further
increases in British rates might occur. On the Canadian dollar market, the
forward Canadian dollar had again been in demand, and despite Bank of
Canada operations, had been at a small premium. As a result, covered
interest rate differentials had again stood in favor of Canada, but the
reported net flow of funds from the United States (all for investment in
finance company paper) had so far remained snall.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the System
Open Market Account transactions in foreign
currencies during the period May 5 through
May 25, 1964, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Mr. Sanford noted that two swap arrangements were scheduled to mature
in June; $100 million with the Netherlands Bank (on June 15) and $50 million
with the National Bank of Belgium (on June 22). No drawings were outstancing
under the Dutch arrangement. The swap line with the National Bank of
Belgium, on the other hand, was fully drawn as it had been from the beginning,
and consequently that drawing also matured next month. He recommended the
renewal of the Dutch arrangement for another three months and of the Belgian

5/26/64 -6
swap arrangement and drawing for another six months. In addition, a swap
of $13 million of sterling for Swiss francs with the BIS would mature on
June 10 and it might prove necessary to roll it over. This would be the
fourth renewal of this swap.
Finally, the Bank of Italy's $50 million drawing on the System of
March 17, 1964, would be due for its first renewal on June 17. Although it
was anticipated that this drawing would be paid off by then as a result
of the Bank of Italy's arrangement with the Swiss National Bank, in view of
the delays that had attended the coming into being of that arrangement, it
might be necessary to roll it over temporarily.
In response to questions by Messrs. Shepardson and Mills, Mr. Sanford
said that the sterling-Swiss franc swap for which a fourth renewal was
proposed was the only one of its kind and in his judgment was in a different
category from the dollar-franc swap drawings. It originally had been
entered into some time ago, when the Account owned sterling but had a greater
need for Swiss francs. The sterling could have been sold for francs, but
since this might have put some pressure on the pound a swap seemed preferable.
There was no exchange risk, since the rates were fixed. He thought it would
be desirable to terminate the arrangement when possible, and was hopeful
that this would be soon. But he considered the matter much less pressing
than in the case of dollar swap drawings to which, in his judgment, the
Committee's general standards for limiting the number of renewals primarily
applied.

5/26/64
Mr. Sanford said that he considered the rule limiting renewals of
dollar swap drawings to be a good giideline, but he did not think the
Committee intended it to be absolutely rigid. It was possible, if the tide
turned against the U. S., that the Committee might prefer to break the
rule rather than to reverse a particular swap drawing under severe pressure.
He thought that in any particular case the Committee would want to weih
the desirability of maintaining the rule against all other factors.
Renewals of the swap arrangements with
the Netherlands Bank and the National Bank of
Belgium, as recommended by Mr. Sanford, were
approved.
Renewals of the drawing on the swap with
the National Bank of Belgium, of the sterling
Swiss franc swap with the Bank for International
Settlements, and, if necessary, of the Bank of
Italy's drawing on the System, as recommended by
Mr. Sanford, were noted without objection.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market Account
covering open market operations in U. S. Government securities and bankers'
accept nces for the period May 5 through May 20, 1964, and a supplemental
report covering the period May 21 through May 25, 1964. Copies of these
reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone commented
as follows:
The money market has had a generally firm tone since the
last meeting of the Committee, with Federal funds trading at
3-1/2 per cent on every day of the period. Member bank borrow
ing from the Reserve Banks has averaged about $300 million in

5/26/64
the recent interval, almost $100 millicn higher than in the
preceding period between meetings. This somewhat firmer
tone reflects in part the unwinding of the very heavy concen
tration of reserves in the money centers in late April as a
result of Treasury redeposits of individual income tax
receipts. It may also reflect a somewhat faster pace of
bank credit expansion following the somewhat sluggish per
formance :f April.
The firming of the money market has not been accompanied
by any significant upward pressure on Treasury bill rates.
Nonbank demand for bills has continued strong even though
long-term investors who temporarily put their funds in bills
amid the uncertainties of March and early April appear to
have reverted to their normal practice of placing funds in
long-term issues. In contrast with March and early April,
when investors wanted not merely bills, but bills of short
maturity, recent demand has moved progressively toward the
longer bill maturities. This tendency has reduced the yield
differential between the 3- and 6-month bills to about 12
basis points, compared with 20-21 basis points in early April.
While the approach of the June season for tax and dividend
payments nay exert an upward influence on bill rates over the
next three weeks, the bill market has tended to get by similar
periods in the recent past without mud movement in rates.
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved higher during
the first part of the recent interval, continuing at an
accelerated rate the price recovery that had been in progress
since late March. Over the past week cr so the recovery
has tendec to falter. Whether this means the rally has run
its course or whether the market is simply collecting itself
for a further advance remains to be seen. It is worth noting
in this connection that the recent gairs have pushed the
prices of a number of issues to levels close to the highs
reached earlier this year. The majority of investor opinion
now seems to have swung to the view that interest rates are
not likely to push higher in the immediate future. The success
the Treasury enjoyed in its recent refunding both reflected
and reinforced that shift in the climate of opinion.
The Treasury does not definitely contemplate any new
financing between now and the end of the fiscal year, except
for the routine monthly offering of one-year bills. Should
prices of Treasury notes and bonds improve significantly
further, however, it is possible that in the second half of
June the Treasury would offer a coupon issue, most likely a
note, for cash in view of the large new money needs projected

5/26/64 -9
for the early part of the new fiscal year. Even so, the
Treasury would still have to issue a tax anticipation bill
to raise the bulk of its July needs, which may be as much
as $4 billion. It is also a possibility, although not a
prominent one, that the Treasury might undertake an advance
refunding in late June if the market should become particularly
strong. In late July the Treasury will, of course, have to
deal with the problem of refunding its August 15 maturities.
Mr. Mills said that he had to confess to confusion about the
technical objectives in handling the Account. He noted that the projec
tions for the current statement week indicated positive free reserves of
$5 million. Yesterday the Account had bought about $80 million in bills
from foreign accounts. This purchase prevented the market from tightening,
but did not introduce reserves. The demand for bills had been strong
yesterday, Mr. Mills noted, but the Committee's directive called for accoma
modating expansion of bank credit. Could this be accomplished with the
minimum level of free reserves projected for the week, or was all of the
Account Management's attention focused on the interest rate structure?
Mr. Stone replied that attention recently had not focused primarily
on the rate structure. The Account, in fact, had not conducted a single
operation addressed primarily to the bill rate since October 1963. The
recent stability of short-term rates, in his judgment, was due to a
complex of factors, including structural changes in the market.
Mr. Mills commented that reserves had been injected or withdrawn
periodically in conjunction with tightness or ease in the market. In his
opinion this was bound, indirectly at least, to influence interest rates.

5/26/64 -10
Mr. Stone replied that he had no doubt that the operations of the
Account had influenced interest rates. He considered this to be part of
the package of objectives the Committee had in mind in giving the Account
Management its instructions. With respect to yesterday's purchase of
$80 million of bills from foreign accounts, Mr. Stone said, the foreign
accounts had directed the sale of these bills with the expectation of
making payments to others in the amount of the proceeds. If the bills
had been sold on the market member bank reserves would have been reduced
by $80 million and, when the proceeds were paid out, those reserves would
have been returned to the market. By buying the bills the Account
Management prevented the reduction of reserves, so the net effect of the
bill sale to the System plus disbursement of the proceeds was to raise
reserves by $80 million. Thus, at the conclusion of the operation yesterday,
the free reserve estimate for the week was raised to $36 million. In
approaching operations yesterday, the Account Management had in mind the
fact that it was going to have to supply a substantial amount of reserves
over the next few days. The question was whether to wait until Thursday,
or to do it Wednesday or today. The decision would depend on the market
circumstances that developed.
Mr. Mills then asked what level or movement in free reserves
Mr. Stone would consider necessary to accommodate an appropriate expansion
of bank credit. It seemed to him that actions usually were taken to prevent
negative free reserves but not necessarily to produce the level of positive
free reserves that would accommodate expansion of bank credit in accordance
with the Committee's directive.

5/26/64 -11-
Mr. Stone said the operational paragraph of the Committee's
directive was written in terms of maintaining about the same conditions
in the money market as in recent weeks.. He interpreted this to relate to
free reserves as well as to other measures of market conditions. He
thought it was the wish of the Committee that free reserves should fall
somewwhere in the broad range between zero and $200 million. He did not
think the Committee wanted to see net borrowed reserves appear, and
certainly not for two or three weeks in a row. He did not think it de
sirable to give the market the idea that the Committee had changed policy
when it had no:. He regarded a free reserve figure in the zero to $200
million range as consistent with the Committee's intent, provided that the
Federal funds rate typically was around the discount rate, and that
borrowings were somewhere in the neighborhood of $200 or $300 million.
These were the conditions the Committee had indicated it would like
to see, Mr. Stone continued. He interpreted it to be the expectation of
the Committee that if these conditions were achieved, its intent with
respect to the rate of bank credit expansion over the period also was likely
to be realized.
Mr. Robertson commented that the way Mr. Stone stated his interpre
tation of the instructions was what gave rise to doubts in his and Mr. Mills'
minds. Mr. Stone had said it was his understanding that operations should
be conducted with a view to maintaining about the same conditions in the
money market as had prevailed in recent weeks. But he had left out the

5/26/64 -12
rest of the sentence in the second paragraph of the directive, which was
"while accommodating moderate expansion in aggregate bank reserves."
Mr. Robertson thought there was a feeling that Mr. Stone gave too much
weight to the first half of the sentence. lie hoped there was no intent
to respond to one part of the instructions to the exclusion of the other.
Mr. Stone remarked that whether maintaining about the same conditions
in the money market would result in moderate reserve expansion depended
on the vigor with which the economy utilized reserves. This was something
over which he had no day-to-day control. If bank credit demand became
sluggish, as it had at times in the past, accommodating moderate reserve
expansion would mean easier money market conditions.
Mr. Robertson asked if Mr. Stone's operations would be different
at all if the order of the two clauses in the second paragraph were reversed.
Mr. Stone replied that they would, if this change were accompanied by a
discussicn indicating that the Committee warted emphasis placed on having
moderate reserve expansion. Then the Accourt Management would have to
operate in terms of some aggregate reserve variable and let the chips fall
where they might with respect to money market conditions. Most of :he time,
he thought, the two instructions were compatible, although not necessarily
from day to day. There had been short periods when they were not compatible.
Mr. Robertson said he thought that as Mr. Stone construed the
Committee's intent money market conditions were the primary factor and the
rate of reserve growth was secondary, and Mr. Stone affirmed this statement.

5/26/64 -13
Mr. Daane commented that the desired rate of reserve growth
responsive to the strength of credit demand would be automatically
accommodated if money market conditions, including the free reserves
variable, were held within some fairly narrow range. Mr. Robertson said
this would be true if everything worked perfectly, but this would not
necessarily be the case, and in fact had not been during the past weeks.
As a result, the Manager had to exercise his discretion in deciding which
part of the instructions he was to follow.
Mr. Mills commented that there was a distinction between supplying
reserves and expanding bank credit. To supply reserves did not necessarily
mean that bank credit would expand; the reserves had to be employed by the
banking system. His impression from reading the figures was that total
reserves had not risen more than fractionally. In other words, the reserve
support supplied had not been very great. Nevertheless, it had encouragec
a considecable expansion in bank credit over a long period.
Mr. Balderston said that he had been impressed by the figures on
nonborrowed reserves shown in table C-1 of the staff reserve memorandum.
In the year ending with April, nonborrowed reserves had been increased by
about $625 million. Member banks were, of course, left with whatever leeway
they wished to exercise with respect to these reserves. But, in a sense,
this was a test of what the Desk had achieved in a year's time, despite
the day-to-day and week-to-week difficulties it encountered.

5/26/64 -14
Mr. Stone said there was no question in his mind that frequently
there was incompatibility on a week-to-week basis between the instruction;
relating to morey market conditions and to reserves. He thought it impor
tant, in assessing the latter, to focus on trends rather than very short-run
fluctuations. And he considered it the Committee's position to employ money
market conditions for operations on a short-run basis, recognizing that i:
met every three weeks and could assess developments with respect to the
various reserve aggregates at those intervals.
Mr. Swan said it seemed to him that at present, even in terms of
money market variables, conditions were a bit tighter than was consistent
with the directive. Free reserves at $36 mi lion for the current week
seemed a little low. Why wait until Thursday to begin providing the reserves
that would be needed?
Mr. Stone replied that the preliminary reserve figures were hazard
ous; the money market itself was a much better indicator today of what the
final figures would show than the present estimates were.
Mr. Mitchell noted that Mr. Stone had said he would not like to see
negative reserves appear for two or three weeks in a row, but he had not
seemed to be diturbed at the thought of their appearing for one week.
He asked whether Mr. Stone thought negative reserves for a single week
could have a significant impact on the market.
Mr. Stone responded that he had not meant to imply that he would
be unconcerned about even one week; he had tried to avoid a negative figure

5/26/64 -15
because it would, indeed, have some impact or the market. He thought the
impact would be temporary if free reserves became positive again in the
following week. But if negative reserves appeared for two or three weeks
in a row that definitely would be read by the market as a signal that the
Committee had changed policy.
In short, Mr. Mitchell said, if a negative free reserve figure was
published for one week, it would raise a question in everybody's mind.
Mr. Stone agreed, and added that while the Desk tried to avoid negative
figures there was an unavoidable risk that they would eventuate if the
Committee set a target under which free reserves would at times be below
$100 million as well as above. Revisions in weekly average figures on a
single day had been as large as $85 million. The risk of negative figures
could be avoided, of course, by raising the target to $200 million or above.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the
open market transactions in Government
securities and bankers' acceptances dur
ing the period May 5 through May 25, 1964,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
The staff economic and financial review at this meeting was in the
form of a visual-auditory presentation, for which Messrs. Garfield and
Hersey of the Board's staff joined the meeting. Copies of the text of
the presentation and of the accompanying charts have been placed in the
files of the Committee.
The introductory portion of the review, presented by Mr. Brill,
was as follows:

5/26/64 -16-
In the chart show this morning, we're departing from
earlier practices in several respects, and I'd like to say
a few words to put these changes in perspective.
Formerly, the chart show presentation took the place of
both the written staff review, distributed in advance of
Committee meetings, and the oral staff interpretations pre
sented at the meetings. It has become increasingly evident
that within the necessary time constraint of a half-hour or so,
we cannot adequately review all elements of the economy :hat
should be brought to Committee attention and also study in
depth specific elements of special interest to the Committee.
To try to meet both objectives, therefore, we're experimenting
with a new procedure whereby the comprenensive staff review is
distributed as usual to the Committee in advance of the meeting,
and the chart show is devoted to a more intensive analysis of a
limited number of economic problens.
This morning our explorations carry into three subjects
suggested by Committee discussion in recent meetings. The first
is that of capacity utilization and prizes--the relatiorships
that obtained in earlier cycles, and the current situation and
trends. Next we turn to a key problem in the financial scene-
bank credit expansion, its sources, its composition, its relation
to total credit flows and its repercussions on bank liquidity.
Turning to the international scene, we will review development
in interest rates here and abroad and their relation to interna
tional capital flows. Concluding, we will draw on these special
studies as well as the comprehensive staff review already
distributed to appraise the balance of economic forces a-d its
implication for policy.
The concluding portion of the review, presented by Mr. Koch: was
as follows:
Our conclusion this morning is based not only on the
selected elements in the economic situation as discussed
earlier bu: also on the entire situation as analyzed in the
staff report distributed to you last week.
As the report indicated, some of the economic news that
has become available since our last meeting suggests a pick
up in the pace of the expansion. The 7 per cent rise in new
orders for durable manufacturers in April, although covering
only one month, was impressive, as was the rise in employment.

5/26/64 -17-
Our index of industrial production rose a full point last
month, following three months of smaller gains. Thus,
activity in the business sector seems to be catching up to
the air of optimism that has prevailed there for some time.
Two features of the situation at the end of the first
quarter favorable to expansion were the scheduled further
rise in plant and equipment expenditures and a low inventory
sales ratio. Additions to stocks at both producers and dis
tributors were small in the first quarter, although dealer
stocks of autos rose.
Despite the rise in business activity this spring, the
industrial commodity price average has remained stable, while
prices of foods and foodstuffs are down a little in recent
weeks. Regarding the recent rise in capacity utilization
and its possible upward pressure on prices, we noted earlier
that the situation appears rather different today from what
it was in the expansion of the middle 1950's. This is cue
to a number of reasons, including a greater apparent business
awareness of the threat of longer run competition, both from
substitute products and from abroad. Recent price develop
ments seem to bear this out. At this point further expansion
in activity and general price stability appear compatible,
assuming that inflationary developments abroad are held in
check. Testing of markets will no doubt continue, however,
and a close watch will need to be kept on price and cost
changes.
Very recent data on the consumer sector are also
stronger. Preliminary figures indicate that the rate of
retail sales in the first half of May may have approached
the February high. The latest Census Quarterly Survey of
Consumer Buying Intentions, conducted in mid-April, suggests
that buying of durable goods will rise further in the months
ahead.
In the financial area, the pace of expansion of bank
credit, the money supply, and other forms of liquidity seem
to have slackened somewhat thus far this year compared with
last year. Banks continue to sell Government securities and
to moderate their acquisitions of municipals in order to meet
sizable loan demands. As a result, their liquidity positions
have been reduced further. Revised seasonal adjustment
factors for our money supply series suggest that the recent
annual rate of increase has been less than we had thought
earlier, 2.9 per cent for the first four months of the year,
as compared with 3.3 per cent in the same months of 1963.

5/26/64 -18-
Earlier in the presentation, we also analyzed several
longer run aspects of the financial situation that are of
particular relevance to monetary policy formulation. We
concluded, first, that the private economy's liquidity,
although it has risen contracyclically, does not look
excessive when related to either private expenditures or
to private debt; second, that the rise in liquidity has
consisted mainly of near moneys rather than money itself
and we can influence the rate of conversion of near moneys
into money; third, that the large current share of total
credit flows provided by commercial banks reflects essen
tially the structural shift in the savings flow and is not
in and of itself a cause of inflation; and, finally, that
the reduced current liquidity of banks as well as other
financial institutions means that expansion of their
lending and investing activities would likely be curbed
promptly by lessened availability of bank reserves and
the accompanying rise in interest rates.
Finally, on the international front, the table on the
screen compares the annual rate of deficit in the balance
of payments in the last 10 months to the average of 1959
and 1960, a period selected because in early 1960 European
demand was, in a cyclical phase similar co early 1964. It
shows clearly that the major factor of long-run improvement
has been trade. Nevertheless, our presentation this morning
indicated that the rise in short-term interest rates and
rates paid on time deposits since last summer has reduced
and at times actually reversed outflows of money market funds
into Euro-dollars.
It also showed that capital movements are influenced by
a wide ran.,e of forces and conditions other than interest
rates. Among these, the size and capacity of our financial
markets and the general availability of credit here have been
among the more important. Some modest reduction in credit
availability might contribute to an increased reluctance
on the part of banks to make marginal loans to overseas
borrowers.
Domestic considerations, however, do not suggest the
need for credit curtailment. Economic expansion still appears
to be balanced in character and not so rapid as to be unsus
tainable. There is little evidence in financial or nonfinan
cial markets of a rebirth of inflationary expectations. There
is still a way to go in achieving more satisfactory use of
resources, and the current posture of policy can contribute
to this objective.

5/26/64 -19
At the conclusion of the presentation Mr. Daane commented that
he thought the new technique of focusing on special areas was much more
productive than the earlier, broader-ranging chart shows.
Mr. Hickman agreed, and added that he thought the particular
areas that had been selected were those that warranted examination most.
He congratulated the staff on both the choice of subject matter and the
presentation itself.
Mr. Balderston then called for the usual go-around of comments
and views on economic conditions and monetary policy beginning with
Mr. Treiber, who presented the following statement:
Business expansion continues its orderly advance.
In general, the outlook appears to be one of quickening
tempo throughout the economy. April was marked by a good
increase in industrial production and in new orders for
manufacturers' durable goods. Manufacturers' inventories
have rema:.ned steady while sales have risen. For business
as a whole, the ratio of inventory to sales is lower than
at any time since 1955.
Residential construction activity continues at a good
level. So far, consumer buying, as reflected in retail
sales, continues to show no discernible reaction to the
tax cut. Apparently many consumers have been taking ad
vantage of the tax cut to reduce their debt. This develop
ment lays a good basis for further expansion later.
The price picture continues about unchanged. While
wholesale prices declined 0.1 points in April, industrial
wholesale prices rose 0.1 points. Raw industrial prices
have declined after substantial rises. Of the specific
price announcements in the last few weeks, there have
been more reductions than increases. Members of the National
Association of Purchasing Agents expect a buyers' market
over the rest of the year.
Total employment rose substantially in April but the
increase in the civilian labor force was slightly larger.
The over-all unemployment rate remained unchanged, as did

5/26/64 -20-
the unemployment rate for married men. The long-term unemploy
ment rate, i.e., unemployment for 15 or more weeks, declined.
Bank credit showed little change in April following a
substantial advance in March. Bank credit growth may have
slowed down somewhat this year; but as yet the evidence is
inconclusive. Current loan forecasts of the major New York
City banks indicate a moderate loan demand. But bank loan
deposit ratios have risen further, and the banks could find
themselves under pressure if loan demand should become
vigorous as the economy gains further momentum.
So far this year our balance of payments experience has
been quite encouraging. The good record is due, in part, to
such transitory factors as large grain exports to the Soviet
Bloc, unusually low imports, and small sales of foreign
securities in our capital market. For the remainder of the
year the outlook is not as good. We cannot expect such good
results in a number of areas. We are likely to have a sub
stantial deficit during the remainder of the year. I believe
we will have to keep the balance of payments in the forefront
of our policy considerations over the remainder of the year.
Britain's trade deficit rose sharply in April. Since
the last meeting of the Committee, rates on British Treasury
bills have risen somewhat. Continuing inflationary pressures
on the European Continent could very well lead to higher in
terest rates there. If later there is a further increase in
interest rates abroad, present United States short-term in
terest rates might well be inadequate to protect Lhe United
State against an adverse movement of funds.
The recently declared opposition of the AFL-CIO executive
council to the Administration's guideposts for noninflationary
wage settlements does not augur well for wage contract ne
gotiations this summer. There could be strikes, delays, and
inflationacy wage settlements. A .age-price push would undo
the gains experienced in our cost picture in receipt years, with
deleterious effects at home and abroad.
The present situation calls for a high degree of alertness.
I am not persuaded, however, that it calls for d major change
in policy at this time.
Within the present directive I would hope to see the
Federal funds rate consistently at the discount rate, free
reserves between zero and $100 million, the rate on three-month
Treasury bills above the discount rate as well as below, and
some increase in member bank borrowing. I see no reason to
change the language of the directive except to delete the
reference to the Treasury refunding.

5/26/64 -21
Mr. Shuford said he would like to join with the others who had
expressed appreciation for the revised form of the chart presentation.
He thought it had been excellent.
Mr. Shuford then noted that national economic activity continued
to expand, as the presentation had indicatec. The latest data showed
significant rises in employment and industrial production, and construction
outlays continued at a high level. There had been impressive gains in
new and unfilled orders of durable goods manufacturers. Personal income
and instalment credit continued to rise in April. Retail sales had been
high for the past three months, up at a 9.6 per cent annual rate from
the previous three months. It seemed that the national economy was strong
and that the expansion might be accelerating.
In the Eighth District, Mr. Shuford said, economic activity had
not been as strong as in the nation. Data received in the last three
weeks suggested continued hesitation. Industrial use of electric power
in the major metropolitan areas had drifted down for the last several mon:hs.
Si ce the last meeting of the Committee, Mr. Shuford continued,
there appeared to have been some contraction in the money supply, a develop
ment which he considered appropriate. Over the past year growth had been
at the relatively rapid rate of 4 per cent. In light of the current rate
of economic expansion and the prospects for acceleration,continued rapid
increase in the money supply could contribute to an unsustainably high

5/26/64 -22
rate of expansion. He would prefer a more moderate rate of increase
in bank reserves and money even though this meant a little less ease in
the money market.
Mr. Shuford did not favor an overt change in policy at this time.
However, if strong credit demands should work in the direction of less
ease, he was inclined to think that this should not be offset. His
thinking ran :.n terms somewhat like those outlined by Mr. Treiber. He
suggested that it would be appropriate for the three-month Treasury bill
rate to fluctuate in the range of 3.50 to 3.60 per cent, and for free
reserves to be held in or close to the $50 to $100 million range. He
would not recommend a change in the discount rate. With respect to the
directive, he shared Mr. Treiber's view that the one adopted at the last
meeting remained appropriate except for deleting the reference to the
Treasury refunding. However, he had no objection to the proposal that had
been submitted to the Committee by the staff.
Mr. Bryan reported that recent statistics seemed to indicate that
activity 'n the Sixth District was going along about as in the nation.
There were the usual number of series in which the District was doing
less well than the nation and in which it was doing better, but he could
not read any particular significance into the recent District data.
It seemed to Mr. Bryan that national developments were proceeding
in surprisingly good fashion. He saw no evidences of an uncontrolled
boom, and certainly none of recessionary tendencies. Accordingly, he

5/26/64 -23
advocated no change in policy. In terms of free reserves, he favored a
central target of about $100 million, in full recognition of the cir
cumstances that required that the Manager have some leeway in that figure.
With regard to some of the preceding discussion, Mr. Bryan remarked,
he appreciated fully the psychological jar that might come from a negative
free reserve figure. However, he felt that the longer the period that
reserves remained positive the greater woul be the jar when they became
negative. He did not know how long the Committee could go without a
negative free reserve figure, but if it was much longer he suspected that
the economy would get a considerable jolt from the appearance of such a
figure despite the fact that expansion easily could proceed with constant,
moderately negative free reserves. Over the past year, total reserves
had increased by more than 3 per cent, although the movement had not been
steady. For the time being, and in terms of a lorger run than three week:,,
he favored aiming for expansion in total reserves at an annual rate of
about 3 to 3-1/2 per cent. He did not favor a change in the discount rate
at this time.
Mr. Bopp reported that economic conditions continued to improve in
the Third District. Unemployment claims had declined seasonally to a
level lower than in recent years. Help-wanted indexes had risen both in
Philadelphia and in the United States, and department store sales again
had gained over last year but still did not match the nation.
Busines loan at weekly reporting banks had increased slightly
during the past three weeks, but by more than in the same period last

5/26/64 -24-
year. The basic reserve position of reserve city banks stood now at
about the same level it had been for the past six weeks, and activity
at the discount window had been light.
Perhaps he was overlooking something, Mr. Bopp said, but it
seemed to him that determination of policy in the present environment
came down to a few clear issues. The Committee was concerned with three
problems: unceremployment of resources, the balance of payments, and
inflation. Only the first of these was a matter of current urgency.
This was not to say that the Committee could ignore the other two. The
balance of payments remained a problem and could become an acute one
at any time. Some prices had been going up and perhaps enough more would
follow to qualify as an inflationary movement. But at the moment
neither the balance of payments nor prices seemed to him to justify a
move toward restraint.
In this situation, he agreed with Chairman Martin that the
Federal Reserve should not "take the lead toward higher interest rates."
He would continue to use monetary policy to stimulate economic activity.
He would make no change in the directive (except for deleting the
reference to Treasury refunding) or the discount rate.

5/26/64 -25
Mr. Hickman said that the keynote of economic news for April, as
the chart show had indicated, was the sharp spurt in productive activity.
Of major importance was the snapback of new orders for durable goods after
two months of decline. Retail sales remained about the same as in Marcn
at a very high level. The evidence continued to suggest balanced, orderly
growth at a sustainable rate for the economy as a whole.
An important question at this time was whether there would be suf
ficient strength from other sectors of the economy to offset the expected
leveling in production of autos and steel. Both auto sales and auto output
advanced more than seasonally in April. On the basis of fragmentary data
for May, however, both were expected to decline somewhat from recent high
levels. Steel production, seasonally adjusted, increased from March to
April and was possibly increasing slightly further in May. All reporting
steel producers in the Fourth District expected new orders to be less in
May than in April on a seasonally adjusted basis.
Regardless of the strength in aggregate demand over the near future,
and recent near-record increases in employment, Mr. Hickman continued, be
could not expect that the large number of young and relatively unskilled
entrants into the labor force this spring would find jobs easily. There
were increasing instances of shortages of skilled workers along with a
surplus in the unskilled group. This was clearly reflected in the per
centages of unemployment in the various labor market categories. April
unemployment among teenagers was an uncomfortably large 16.2 per cent,

5/26/64 -26
while for married men (as distinct from adult men discussed in the chart
show) it stood at a record low of 2.9 per cent. Recently, there had
been repeated reports of serious shortages of skilled labor in the
machinery industry. In view of the expected large demand for capital
goods, this could create a bottleneck and lead to higher prices for
machinery and machine tools. These structural problems in unemployment
were not susceptible of easy solution by monetary means.
The various measures of bank reserves in recent weeks appeared
to Mr. Hickman to have been quite consistert with the Committee's directive
and intent. Free reserves had averaged lower over the past three weeks
than in most recent months, while borrowings had been somewhat higher.
On the other hand, intermediate- and long-term yields had moved slightly
lower, partly because of expectational factors and partly because of
strong nonbank demand.
Although these drifts in yields might seem minor in themselves,
and not wholly undesirable from the standpoint of the domestic situation,
Mr. Hickman continued to be bothered by their possible adverse implica
tions for the U. S. balance of payments. With inflationary pressures
persisting abroad, certainly no movement toward lower yields could be
expected there. Under these circumstances, he thought the Committee
should consider the desirability of some firming of rates here. This
could be done under the terms of the present directive. He would delete
the reference to the Treasury refunding, but he had rather mixed feelings

5/26/64 -27
about the other revisions suggested in the staff's draft. In particular,
the reference to the recent quickening of business orders was based on only
one month's showing of a very volatile series. Also, he was not sure in
what sense manpower was "underutilized" in view of the fact that unemploy
ment among married males was now at a record low.
Mr. Daane said that at the recent American Bankers Association
meeting in Vienna he had found a perceptible change in attitudes with re
spect to the U. S. balance of payments performance. In his judgment there
was, perhaps, too much confidence expressed that the U. S. was beyond the
problem and that there was no longer any need to be concerned with it. The
Europeans were concerned with their own inflationary problems. To Mr. Daane
this underscored the need Mr. Treiber had mentioned for the Committee to
keep the balance of payments in the forefront of its considerations. He
thought the Committee could not put the problem aside at this moment even
though the first quarter figures were so much better. A slippage could
have a very adverse effect, and he did not think there was anything in the
recent improvement to indicate that it was p:rmanent. In the light f
this, and in light of the attitudes he had found abroad, Mr. Daane thougt
it behooved the Committee to keep the balance of payments problem in mind.
Having said that, Mr. Daane remarked, he would add that in his
judgment the recent quickening of domestic economic activity was what the
Committee had wanted and what it would like to see continue. He saw
nothing in the domestic area to justify a change in policy. He would make

5/26/64 -28
no apology for maintaining policy unchanged because he thought that
current policy was contributing to the Committee's goals. Operationally,
he would not go along with suggestions that it was desirable to try to
push interest rates up or free reserves down. On the contrary, Mr. Daane
thought that the Committee had been living a little too dangerously with
respect to free reserve figures. He would give the Manager the latitude
suggested by the range of zero to $200 million, but he would prefer to
have any errors on the higher side rather than have the Manager skate
too close to zero and run the risk of showing negative free reserves.
Mr. Daane said that he would not change the directive in the
manner sugges:ed by the staff because he thought it implied too much in
the reference to "recent quickening." He would stay with the present
directive, except for deletion of the Treasury financing reference. He
would not charge the discount rate.
Mr. Mitchell commented that he agreed with Mr. Daane that the
Manager was causing the Committee to live too dangerously. He would be
prepared to rise the free reserve target to $250 or $300 million if this
was necessary to avoid the risk of ending us with a negative figure. He
would rather postpone having net borrowed reserves until the Committee
wanted to give the market a jolt, rather than produce a negative figure
inadvertently and have to operate to raise it in the following week.
Mr. Mitchell thought that the differences in view among Committee
members were quite small, but nevertheless significant. Most seemed to

5/26/64 -29
feel that over this long period of economic expansion the Committee had
maintained a policy of moderate ease. In his judgment, however, there
had been a gradual move from ease to tightness. To him conditions appeared
quite taut at present. Banks were extremely illiquid, and the turnover
in deposits was high and continuing to rise. These circumstances were
symptomatic of greater tightness and tensicn than many thought existed.
Small probings toward greater firmness in monetary policy could cause
difficulty, and could contribute to thwarting the national objectives o,
increasing activity and reducing unemployment. He thought the Committee
was doing about the right thing but that it -was cutting matters a little
too finely.
Mr. Mitchell said he was prepared to accept either the existing
directive or the staff draft. In the latter, he agreed with Mr. Hickman
that it might be desirable to omit the reference to business orders,
since the rise was a one-month development. He would substitute the word
"apparent" for "recent" in referring to the quickening of the expansion.
In general, he thought it desirable to revise the directive frequently,
and he was satisfied with the staff draft even though its tone seemed to
suggest something to some people that it did not suggest to him.
Mr. Shepardson said that he, too, had found the new type of chart
show much more helpful to him than earlier ones. With respect to
economic developments, all the information before the Committee seemed
indicative of a gradual and sustainable expansion in business. The Com
mittee certainly was concerned with the problem of unemployment, but this

5/26/64 -30
problem had different segments and in his judgment the segment that
appeared to be most serious was not susceptible to relief by monetary
policy. He thought the Committee had been providing the opportunity for
expansion of business. If there was to be healthy and sustainable
expansion, it had to come out of a growth in business itself; the Com
mittee's obligation was to accommodate this growth and not to over
stimulate the economy.
It seemed to Mr. Shepardson that the Committee had been following
an appropriate policy as measured by the amount of expansion in reserves.
He was please that, if anything, there had been a little less reserve
expansion in the recent period. This, he thought, was well within the
scope of the guidelines that have been given the Manager. He favored
continuation of the present policy as reflected in the indicators of
recent weeks. On the directive, Mr. Shepardson thought there was some
advantage in the draft proposed by the staff. He agreed with Mr. Mitchell
on the desirability of changing the word "recent" before "quickening" to
"apparent."
Governor Robertson made the following statement:
At each of the Committee meetings since the enactment of
the tax cut, discussion here has suggested the need for a
policy of "watchful waiting," pending clarification of the
resulting stimulus to business activity. There has been con
cern about a possible boom in business capital spending, a
sharp upsurge in credit demands, and the triggering of a
wage-price spiral. But in the weeks that have followed, the
facts as they have come in describe a continued relatively
gradual business and credit expansion. The very latest

5/26/64 -31-
statistics suggest a slight quickening in the rate of
business advance, but this seems no more than what might
have beer expected--or even hoped for--if the economy is
to make some steady headway in employing its idle re
sources. Meanwhile, a remarkable restraint has charac
terized business price and inventory policies. No spurt
of inflationary ebullience has developed. Signs of
improving employment are appearing, without yet any sign
of approaching bottlenecks that could create distortions
in the growth of output.
It seems clear that we are moving upward in a gradual
advance n activity that is not threatening to get out of
hand, and to my mind this justifies a positive policy of con
tinuing to provide a generally stimulative monetary environ
ment. Economic developments calling for a less stimulative
policy may well develop at a later date, but that is no reason
to tighten credit at this juncture.
There may be some thought that the recent substantial
flow of bank credit to foreign customers represents a develop
ment to waich monetary policy should attend. I could not
disagree nore. General monetary policy needs to be adapted to
general credit conditions, and, in general, credit conditions
in this country do not call for restraint. Foreign loans by
big domestic banks are a very narrow and special kind of
credit outlet, It sometimes seems hard to distinguish the
portions of such credit that finance part of our heartening
trade surplus and the portions that have an unrequited adverse
effect upon our balance of paymerts. It strikes me as rather
ironic that sizable amounts of this foreign lending are being
made by some of the same big bankers who have been bemoaning
the "payments problem." It might not be amiss to seek an
appropriate way of reminding some of the most aggressive foreign
bank lenders of this seeming iron , and also of the desirability
of prudent limitations on their exposure to foreign currency
hazards, and of the wisdom of avoiding pyramided credit ex
tensions not closely related to the financing of our interna
tional trade.
As for the directive to the Desk, I would be agreeable to
continuing the present language unchanged, aside from dropping
the reference to Treasury financing. And I would hope the
Manager could implement this by achieving both objectives
mentioned in the final paragraph, namely relatively the same
money market conditions and some moderate expansion in aggre
gate bank reserves. (As a practical matter, if we start to
experience a persisting shortfall in aggregate reserve expansion,
then I should like to see the Desk allow a little compensating ease
in the money market in order to cushion the reserve contraction.)

5/26/64 -32
Mr. Robertson added that he had no objection to the staff draft,
with the substitution of the word "apparent" as suggested by Mr. Mitchell.
He also agreed with Mr. Mitchell that it was desirable to revise the
directive frequently.
Mr. Mills said he was in agreement with the position taken by
Mr. Mitchell, although he would not be quite as free and liberal as
Mr. Mitchell would in raising the level of free reserves. On the other
hand, Mr. Mills said, he thought the Committee should guard against
allowing the level of free reserves to move down to or touch the zero level.
Mr. Mills added that he would be prepared to accept either the
existing directive or the proposed revision with the substitution of the
word "apparent" for "recent." However, he did not think the Committee's
problem ended with considering the wording of the directive if in the
course of its implementation by the Management of the System Open Market
Account it was subject to another interpretation. The matter had ccme
up often, but he thought there were good reasons to believe that the
Committee had been trapped into specifying objectives in terms of magnitudes,
particularly in terms of some specified general level of interest rates
or volume of free reserves. He thought the conduct of operations by the
System Open Market Account had been handicapped in that regard. The way
to break free from these shackles was to move toward allowing the market
as such to give direction to the System's policy rather than for the System
to give a positive direction to the market as to what its specific intentions
were. The mechanics of the shift toward a more flexible policy would be

5/26/64 -33
to not offset fully the fluctuations that occurred in the vault cash
factor and the float factor. If, as it originally did, the Committee
allowed such changes to pass by with less notice the result would be a
more responsive market, and one that would give more leads to System
policy. Care would have to be taken to avoid negative free reserves,
but he had no concern in that regard.
By and large, Mr. Mills said, he would accept the directive and
he would hope that the Committee could move toward more flexibility in its
policy actions, becoming more responsive to the market and permitting
the market to move more slowly to its (the Committee's) ideas rather than
forcing its views on the market.
Mr. Wayne reported that the trend of Fifth District business
continued upward, and improvement seemed more broadly based as a result
of recent developments. The District's prircipal manufacturing industries
had continued to increase production. Textile producers had all the current
business they could handle and, although few chose to talk about it, there
was considerable evidence that most of the prices were now reflecting
some of the recent 6.5-cent-a-pound cotton cost reduction. Retail trade
showed noticeable improvement in the first half of May, according to retail
store executives polled in the recent survey of the Richmond Bank and as
reflected in its department store series. The latest statistics on
building permits and contract awards indicated substantial new additions
to the already large volume of District construction projects. In line

5/26/64 -34
with expectations, first quarter cash receipts of District farmers were
1 per cent belcw last year's level. In the latest three weeks, loan
demand, especially in the business sector, appeared to have been somewhat
stronger in the District than in the nation as a whole.
For the country as a whole, most of the available information
indicated that the economy was moving forward with considerable strength
and with no notable signs of inflationary pressure. The large increase
in employment and the substantial rise in industrial production last
month were solid contributions to the general improvement. Weekly data
through mid-May suggested some gains in retail trade, although it remained
to be seen how substantial these were. The corporate profits picture
remained favorable, supporting general expectations of rising investment
outlays in the months ahead. Continuing strength in new orders for durabl:
goods and in manufacturers' backlogs also made for an encouraging prospect.
The one doubtful element in the current situation was the highly volatile
housing starts series. Expenditures for new construction, however, were
apparently holding firm at their peak level. As Mr. Wayne saw it, the
over-all oicture was one of strength at a high level of activity.
In the policy area, Mr. Wayne said he found himself in almost
complete agreement with Mr. Daane. He was convinced that the Committee's
moderate course over the past several weeks had been the correct one.
The money market had shown encouraging stability in the face of shifts in
expectational patterns, and business expansion was apparently proceeding

5/26/64 -35
without undue inflationary pressure. The balance of payments problem
continued of diminished urgency, although preliminary April figures were
a reminder that this problem was still with the Committee. On the whole,
Mr. Wayne felt that the Committee's policy of moderation had paid off
thus far and he saw nothing in either the domestic or the international
situation that indicated a need for any change at this time. He would
leave the discount rate unchanged. With respect to the directive, he
could accept either the old one, deleting the reference to Treasury
refunding, or the staff draft.
Mr. Clay said that thus far in 1964 bank credit in Tenth District
weekly report..ng banks had expanded slightly more than last year. This
was the net result of a much larger increase in loan volume and a nuch
larger decrease in security holdings. Both real estate and consumer loans
had expanded somewhat more than a year ago, and loans to nonbank financial
institutions had shown marked strength relative to 1963. Business loan
volume, however, had shown pronounced weakness this year, although there
had been a marked increase in business loans during the first half of May.
The loan categories most important in explaining the recent improvement
in business loans were durable goods manufacturing, retail trade, and the
transportation, communication, and other public utilities group. The
growth in loans to retail trade was especially striking, and came on the
heels of laggard growth in retail trade loans during the previous 4 months.
Holdings of U. S. Government securities by District weekly
reporting banks had been sharply reduced in recent months. This Government

5/26/64 -36
security liquidation was a continuation of a pattern dating back to the
middle of 1963. Part of the pressure on the security portfolios of
District banks appeared to stem from the lethargic pace of deposit growth,
principally I.P.C. demand deposits. The time deposit component presented
a different picture. Since year end, these deposits had grown more than
in the comparable period last year. This represented an extension of
the accelerated growth of time deposits during the last half of 1963.
Mr. Clay remarked that in analyzing the performance of the
national economy and in determining the appropriate public policy pre
scription, it was necessary to distinguish the yardstick that was being
applied. The achievements of this business upswing were notable indeed
in terms of the degree of expansion, the length of its life span, and
the stability of prices. Another yardstick had been and continued to
be this accomplishment weighed against the economy's resources and its
potential for growth in an orderly and sustainable manner. It was from
this latter viewpoint that a continuation of the Federal Reserve System's
current nonetary policy had to receive its justification.
The pattern of bank credit expansion during this upswing had
differed markedly from that of other periods in that it had not shown
the typical reduction in the rate of credit expansion as the upswing
progressed. It was also true, however, that the economy's resources and
productivity continued to grow, that a substantial unemployment problem
persisted, and that the likelihood of price inflation did not appear

5/26/64 -37
imminent. Recent economic developments exhibited considerable unevenness,
but there was evidence of some acceleration in certain important sectors.
It had to be recognized that commonly accepted projections for the year
end level of economic activity implicitly involved a significant accel
eration in the over-all pace of economic activity.
Mr. Clay expressed the view that for the period immediately ahead
it would be appropriate to continue monetary policy essentially unchanged.
The staff draft suggested for the current economic policy directive appeared
to be quite satisfactory, although he also would be satisfied with renewal
of the old directive. He concluded by observing that the Federal Reserve
Bank discount rate should remain unchanged.
Mr. Scanlon reported that businessmen in the Seventh District
continued to be optimistic. Total department store sales for the last
four weeks were 11 per cent over last year's volume. He saw little
evidence of any tendency for prices to rise at the wholesale level. Even
capital goods firms with rising backlogs indicated that prices had been
raised only slightly since last fall. Leaders in the machine tool industry,
however, were encouraging one another to raise prices. In this industry
production would increase more rapidly were it not for shortages of trained
labor.
Mr. Scanlon said that demand for credit by both businesses and
consumers at District banks appeared to have strengthened in recent weeks.
Business loans of District weekly reporting member banks were 9 per cent

5/26/64 -38
above the level of a year ago in mid-May. In the previous twelve months
the rise had been 10 per cent. These increases were slightly greater
than those for the nation. The large Chicago banks had continued to show
fairly comfortable reserve positions, with deposit gains in the past
three weeks more than covering loan expansion and with a very small net
position in the Federal funds market. They had continued to increase
their outstanding CDs.
Although turnover of negotiable time certificates had been very
heavy in recent months, Mr. Scanlon said, there was less concern at large
banks that reductions in outstandings might become serious. In part this
reflected the easing of bill rates, plus the experience that, despite a
high withdrawal rate in April, outstanding negotiable CDs rose sharply.
In addition, a general confidence had developed that the ceiling rate on
time accounts would be raised if the differential over bills declined
appreciably at some time in the future.
With the pace of economic activity apparently accelerating,
Mr. Scanlon continued, and in view of prospective rate increases abroad,
it might be appropriate to permit short-term rates to move slightly higher
in response to seasonal pressures in the months ahead. His own judgment,
however, was that the Committee should continue the current policy during
the next three weeks. Therefore, he would renew the current directive,
deleting the reference to Treasury financing, and he would not favor
changing the discount rate at this time. He shared Mr. Mitchell's view
with respect to the directive prepared by the staff and could accept it
with the word change that had been suggested.

5/26/64 -39
Mr. Deming reported that the Ninth District economy was going
along in good form. Recent rains had helped crop prospects and had
generated some optimism. There had been a slight quickening in the pace
of bank credit expansion in early May, although it was not up to last
year's rate. The expansion was stronger at country banks than at city
banks.
As he had mentioned before, the Minneapolis Bank did a survey of
some of the large industrial concerns headquartered in the District with
operations both within the District and beyond, and in some cases inter
national. These firms were asked about prospects, in terms of output,
employment, prices, and profits, for the next three months relative to
the past three months. Responses in the mcst recent survey, taken last
week, indicated general optimism which seemed to have taken on some of the
air of exuberance. This was true with respect to output, employment:,
and profits. In connection with prices, one or two of the firms said
their prices would go up over the next three months and one or two said
they would go down, but most indicated that their prices would stay about
the same,
With respect to policy, Mr. Deming said he was in substantial
agreement with Mr. Daane; he would favor continuing policy as it was.
He had no strong preference as between the existing directive or the staff dr
with the proposed change in wording.
Mr. Swan said that following the first quarter, in which there had
been some modest gains in business activity, the Twelfth District appeared

5/26/64 -40
to have marked time in April and early May. Total employment in the
Pacific Coast area was about the same in April as in March; a decline
in the Pacific Northwest was offset by an ircrease in California. The
unemployment rate also was unchanged. April saw another decline in
defense and space-related employment and present indications pointed to
further reductions at least through July. Housing starts were up in
April but construction employment declined in several States. In the
lumber industry orders were down in early May from a year ago and there
had been some slight weakening of prices.
On the other hand, Mr. Swan said, bank loan demand in the District
in recent weeks appeared stronger than a year ago. This was particularly
true of business loans, and the increases were widely distributed among
the various loan categories. The large banks were still net sellers of
Federal funds :.n the four weeks ending May 20, but member bank borrowings
from the Reserve Bank ranged from 10 to 15 per cent of the national total,
considerably more than the District's share in previous months.
On policy, Mr. Swan said that he saw no basis for tightening in
either the domestic or international picture. It seemed to him that the
signs of an increase in the pace of expansion--in industrial production, in
new orders if they had in fact risen, and in the firmer tone of the labor
market--should be welcomed, particularly since they had been accompanied
by little change in commodity prices and by few indications of unsustainable
developments. He noted that the upward courses in bank reserves, bank
credit, the money supply, and time deposits all had been moderate in recent

5/26/64 -41
months. In general, he favored no change in policy. In this connection,
he observed that apparently there had been a somewhat firmer money market
in the past three weeks than previously, with the Federal funds rate
constantly at 3-1/2 per cent, free reserves down slightly, and borrowings
up. Bearing this in mind, he favored no further tightening, however slight.
With respect to the directive, Mr. Swan expressed a strong pref
erence for the draft proposed by the staff. It seemed to him that the
first paragraph of the directive should reflect the current situation,
and that there had been enough change in the general picture since the
last meeting to warrant revision of this paragraph. He agreed with the
language change suggested by Mr. Mitchell.
Mr. Coldwell reported that conditions in the Eleventh District
were almost unchanged recently, with production, income, and sales at
record or near-record levels. There were some problem areas, such as
cattle, where prices were down sharply and marketings were rising with
dry conditions and cost of feed, and the petroleum industry, where drillirg
activity was srill declining. The major integrated oil companies were
all right financially but the independent companies were having a difficult
time. Crude oil prices were weakening and stocks were high. Loan demand
was quite good at District banks and the large banks were working every
penny, to the point of scheduled deficit positions. They were making
continual Federal funds purchases and were borrowing from the Dallas Bank
more than occasionally.

5/26/64 -42
Mr. Ellis said that business in New England continued to be good
but it was not spectacular. Manufacturers' new orders were rising, but
with output level from month to month manufacturing employment was rela
tively stable. There seemed to be less concern than earlier about
unemployment, and unemployment insurance claims continued below year-ago
levels. Nonresidential building was running 24 per cent ahead of 1963,
and residential building showed a gain of 36 per cent. Real estate loans
of weekly reporting banks were 19 per cent ahead of last year as the
banks sought cutlets for the continued rapid inflow of time and savings
deposits. The rate of growth of CDs in a year's time exceeded the national
rate by a substantial margin. District banks had drastically decreased
their loans tc brokers and dealers over the year. Thus, while business
in the District was notspectacular, its effect on District banks was
nearly so.
Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Ellis said that for some months
the Committee had been in a posture of "wait and see," wating to see how
the economy would respond to the tax cut. The evidence as to the reaction
of business was beginning to be clearly established; the expectations of
a rise in capital outlays had been confirmed by the substantial increase
in new and unfilled orders in April. Consumers were responding somewhat
more slowly.
In this situation, Mr. Ellis thought it appropriate that policy
should continue in a posture of watchful waiting. His uneasiness stemmed

5/26/64 -43
from the feeling that it would be better if the Committee were watching
more as a neutral, from the sidelines, rather than as a participant.
Unfortunately from his viewpoint, it was clear that a move to neutrality
now would be viewed as an aggressive move. Such aggression did not seem
appropriate to the Federal Reserve, especially in view of the market's
reaction to the Chairman's recent statement before the Advertising Counc.l.
Mr. Ellis therefore fell back on Mr. Iron's suggestion of three weeks
ago that the Committee instruct the Manager to resolve doubts on the side
of less ease while maintaining a posture of watchful waiting.
Mr. Ellis said that he had found the discussion about the direc
tive this morring highly interesting. It was a useful illustration of
the continuing need for the Committee to give more attention to its
directive and to assume more responsibility for judgments that now were
left to the Account Manager. His personal view was that the Manager had
been doing very well in implementing policy. He noted that Mr. Stone hac
described the free reserve target in terms cf a zero to $200 million
range. He had thought the target range was $50 to $150 million, but he
was delighted to accept the Manager's version of a range from zero upward.
Along with that he would suggest fluctuation in the bill rate from 3.44 to
3.60 per cent, the range that had prevailed over the last six months.
Referring to Mr. Bryan's comments, Mr. Ellis said that the
Committee seemed to be caught between the alternative of giving the market
an occasional psychological jar with a negative free reserve figure, or

5/26/64 -44
avoiding this and setting up the chance to really jolt the market when
it wanted to change policy. He would prefer the occasional jar, and
have the market come to recognize that a single low free reserve figure
should not be taken as signifying a change in policy. The Committee
could then move in gradual steps rather than in jolts.
In concluding, Mr. Ellis said he thought the directive shculd
reflect recent developments. Accordingly, he favored the draft proposed
by the staff with the substitution proposed by Mr. Mitchell of "apparent"
for "recent."
Mr. Balderston commented that he also would like to express his
appreciation for the new form of the chart presentation given to the
Committee this morning. He was especially nappy about the strength and
balance of the economy in May, as recorded in the presentation. He was
not suggesting that May would prove to have been the high point of the
expansion, but he thought it might be a point to which the Committee would
look back in the future as reflecting the kinds of economic conditions
that it desired and that it had hoped for before the tax reduction.
Mr. Balderston said that the consensus of the Committee clearly
favored a continuation of the policy of recent weeks. Parenthetically,
he noted that he was among those who had been pleased with the implementation
of policy since the last meeting.
After a discussion of the specific language of the directive to
be adopted, Mr. Balderston suggested that a vote be taken on the staff

5/26/64 -45--
draft with the substitution of the word "apparent" for the word "recent"
before "quickening." Messrs. Daane, Hickman, and Mills each indicated
that he had certain reservations about the proposed directive but did not
consider them sufficiently serious to warrant dissenting.
Thereupon, upon notion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York was authorized
and directed, until otherwise directed by
the Committee, to execute transactions
in the System Account in accordance with
the following current economic policy
directive:
It is the Federal Open Market Committee's current policy
to accommodate moderate growth in the reserve base, bank
credit, and the money supply for the purpose of facilitating
continued expansion of the economy, while fostering improve
ment in the capital account of U. S. international payments,
and seeking to avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures.
With the recent Federal income tax reduction, continued
strength reported in consumer buying plans, and anticipated
increases in business capital expenditures as immediate
background, this policy takes into account the indications
in most recent data on production, business orders, and
employment of some apparent quickening in the pace of
domestic expansion. It also gives con.ideration to the con
tinued relative stability in average commodity prices; the
persistent underutilization of manpower and other resources;
the country's improved, though still adverse, international
payments position this year; and the interest rate advances
over past months in important markets abroad.
To implement this policy, System open market operations
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining about the same
conditions in the money market as have prevailed in recent
weeks, while accommodating moderate expansion in aggregate
bank reserves.

5/26/64 -46
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Wednesday, June 17, 1964, at 9:30 a.m.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary