A meeting of the Federal Open Market: Conmmittee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, January 7, i964,. at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. H ayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Bopp
Mr. C lay
Mr. Daane
Mr. M ills
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Scanlon
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Shuford, Alternate for Mr. Irons
Messrs. Hickman, Wayne, and Swan, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Ellis, Bryan, and Deming, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta,
and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Fr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Baughmar., Brill, Eastburn, Furth,
Garvy, Green, Holland, Koch, and Tow,
Associate Economih.ts
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market
Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary, Board of
Governors
Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Miss Eaton, Secretary., Office of the Secretary,
Board of Governors

1/7/64 -2
Measrs. Mann, Ratchford, Rawlings, Jones, Parsons,
and Grove, Vice Presidents of the Federa:
Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta,
St. Louis, MinneEpolis, and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Willis, Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston
fir. Sternlight, Manager, Securities Department
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Upon motion duly made and Seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Opei Market Com
mittee held on December 3, 1963, were
approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System OFen
Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open Market
Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the period
December 17, L963 through January L, L964, together with a supplemental
report covering the period January 2 through January 6, 1964. Copies
of these reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.
Supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs stated that the
Treasury gold stock would remain unchanged this week. The Stabilization
Fund had roughly $82 million on hand with prospective sales of at least
$45 million in January. The Russians had been pretty much out of the
market throughout December but might be back in sizable volume during
January and subsequent months.
Mr. Coombs reported that since the Last meeting of the Committee
the Account had paid off $12Z2 million of the swap drawing of $136 million

1/7/64 -3
on the Bundesbank, Leaving a balance of onL) $14 million. It also
had paid off $10 million of the swap drawing on the Netherlands Bank,
leaving a balance of $70 million. On the other hand, the swap draw
ings of Swiss francs on the Swiss National IBank and the Bank for
International Settlements rose from $150 million to $220 million in
order to mop up heavy repatriations of dollars
banks at the end of the year. In the Light ol
Coombs said, the increase of the Swiss franc s
million to $300 million on November 22 seemed
the right order of magnitude.
In recent years, Mr. Coombs continued,
tended to bring about some strengthening of the dollar and weakening
of the Continental European currencies during the first half of the
year. Again this year, the seasonal awing might enable the Account to
make good progress in paying off both the Swiss franc and guilder debts,
which now amounted to a combined total of $290 million. On the other
hand, th4 normal seasonal outflows fror the Netherlands and Switzerland
might be frustrated to some extent by a further tightening of credit
in both countries. The increase in the Dutch discount rate last week
from 3-1/2 to 4 per cent had been immediately reflected in a strengthen
ing of the guilder rate. Nevertheless, the basic strength of the guilder
had been undermined by the LO per cent wage increase recently granted
and Dutch officials continued to express fears of a sizable deterioration
in the Dutch balance of payments. Mr. Coombs was not sure how those

1/7/64 -4
two opposing tendencies would net out. But if credit conditions in
Amsterdam tighitened so severely as to prevent the Account from paying
off the swap debt, he thought that urging the Netherlands Bank to
accept a guilder bond issued by the U. S. Treasury would be fully
justified. He had, in fact, already discufsed this possibility with
President Holtrop and was hopeful that the latter would agree. This
would gave the Account the "take-out" it might need.
Similarly, Mr. Coomba said, an anti-inflationary program now
being put together by the Swiss Government might also make it more
difficu t for the Account to buy the Swiss francs it needed to clear
up the Swiss franc debt. Here again, however, there were possibilities
of further issue of Swiss franc bonds by the U. S. Treasury which
could provide a take-out, if necessary. At the next Basle meeting
on Friday of this week, Mr. Coombs said, he would discuss with the
Bank for Intenational Settlements and the Swiss National Bank such a
Treasury issue in the amount of rotgh.y $75 million.
the normal seasonal weakening of Continental European currencies
during the first half of the year had often been accompanied by a seasonal
strengthening of sterling, Mr. Coombs observed. It was conceivable that
the Bank of England might take in a very sizable amount of dollars during
the first quarter of 1964. The Account might, therefore, find it use
ful to draw upon its sterling swap Line during this period with the
anticipation that speculative pressures arising out of the British

1/7/64 -5
election later in the year probably would enable such a swap drawing
to be paid off without undue delay.
In response to a question by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Coombs said
he was hopeful that the recent tightening of money in Switzerland
would not produce an actual inflow of fund,;; the more immediate risk
was that such tightening would impede the normal seasonal outflow.
It was his judgment that the authorities would use various direct
controls to immobilize funds, and that they would try to avoid interest
rate actions. The Long-term rate was a politically sensitive matter
in Switzerland because an increase would be reflected within six
months or so in rates paid on outstanding mortgages in the country.
Mr. Mills referred to Mr. Coombs' statement that the System's
guilder and Swiss franc drawings could be funded by issuance of Treasury
bonds denomirated in those currencies if the System had difficulty in
repaying the drawings. He asked whether this would not amount to
sweeping the matter under the rug temporarily, and whether the System
would nt be better off if it had some incettive to live more closely
with the problem rather than postponing the day of reckoning. In
reply, Mr. Coombs said that his understanding of the rationale of the
swap arrangements was that they were intended to meet short-run
problems. If a particular drawing took longer to unwind than had been
anticipated because of market events or government policies, he thought
it desirable to substitute a type of credit appropriate to a longer run

1/7/64 -6
situation. Under such circumstances the problem was not the System's,
but the Treasury's.
Mr. Laane commented that in his apinion this was the appropriate
relation between the System's responsibilities and those of the Treasury.
Mr. Hayes observed that Mr. Mills ad put his finger on a funda
mental issue--to what extent should System swaps be used to reduce gold
losses? In his judgment, security issues by the Treasury were appro
priate to tiis purpose.
Mr. Hickman asked whether the object of the proposed drawing
on swap line with England, and the subsequent sale of pounds, was to
prevent a possible gold outflow rather than to eliminate the seasonal
pattern in exchange rate movements, and Mr. Coombs replied in the
affirmative. He added that the British authorities might be changing
their thinking about the appropriate size cf their dollar holdings.
In any case, a swap drawing and subsequent repayment seemed to be a
legitimate way of bridging a short-run improvement in the British
interna ional position during the first quarter. British elections
in May or June probably would result in an outflow from that country,
which would permit repayment of the drawing.
In response to a question by Mr. Deming regarding the outlook
for further Russian gold sales, Mr. Coombs reported that the Russians
had sold slightly over $500 million of gold in 1963, which was about
$300 greater than their normal annual sale. It was his understanding

1/7/64 -7
that their gold sales in coimection with extraordinary wheat purchases
might run to at least $700-$800 million. In 1964 their sales might be
$300 million greater than normal, or Ferhapa as much as $400 million
greater. He noted, incidentally, that the growth of offical gold
reserves in 1963 had been fairly sizable. The Gold Pool had acquired
and distributed to members $640 million of gold, while South Africa
had also increased its gold reserves. In 1963, the total monetary
gold stock h ad probably risen by at least $750 million, or nearly
2 per cent.
In re.ponse to other questions, Mr. Coombs said he had no
firm basis for evaluating the accuracy of recent conflicting reports
of the volume of Russian gold holdings. He thought their foreign
exchange hold:.ngs could be ascertained, however.
Thereupon, upon notion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous viote, the System
Open Market Account transactions in foreign
currencies during the period December 17,
1963 through January 6, 196k, were approved,
ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Coombs recommended renewal, on a three-month basis, of
seven reciprocal currency arrangements maturing on or before February
6, 1964. The arrangements, with their amounts and dates of most
recent renewals, were as follows: Bank of Sweden, $50 million,
October 17, 1963; Swiss National Bank, $150 million, October 18, 1963;
Bank for International Settlements, $150 million, October 18, 1963;

1./7/64 -8
Austrian National Bank, $50 million, October 24, 1963; Bank of
Japan, $150 million, October 29, 1963 (date of original agreement);
Bank of France, $100 million, November 6, 1963; and German Federal
Bank, $250 million, November 6, 1963.
Benewal of the seven swap arrangements
for a further three-month period each was
approved unanimously.
Mr. Coombs noted that the System had drawings of $20 million
on the Bank for International Settlements and $55 million on the
Swiss National Bank, and the Bank of Italy had a drawing on the
System of $50 million, all three of which were reaching their first
three-month maturity. He recommended renewal in each case for
another three months, if that should prove desirable.
Mr. Ellis inquired whether the System's desire not to continue
renewing the drawings indefinitely was understood by the Italian
authorities, and Mr. Coombs said that it was. However, he noted,
there was a problem of choosing among several alternative means of
repaymet =. l3 his opinion, the most effective and appropriate method
might be for the U. S. Treasury to redeem its outstanding lira
denominated bands.
The proposed renewal of the three
drawings for a further three-month period
each, if such appeared desirable, was
noted without objection.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market

1/7/64 -9
Account covering open market operation\s in U. S. Government securities
and bankers' acceptances for the period December 17, 1963 through
January 1, 1964, together with a supplemental report covering the
period January 2 through January 6, L964. Copies of these reports
have been placed in the files of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone commented
as follows:
As we approached operations during the past few weeks we
were prepared to encounter the problems that so frequently
beret the money and securities markets at this time of year.
As matters turned out, however, the recent period was more
like sleepy August than turbulent Decetiber, for the market
mechanism handled smoothly and with grceat efficiency the
seasonal strains and stresses that correrged upon it. This
result apparently reflects a considerable degree of advance
preparation made by banks and other market participants in
an effort to minimize the adverse impact on them of the wide
and erratic swings in market condition, that have sometimes
occurred in mid- and late December. Furthermore, corpora
ticns appear to have been unusually liquid for this time of
the year, for they were sizable buyers of bills and suppliers
of funds to the market during much of the period. For our
part, we stood at the edge of the market, so to speak,
injecting reserves at times, and absorting them at other
times, while aiming at keeping the machinery working smoothly
aga.nst the background of a steadily f-.rm tone and feel in
the market. Operating in this way, we were content to let
free reserves come out where they might--an approach that was
necessary in any case since the reserve figures at times
bounced around pretty capriciously.
As the written reports have indicated, Federal funds were
at 3-1/2 per cent throughout virtually the entire period,
while dealer lending rates generally remained in a 3-3/4 - 4
per cent range. Member bank borrowing was generally in the
range of recent months except for a rise last week as banks
prepared for the year-end statement date.
The securities market have generally been steady over
the year-end period. In the case of Treasury bills, rates

1/7/64 -10-
on three-month maturities have hugged a 3.51-3.54 per
cent range while the six-month bills ranged about 12
to 15 basis points higher. Toward the year-end, there
was a better-than-seasonal demand for Treasury bills,
which produced some rather aggressive dealer bidding in
the regular auctions that preceded Christmas and New Year's.
So far in the new year, however, there has been little
evidence of the net demand that often tends to pull rates
lower at this season. In yesterday's auction, the average
rates were about 3.53 and 3.67 per cent, or very nearly
the same as on December 16.
In the Treasury note and bond markets, the downward
price trend that persisted through most of December leveled
off just around Christmas and there wes some price recovery
in the final days of the year. hile most market observers
still feel that the major anticipated influences on the
market this year--notably a prospective tax cut, good busi
ness, and a continuing external payments problem--will tend
to produce higher rather than lower rates, there was also a
feeling that the market had discounted these prospects to
some appreciable extent. Still, the Lnderlying market
atmosphere remains a bit cautious as dealers and investors
wait to see what balance may emerge bftween private forces
of credit demand and supply, and what the Treasury may be
offering in the period ahead.
The corporate and municipal bone' markets have enjoyed
a respite from major new issues during the past few weeks,
with prices holding about steady. Starting today, however,
somle larger new issues will reach those markets and give a
more realistic test to current rates. Particular attention
will focus on the $130 million New Yorc Telephone issue,
scheduled for competitive biddin,~ today. This is a Triple-A
rated issue and yesterday's market talk suggested a reoffer
ing rate around 4.50-4.55 per cent.
A suecial comment is in order regarding the bankers'
acceptance market, which has experienced a larger-than-usual
increase in supplies this year-end season. Moreover, since
the period of seasonal rise in supplies started with in
ventories already at a relatively high level, total dealer
holdings of acceptances have risen to new records in recent
days. Nevertheless, there has been no apparent concern on
the part of most of the acceptance dealers. One dealer
limited his participation in the inventory rise by increasing
his rates just prior to the last meeting of the Committee,
but the others did not follow and by January 2 this dealer

1/7/64 -11-
returned to the rate level ciuoted by the other dealers
in order to continue effective participation in the
mar ke t.
To assist the acceptance market through this period
of seasonal pressure the System gradually increased its
outright holdings of acceptances to a peak of $71 million.
System holdings of acceptances under repurchase agreements
briefly reached a peak of about $95 million but had re
ceded to $79 million by the end of the period.
Treasury financing plans recently have been in a
state of flux. Unitl a few days ago it was anticipated
that the Treasury would follow up this week's auction of
$2-1/2 billion June tax bills with a ca.sh offering of
$3/4 to $1 billion in a note or short 3ond. Now it appears
that the Treasury's cash position may e strong enough
without this additional borrowing, but the Treasury is
instead giving serious consideration to making an advance
refunding offering, possibly with an announcement tomorrow
and the books open next week. WE understand that no final
decision has yet been made on this financing. The market,
incidentally, has no hint of this possibility. The Treasury
will meet with its advisory commjttees near the end of this
month and will announce on January 30 the terms for refund
ing the certificate and bond thar matu-e on February 15, of
which a little over $4 billion aie held by the public.
The staff projections indicate a very substantial bulge
in reserves from market factors in the next few weeks and
accordingly I would recommend an increase in leeway for
change in System Account holdings between Committee meetings
to $1.5 billion.
After eliciting information onL currant competitive rate relations
in investment markets between bankers' acceptances and negotiable time
certificates of deposit, Mr. Mills asked why the acceptance dealers
allowed themselves to be saddled with large inventories, rather than
reducing them by adjusting their rates to meet competition. Mr. Stone
replied that most acceptances were bought by banks as investments.
There had continued to be some small buying recently, and the dealers

117/64 -12
seemed confident that they would work their inventories down unless
some sharp upvard movement occurred in other market interest rates.
He agreed witf, Mr. Mills' suggestion that the dealers might be worrLed
about retaliation by their banker clientele to rate increases, but
added that such increases probably would be made anyway if inventories
were not reduced in the next week or two.
Mr. Mitchell asked whether in Mr. Stone's judgment Treasury
bill rates would have been as stable as they had been recently if the
Desk had formulated its objectives in terms of reserves rather than
interest rates. It seemed to him that the advance preparation for
seasonal needs by banks and corporaticns, to which Mr. Stone had
attributed the recent smooth performance of the market, had been
possible becatse market participants believed short-term rates were
pegged, and it. might not have occurred if tie Desk had been following
a reserve objective not known to the narket,
Mr. Stone said that the New York morey market banks had worked
their he vy basic reserve deficiencies down close to zero as the mid
December tax and dividend date approached in order to have room to
take on additional loans. In his judgment, such actions by banks would
have made the market machinery work smoothly whether or not the Desk
had operated with a reserve objective.
In reply to Mr.. Mitchell's question of whether banks had not
reduced their reserve deficiencies in December at the cost of further
monetary expansion, Mr. Stone said he doubted that there was any

1/7/64 -13
evidence to the effect that creditworthy borrowers who wanted loans
in December could not get them. Lf the DIerk had attempted to use a
free reserve target, Mr. Stone continued, there would have been wide
swings in market conditions because of shifts in the distribution of
the given volume of reserves and changes ii the intensity of reserve
utilization. On balance, market conditions would have been firmer
if the level of free reserves had been hel'. stable.
Mr. Mitchell commented that stabil:.ty in market conditions of
the recent sort might deprive the Desk of useful signals. Mr. Stone
replied that enough changes occurred to peimit judging the market
pretty well. For example, he said, figure:, on bank borrowings had
fluctuated considerably in Decenber, indicating changes in the degree
to which reserve needs were not being met by the existing supply of
reserves.
In reply to a question by Mr. Hickman, Mr. Stone said that if
the Account bad held free reserves at about $100 million recently the
90-day rill rate probably would have been several basis points higher
than it was--perhaps around 3.60 per cent.
In response to questions about prospective Treasury financing
operations, Mr. Stone observed that Federal tax receipts currently
were considerably above the estimates of only a few weeks ago. While
the Treasury's cash position might run rather low in April, it was
possible that additional cash borrowings would not be necessary during
the first half of the year except for $1 billion to be raised each

1/7/64 -L4
month in the one-year bill cycle. If the Txeasury decided to carry
out the January advance refunding, settlement would come shortly
before announcement of the refunding of February 15 maturities.
After the February refunding the way probably would be clear for
monetary policy action until the announcement of the May refunding
around the end of April. Whether a shift in policy about mid-February
would be consistent with the tradition of even keel during periods of
Tieasury financings would depend partly on the condition of the market
then. If the February refunding involved short-term issues only, as
seemed probable, there was a reasonable prospect that the new issues
would be rapidly distributed and that there would be no serious
constraints on policy actions after about mid-February.
Thereupon, upon notion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the open market transactionE in
Government securities and bankers'
acceptances during the period
December 17, 1963 thrcugh January 6,
1964 were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and financial
reports, supplementing the written reports that had been distributed
prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed in the files of
the Committee.
Mr. Brill commented on economic conditions as follows:
I assume you are all as surfeited as I am with reviewis
of 1963 and prcgnostications for 1964. I had hoped to eschew
this seasonaJ occupational hazard and focus instead on the
very current economic situation. Unfortunately, at this time

1/7/64 -15-
of month current data are sparse. We have, as yet, only
fragmentary indications as to the course of industrial
production in December. These bits ane pieces suggest
that the pace of industrial activity held at about the
November level or perhaps edged a bit higher; there is
no eviderce of a renewed upsurge in activity. Some
industrial commodity prices crept up further last month,
particularly metals, but the over-all wholesale price
average remaired unchanged at about the levels that have
been prevailing over the past six years.
More bullish information comes frcm the consumer
sector. The resurgence in retail sales after the slight
November dip indicates that the December total set a new
high, and by a substantial margin. Sales gains were
recorded in all categories of durable goods and in most
categories of nondurables. Sales of new autos were in
record volume for the month, estimated at a rate of over
8 million domestically produced cars.
Evioence that consumers are willirg to spend
vigorously is most encouraging, indeed vital to the
maintenance of optimism, for we are not now getting much
thrust f-om most other sectors of the economy. Business
men, by and large, are continuing to behave cautiously.
There was some perking up in inventory accumulation at
the manufacturing level in both October and November,
concentrated largely in nondurable goocs industries, but
stock/sales ratios at both the durable and nondurable
levels remained low and manufacturers have reported plans
to reduce the rate of inventory additions in the first
quarter of this year. As has been repcrted earlier,
business plans for fixed capital spending were for a
moderate increase in the fourth quarter of 1963, a leveling
off in the current quarter, and another moderate increase
in the spring quarter. While corporations are girding
themselves with funds--capital market financing in
December was large and the corporate calendar for this
month continues relatively heavy--the business sector's
current contribution to expansion remains modest.
State and local spending has continued to rise at a
rapid rate, with another large increase in their payrolls
and outlays for road construction recorded in the fourth
quarter. Federal Government spending, however, has been
lagging, Federal purchases of goods and services in the
fourth quarter are estimated as not much higher than in
the second or third quarters, even though the fourth

1/7/64 -16-
quarter figure includes the $1 billion increase in military
pay. It is worth emphasizing how much the GNP advance in
1963 has depended on the private econo-my. Since early 1963,
Federal spending for goods and services has increased by
only a little more than $1 billion, or about 5 per cent of
the increase in total GN . In contrast, over the first two
years of the cyclical expansion--from the first quarter of
1961 through the first quarter of 1963--Federal spending
rose by $10 billion and accounted for almost 15 per cent of
the increase in GNP. It is a t.estimonial to the underlying
strength of private demands for goods and services that the
economy could maintain a 4 per cent rate of expansion in
real GNP last year with so little help from Federal spending
and with only a shopworn promise of future tax relief.
This strength in private denands has depended in no
small measure on the availabilit7 of credit. Consumers, for
example, financed the record volume of auto and other durables
purchases in part through an increase in their instalment
indebted-ess of about $5-1/2 billion last year, equal to
the previous record expansion in 1959. They financed a rising
volume of home purchases--and probably other types of outlays-
through a record increase in home mortgage debt, tentatively
estimated at about $15 billion or 10 per cent more than in
1962. The other strongly expansive sector last year--State
and loca' governments--also tapped the capital markets in
record anount; issues for new capital floated by these
governments in 1963 totaled $9 billion, 6 per-cent more than
in the previous year.
Of course, we've had to take the bad with the good,
namiely, a record volume of heavily debt-financed apartment
house and office construction, not all of which may ultimately
prove to have been sound business ventures. This is always
a 1a-zard in a market economy subject in the credit area only
to general controls; one can hope that credit-induced dis
tortions are not widespread and that likely readjustments in
this area will be orderly and noncumulative. For the economy
as a whole, however, until fiscal policy takes over more of
the task of sustaining expansion, it would appear that monetary
policy remains saddled with the burden--and the risks.
Mr. Koch made the following statement with regard to the financial
situation;

1/7/64 -17-
The fairly steady position of the money and capital
markets that came about early in November has continued
in general to date. This development was initiated by
market recognition of the fact that the Treasury felt that
for international reasons, and for the time being at least,
short-term interest rates could be too high as well as too
low. It has continued because these earlier psychological
and expectational influences have been backed up by some
what less expansionary economic and financial developments.
In December, for example, the economic news becoming
available was not quite up to the bullish business optimism
that continues widespread. Secondly, there was a less
intense demand for financing. In the capital markets, it
was the municipal calendar that was light and, in the case
of bank credit, loan demand was less strong. In the money
market, the December 10 dividend date and the December 15
tax date both came and went without the usual signs of
seasonal stress, and at the month end, too, the churning
and pressure that usually characterize the money market was
noticeably absent.
Bank credit in December rose less than in November,
but the rise was about in line with the average increase
earlier in the fall. Excluding the erratic security credit,
total loan growth in December was also in line with that in
earlier months, as was that in business loans. The December
rise in Business loans included heavy borrowing around the
December 15 tax date, Larger temporary borrowing by public
utilities prior to capital marke: financing, and bank
acquisitions of acceptances. A :year-end bulge in business
loans reElected a large sale of instalient receivables to
the banks by General Electric as well as temporary borrowing
by oil and other natural resource industries for tax purposes.
Another important aspect of recent credit developments
has been the fact that banks have again been increasing
their U. S. Government security portfolios and have apparently
again become more interested in acquiring municipal securities.
Banks seam to have been under a little less reserve pressure
recently than they were prior to November. This may have been
due to the fact that reserves were a bit more readily avail
able than earlier, or that loan demands have been more intense,
or possibly banks are becoming a bit more complacent about the
somewhat larger borrowings from the Reserve Banks of recent
months.
We have little additional information available on the
recent course of the money supply and other forms of liquidity.

1/7/64 -L8-
All that can he said is that: the estimates given at the
last meeting of the Committee are now firmer. The narrowly
defined roney supply through December has changed little
since early November, following ts rapid rise earlier.
The course of the money supply has been considerably affected
by that of Treasury deposits, which haze increased recently.
Time and savings deposit growth slackened markedly in
December from the sharp November pace, excluding the large
year-end rise in certificates of deposit due General Electric
as payment for their instalment receivables.
An interesting aspect of the recent money supply growth
has been the relatively sharper rise in the currency component
than in the demand deposit component. Currency outside banks
rose almost 7 per cent last year, as compared with a little
less than 3-1/2 per cent in the case of demand deposits.
This fact, coupled with the sharper growth in the total money
supply, suggests rising transactLons requirements for money.
Demand deposit turnover has also tended to level off,
fluctuating recently around the higher level attained about
mid-year. In other words, the rate of use of existing money
stocks may be reaching upper resistance points in certain
sectors of the economy.
Turning to bank reserves, free reserves averaged about
$175 million last month, as compared with around $75 million
earlier. This rise in free reserves was due entirely to
higher excess reserves, for member bank borrowings continued
to average a little over $300 million. Nevertheless, money
market conditions remained about the same, that is, slightly
less taut than prior to November.
As to the future, we are now entering the period when
we should be able to separate out more satisfactorily the
effects of seasonal as contrasted with cyclical influences
on xpan:;ion of bank credit, money, and reserves. I feel
that the cyclical forces will continue strong and that they,
coupled with the expected busy January Treasury financing
schedule, will offset, in part at least, the usual seasonal
forces that tend toward credit and deposit contraction and
lower interest rates. In the first place, most money and
capital market participants expect higher interest rates
sometime soon and therefore any tendency toward lower rates
is resisted. Also, bank lending officers now look for less
seasonal loan liquidation than usual. Moreover, both the
corporate and new municipal financing calendars for January
look large. Finally, even mortgage rates are showing a
little more firmness.

1/7/64 -L9-
Developments in the first few days of seasonal
eas-ing thkit have already occurred are consistent with
thia interpretation. Bill rates nave declined little
despite substantial corporate demand. The Treasury has
announced that it might accomplish its mid-month cash
financing through a note or bond issue rather than a bill
strip, or that its better than expected current cash
position might enable it to skip this financing entirely.
In the latter case, however, the financing calendar could
still not be clear, for the Treasury might decide to move
up its expected advance refunding from March to January.
Since the Treasury is anxious to achieve some debt
lengthening, January is probably a more appropriate time
to accomplish it than later, when the Treasury might have
to compete with larger credit demands Irom a more sharply
expanding economy. It should be possible for the Treasury
to take such action now without putting undue downward
pressure on short-term interest rates. However, given the
preaailirg interest rate outlook, it might result in some
upward pressure on longer term yields. In event of an early
advance refunding, an "even keel" monetary policy obviously
would be called for, but the question that might be raised
for the Committee would be whether it should try to cushion
any upward pressure on longer term rates that might thereby
result.
Mr. Furth gave the following report on the balance of payments:
The tentative weekly figures for December indicate a
surplus for the month in the neighborhood of $450 million.
If these figures could be taken at face value, the payments
deficit for the fourth quarter wculd be at a seasonally
adj sted annual rate of about $1 billion, little more than
half of the third-quarter rate ard less than one-fourth of
the rate of the first two quarters. Arid the deficit for the
entire ycar 1963 would be less than $3 billion, the lowest
deficit in six years.
A large part of the December surplus may reflect with
drawals by U. S. corporations of funds deposited abroad,
either for year-end window-dressing, or for good owing to
the recent troubles in the Euro-dollar market. If the former
interpretation were to prove correct, the economically
meaningful surplus for December might have been as much as
$300 million smaller. In that case, the deficit for the
fourth quarter would have been somewhat larger than that for

1/7/64 -20
the third quarter, and the deficit for the year 1963 in
the neighborhood of $3-1/4 billion, only 10 per cent
smaller than the deficit for 1962.
Bu in any case, the second half of the year seems
to have shown such a decisive improvement over the first
half that the deficit for the year as a whole, which until
recently had looked much larger than for 1962, actually
turned out to have been considerably smaller. Unfortunately,
the public-relations impact of that development has been
impaired by the statistical adjustments in the official
presentation for 1962, which--despite the warnings of the
Board's staff--made it appear that the deficit in that year
had been only $2.2 billion instead of the economically
meaning.=ul figure of $3.6 billion. Consequently, some
commentators have already made the mistake of stating that
the 1963 results would show a deterioration rather than an
improvement over 1962.
Trede figures through November suggest that a good
part of the recent improvement was due to an encouraging
export performance. This year, the wheat exports to the
Soviets appear to be materializing, and economic conditions
in most foreign countries are expected to remain propitious.
Hence, we may expect a continuation and perhaps a further
improvenent of that trend during the current quarter.
In contrast to the trade accounts, the capital account
proved disappointing in the fourth quarter, apart from the
puzzling events of the last week of December. In the two
months Cctober and November, short-term bank claims on
foreigners rose by $315 million, a rate close to the second
quarter record. Increased short--term bank lending to
comnercial banks in the United Kingdon, Germany, and Japan
suggest: that at least part of the loan demand that used to
be satisfied in the Euro-dollar market has now, after the
apparent shrinkage of that market, been redirected toward
U. S. sources of supply. This cevelopment seems to confirm
the view that a decline in the Euro-dollar market, while
obviously welcome to the large New Yo-k banks, does not
necessarily help to improve the U. S. payments balance.
Whetever the final figure for the U. S. payments deficit
for 1963 may turn out to be, its financing was less painful
than had been anticipated. In 1963, U. S. gold reserves
declined $460 million, about one-half as much as in 1962.
Other nondollar financing (including prepayments of foreign
government debts; the issue of bonds denominated in foreign
currency; the net increase in U. S. official short positions

1/7/64 -21-
in foreign exchange; and the decline in the U. S. position
in the IMF) accounted for only $750 million, less than one
third of the 1962 figure. And at least $1.7 billion, or
about three-fifths of the entire deficit, was financed by
an increase in foreign holdings of uncovered dollars--as
compared to a trifling $400 million, or one-ninth of the
deficit, in the previous year.
This welcome development may be attributed to three
main reasons. First, the payments position of some
traditional dollar holders--especially in Latin America-
greatly improved. Second, the Euro-dollar market absorbed
on balance dollar funds that otherwise might have been
converted into gold. And third, there seemed to have been
a lessening of market uncertainty about the dollar in the
European private financial community.
The new market attitude toward the dollar so far has
had little effect on the monetary authorities of some of
our European allies, whose policies still show little
understanding of their share in the responsibility for
maintaining a working international payments system. The
latest incident is the increase in the discount rate of
the Netherlands Bank. Its distinguished President has
assured us by cable that the action will not lead to a
flow of funds from the United States to the Netherlands.
He may well be right. But he would have been more
cooperative if, instead of raising the Netherlands
interest-rate level, he had abolished the severe limitations
on foreign access to the Netherlands money and capital market.
Such an action would also have restricted domestic availability
of liquid funds, and would have helped rather than hampered
the reduction in the country's payments surplus--twin sources
of inflationary pressures in the Netherlands. But international
cooperation is apparently easier to preach than to practice,
and good advice easier to give than to take.
Chairman Martin then called for the usual go-around of comments
and views on economic conditions and monetary policy beginning with
Mr. Hayes, who commented as follows:
The business situation contines to be good, with
incomplete data for December suggesting further advances in
steel, a continued high level of auto production, and a
sizable gain in retail sales. On the other hand, additional

1/7/64 -22
statistics now available for November are somewhat disappointing;
and a relatively sober appraisal of first-quarter figures for
1964 may be warranted by such factors as the leveling tendency
of Federil expenditures and housing outlays, and the indications
that business fixed investment and auto sales may be no higher
in the first quarter than in the quarter just ended. To my
mind, hovever, these are merely qualifications in a generally
favorable outlook. The expectation is still that economic
activity will advance further in 1964, particularly in view
of the ircreased likelihood of early action on tax legislation
and the rather buoyant state of business sentiment. And we
should not lose sight of the fact that in 1963 we have achieved
all-time peaks in most over-all measures of the economy.
As :or the balance of payments, eery preliminary figures
indicate that a very sizable surplus in December may result
in a somewhat less adverse fourth-quarter balance of payments
figure than seemed likely a month or two ago. Part of the
December surplus is attributable to regular year-end
amortization and interest payments on outstanding postwar
loans and very substantial payments by Germany for military
supplies. But it also appears that our request to the
New York banks to refrain from foreign window-dressing
operatiols met with a favorable response, and, in addition,
there may have been a sizable repatriation of United States
funds from abroad, particularly from Canada. We shall have
to wait and see how much of the appareitly good December
figure represents a shift in seasonal "jatterns of money
floas rather than a more fundamental inprovement.
In any event, we should not allow ourselves to be
lulled into a sense of false security )y the results of a
single month. Sustained improverient i our balance of
paynents remains imperative. Meantime bank loans to
foreigners are rising as the large U. S. banks are still
aggressively seeking loan outlets abroad.
It is well to bear in mind also the growing signs of
impatience on the part of foreigr cent-al banks with our
failure so far to make more significani progress towards
solving our payments problem. They have become increasingly
reluctant to take in additional dollars; the French in
particular have been expressing their feelings in no un
certain terms at the Group of Ten meetings. Also, the
Federal Reserve has outstanding gross swap drawings of some
$328 million and the Treasury has $120 million in forward

1/7/64 -23-
conmitmer.ts--which obligations should be liquidated soon.
Tighter rmonetary policy in several European countries,
including central bank discount rate increases, must be
expected--the latest Dutch discount rate action. being a
case in point.
The growth of bank credit slowed down in the first
four weeks of December, mainly because of weakness in
security loans attributable to low levels of dealer
inventories and generally cautious feelings about future
rate movements. Most other loan compcnents behaved about
as they have over comparable periods in the preceding two years.
By mid-December money supply proper stowed a twelve-months gain
of 3.7 psr cent, and, together with time deposits, of 8.2 per
cent, as compared with 7.5 per cent a year earlier. As
several members of the Committee suggested at the last
meeting, the question may well be railed whether continued
expansion of credit and liquidity at recent rates can be
consider'ed sustainable or desirable, from a purely domestic
standpoint. As George Ellis put it three weeks ago, the
burden of proof must shift at some point to those who want to
continue inflating the money supply at recent rates--and I
would as3ume that George had in mind cver-all liquidity as
well as the money supply proper. Certainly there is no
jus;tification for keeping it up in orcer to cope with an
unemployment problem which is in large part structural and
su sceptible to cure only by a concerted attack on a variety
of front:,, mostly nonmonetary.
Although both international and comestic considerations
point to the desirability of a more "neutral" monetary policy
than the one currently in force, we aie unfortunately faced
with the prospect of a series of Treasury financing operation:s
wh:.ch would seem to preclude any appreciable policy change at
this time. I should think we might well pursue the same
general policy as in the past three weeks, and under the
sane directive. This would mean aimiig at a firm money
market with the Federal funds rate at the 3-1/2 per cent
ceiling and the Treasury bill rate fltctuating around that
level and more often above it than below. It would also seem
appropriate to counteract any significant tendency toward the
development of an easier tone due to seasonal factors.
Mr. Ellis said that throughout the year 1963 he seemed to have
been reporting substantially the same description of the New England

1/7/64 -24
economy: rising levels of income and spending, and stable or falling
manufacturing output. This description was still apt. District
manufacturing output lost more ground in November than it had gained
in October, and manufacturing employment de-lined more than seasonally
in November. In contrast, consumer spending continued strong. In
downtown Boston, Christmas sales at department stores showed a gain
of 8-1/2 to 11 per cent relative to last year.
The principal December financial development in the District
was a contra-seasonal rise in commercial ani industrial loans of about
2 per cent. Most loan categories other than soft goods showed gains.
A stronger thzn seasonal rise apparently occurred in the nation as a
whole.
Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Ellis said that the French
discount rate increase of 6 weeks ago and yesterday's increase by the
Dutch seemed to destroy whatever validity the proposition ever had
that interest rate increases should be avoided in meeting domestic
economic objectives. His appraisal of the national economy indicat:d
considerably more strength than did the staff reports this morning.
He felt that there had been no knots in the money market in December
because of the volume of reserves supplied by the System. An alternative
description of developments, he said, was that the System had supplied
sufficient reserves to enable banks to increase their lending abroad.

1/7/64 -25
The paramount question in his mind, Mr. Ellis continued, was
whether the Committee should strive to facilitate the Treasury's
advance refuncing at present rate Levels when there existed substantial
evidence that the System might have to take actions that would influence
rates upward about as soon as possible after the February refunding.
Quite possibly, in view of the rate changes abroad and the strength
of the domestic economy, there might be some willingness on the part
of the Treasury to see the air cleared as to impending rate movements
in advance of their refunding. This course might also be considered
more equitable by dealers and investors.
If the Treasury should agree, Mr. Ellis said, he would urge
prompt action to raise the dLscount rate. If the Treasury decided
not to make an advance refunding in Ja.nuary, it was likely that there
would be an advance refunding in March. The choice might then be
between acting now or waiting until April.
If the Treasury was unwilling to adopt the course he had
mentioned, Mr. Ellis said, the Committee presumably should continue
to operate within the framework of present policy; but there was room
for improvement even within this framework. Free reserves should be
allowed to fluctuate nearer zero. The Desk management should move
rapidly to absorb the return flow of currency. Also, the Desk could
resolve uncertainties on the side of less ease since banks would be
experiencing a return flow of currency. He would take 3-1/2 per cent

117/64 -26
as the 90-day bill rate target, and he would he surprised and delighted
if the Desk were able to hold the bill rate at this level in the face
of downward seasonal pressures. In his judIgment recent rates of
increase in reserves were excessive in lighi: of the Last line of the
Committee's directive, which called fr "ac~iommodating moderate
expansion in aggregate bank reserves.."
Mr. Swan reported that the Twelfth District entered 1964
having recorded a faster rate of growth in the past year than the
nation both in employment and in the labor force, and also in unemploy
ment. While the course of District employment had been quite encouraging,
especially sirnce midyear, the major uncertainty at the moment appeared
to be the potential impact of any leveling off or cut-back in space and
defense-related industries. In all probability this impact would be
greater than in the country as a whole. The relatively favorable
employment experience in the District presumnably had been accompanied
by correspondingly favorable behavior of pecsonal income. Paradoxically,
the gain in retail sales, both recently and throughout the year,
apparently had not equaled that for the nation.
In the financial sector, Mr. Swan said, weekly reporting banks
in the District in December reported increases in credit extensions but
at a lesser rate than nationally. In the last week of the year District
banks were fairly heavy buyers of Federal funds and probably would be
so again this week. Borrowings from the Federal Reserve Bank were more

1/7164 -27
than dotble their 1962 Level, in contrast to the decline in member
bank borrowings for the entire nation.
Mr. Swan said that in view of the Treasury financing program
the Committee obviously should not change policy at the present moment.
However, the treasury financing apart, Mr. Swan saw nothing in the
domestic picture or the international situation that called for
immediate actf'on. It seemed to him that the Committee still should
see whether the so-called winter slack was going to turn cut to be
greater or lets than usual. He was sympathetic with Mr. Koch.'s
discussion of the outlook hut did not think that this was a time to
move, even withinin the area that might he allowed by the present
directive. He preferred to continue the Committee's present policy.
He thought it quite reasonable to offset seasonal declines in market
rates, but if downward pressures turned out to be somewhat greater
than seasonal he thought they should be permitted to affect rates.
He would not change the directive or the discount rate at this time.
Mr. Dr:ming said that in December credit at District banks
expanded about as much as in December 1962, and considerably more than
usual for that period. However, Loan Lncreases were about normal and
significantly smaller than Last year, except for business loans which
showed above normal strength. Investment gains were appreciably larger
than in December 1962 and in the average December. Total deposits were
up quite strongly in December with growth welL above normal and quite a

1/7/64 -28-
lot larger than in the same period last yeac. The gains came, however,
in bank deposits and government deposits; growth in both other demand
and time deposits was weaker than usual. The deposit gains put
District banks on the selling side of the Federal funds market for
the first time: in some weeks.
As a result of the above-normal deplsit gains and the smaller
than usual loan increases, Loan-deposit ratios for both city and country
banks farm lerding indicated continued strong farm Loan demand, partly
to finance holding operations into the 1964 marketing period. A nmber
of country bankers reported an increasing proportion of farm borrowers
as carrying maximum debts relative to probable earnings.
Mr. DE.ming said that one new item of interest might be noted
with respect to the nonfinancial side of the District economy. The
Minneapolis Bank's most recent opinion aurvey, taken at year end,
indicated a sharp decline in optimism about the near-term outlook.
This might be >artly the reflection of the coldest December since 1927,
but the change in sentiment seemed to be more than seasonal.
Hr. Dening said he would go along with those who felt the
Committee should not change policy during tfe next few weeks. He
thought there would be enough Treasury financing activity in this
period to warrant mentioning such financing in the directive.
Mr. Scanlon reported that business trends in the Seventh
District continued to be favorable. Retail trade rebounded sharply

1/7/64 -29
in December from the depressed level of late November, while employment
and production remained at high levels.
Christmas sales at District department stares in 1963 were
well ahead of the record 1962 level. Growth in personal savings at
commercial barks and savings associations lagged the 1962 period in
November, and probably in December as well, reflecting strong retail
trade.
Hr. Scanlon said that employment had been at least stable in
the region in recent months. Unemployment compensation claims in the
District in Norember and December remained well below the level of
recent years and compared favorably with the national picture.
Classifizatiors were changed in November for two District labor marKet
ar:eas. Because of increased hiring by farm equipment manufacturers,
the Quad citie:; area was estimated to have "low unemployment" (less than
3 per cent) along with six other District centers. South Bend,however,
was movec into the "substantial unemployment" (more than 6 per cent;
group as a result of the Studebaker cutback. No other District centers
were in this class.
Mr. Scanlon reported a widely held view in the Midwest that a
larger increase in plant and equipment spending was in prospect than the
4 per cent rise indicated by the McGraw-Hill survey in November. The
motor vehicle and railroad industries in particular had announced in
creased expenditure plans in recent weeks.

1/7/64 -30
Farm income in the Seventh DLstict was reduced somewhat in 1963
as larger receipts from crops failed to offset lower income from meat
animals. However, the smaller number of pigs farrowed since last summer,
foreshadowing higher hog prices, together with lower prices paid for
feeder cattle in recent months indicated that incomes of District live
stock farmers would improve in 1964.
As usual, Mr. Scanlon said, December banking developments were
difficult to :nterpret because of the demand for funds to meet corporate
tax and dividend payments and because of year-end adjustments. District
banks had continued to report strong business loan expansion, particularly
in the case of loans to metals manufacturing firms. Loans at smaller
banks tiat did not report industry breakdowns also rose more than usual.
During the second half of 1963 business loans rose 8 per cent, compared
rith 7 per cent during the same period of 1962. Changes in other types
of loans approximated the usual December pattern. Basic reserve positons
of the large banks in Chicago and Detroit remained fairly comfortable,
although these banks were unable to cover t'ieir needs in the Federal
funds market.
With business prospects continuing :avorable, Mr. Scanlon
continued, it appeared that the demand for credit would rise further
and possibly at an accelerated pace. However, the rapid rise of the
money supply (narrowly defined) during the autumn appeared to have halted,
at least temporarily, in December. In both 1961 and 1962 the rise

1/7/64 -31
continued through December before leveling off. Because of the difficulty
of interpretir.g these data and the proposed Treasury financing, Mr. Scanlon
favored continuation of the monetary policy of recent weeks. He would
not change the discount rate. He agreed with Mr. Deming that the Committee
might refer to the Treasury financing in the directive.
Mr. Clay said that an examination of the data for the weekly
reporting banks in the Tenth District and in the United States through
December 25 showed a similarity in performance during the past yeav in
several respects. Loans and investments conbined advanced less than in
1962, while loans increased more. Both business loans and consumer
loans showed larger increases than a year earlier. Total time deposits
increased somewhat less than in 1962, although the second half increase
was larger thr'n the year before.
However, Mr. Clay said, there also were some significant ccntrasts
in the performance patterns. This was particularly reflected in a greater
acceleration in the liquidation of U. S. GoJernment securities in the
District than in the United States. It was reflected further in a
greater moderation in the acquisition of other-securities in the District.
The net effect in the District was a decline in total investments, while
in the nation it was a slowdown in the rate of growth. Another contrast
was found in real estate loans. For weekly reporting banks in the country
as a whole, such loans expanded more than a year earlier, whereas in the
Tenth District the increase was distinctly smaller.

1/7/64 -32
The factors that needed to be weighed on the national scene did
not indicate any basic change in the economy, Mr. Clay said. The general.
pattern of economic developments, including the variations in pace of
activity and economic sectors, was essentially in line with the shape
of events over past months. At this juncture, it appeared to Mr. Clay
to be in order to await further developments and to leave monetary
policy unchanged. Whether seasonal forces would put significant down
ward pressure on short-term interest rates remained to be seen. Re felt
that sore downward movement in rates should be accepted rather than redlcing
reserve avail<bility on a seasonally adjusted basis. If the Treastry
announced an advance refunding, there would be further reason for
maintaining t'ie same monetary policy posture that the Committee had
been pursuing. Mr. Clay would keep the Reserve Bank discount rate
unchanged. HE thought the directive was suitable in its present form
except for a possible reference to Treasury financing.
Mr. Wayne reported that the business picture in the Fifth
District was nixed with some evidence that the rate of increase may
have slowed in recent weeks. In NoverTber, construction remained strong,
factory man-hcurs were up moderately, and nonfarm employment rose slightly.
In December, retail trade apparently was quite good, in line with the
national performance. On the other hand, bank debits declined in
November and, more recently, insured unemployment had risen more than
seasonally, while loan demand had weakened. Business sentiment, as

1/7/64 -33
measured by the latest survey of the Federal_ Reserve Bank, also was
mixed, with scmewhat less optimism than was shown in recent surveys.
With respect to national conditions, Mr. Wayne said that the
performa-ice of the economy in the closing weeks of 1963 demonstrated
continuing baltic srength at a high level. While data for December
were quite incomplete, it now appeared that weakness in some indicators
in November might well have been due to temporary or special circumstances.
As the new year opened, Mr. Wayne continued, no major sector of
the economy afforded any obvious cause for serious concern and several
sectors seemed to be in strong positions. Manufacturing and trade
inventories remained at a very low level in relation to sales as they
had beer for :he past year. The outlook for business investment was
bolstered by a very large backlog of capital appropriations, record
corporate earnings and cash flows, and a slowly but steadily rising rate
of plant utilization. The chances seemed to be good that both corporate
and consumer incomes would benefit substantially from Federal tax reduc
tion before m.ny months. Perhaps the prospects for exports were somewhat
improved, alsc, Mr. Wayne said, espec:ally for agricultural commodities.
The outlook was more uncertain in the large sector of construction,
especially residential construction, where mortgage indebtedness had
been rising very rapidly for the past two years and had doubled in the
past eight years. Consumer credit also had had two record growth years
and was now at a high level in relation to disposable income. This

117164 -34
would suggest that consumers were relatively well stocked with durable
consumer goods; and that their debt load might be growing a bit burden
some. In general, the outlook appeared moderately favorable, but the
steadily risirg level of debt on the consumer was a factor that might
temper the prospects for the future.
In the policy field, Mr. Wayne said, two aspects of recent
market behavior struck him as significant. The first was the relative
stability of the money market and the absence of tightness or sloppiness
during the intense activity in December. Tne second was the moderate
level of member bank borrowings considering the season, and the fairly
generous availability of reserves whether the measure was total,
nonborrcwed, :-equired, available, e)cess, or free reserves. In two
recent weeks free reserves were higher than at any time since July,
and were at levels which he expected r.one of the Committee had
envisioned three weeks ago. The stability of short-term rates in tLhe
face of such a wide swing in free rese.rves were striking but perhaps not
especially significant, Mr. Wayne said. He was not greatly concerned
that reserves were so freely available in December. They contributed to
the stability of the market, which was a desirable result, and apparently
had not yet caused any damage, although the job of mopping up excess
reserves in the weeks ahead had been made somewhat more difficult.
For the period just ahead, however, Mr. Wayne felt there should
be a reduction in the availability of reserves. For some time bank

1/7/64 -35
credit, the money supply, and time and savirgs deposits had been
showing rising growth rates without corresponding increases in the
industrial and commercial sectors of the economy. A continuation of
the high level of reserve availability probably would encourage a still
more rapid increase in bank credit and the money supply which he did
not think the economy needed at this time.
ir. Wayne said he was not suggestinl a policy of restraint
but merely a slightly slower rate of growth in reserves. He would
not like to sea any significant increase in short-term rates, but he
believed that reserve availability could be reduced appreciably in the
next few weeks without causing rates to rise, just as the opposite had
occurred in recent weeks. He would not change the directive at this
time unless sorae reference to Treasury finarcing seemed appropriate and
he would not favor a change in the discount rate at present.
Mr. Mills said that his statement wculd attempt to reduce to
more concrete proportions Mr. Mitchell's earlier observations on the
System's monetary and credit policy. He then made the following ste emen::
Since the Committee's last meeting, the background setting
for monetary and credit policy has largely met the criteria
for actions that I have submitted at recent meetings. The
margin of free reserves available to the commercial banking
system has risen, although supported by a higher level of
Federal Reserve Bank discounts, and a seasonal expansion
of credit has been accommodated without strain. Short-term
interest rates, however, have fluctuated narrowly around the
discount rate of the Federal Reserve Banks and have not been
responsive to the increase in the supply of reserves. The
contradictory divergence in the movement of reserves and in

1/7/64 -36-
the movement of interest rates indicates that a protracted
period during which the U. S. Government securities market
has been fettered by artificiaL controls has rendered market
operators insensitive to the kinds of reserve developments to
which they would have promptly reacted interestwise under free
market conditions. This is an unhappy situation, and it is
hoped tha,: the Committee will take the new year as a corrective
oppcrtunity for reLaxing the artificial controls presently
administered over the U. S. Government securities market and
for encouraging short-term interest rates to develop naturally
in consonance with a supply of reserve, aimed at providing
appropriate credit availabiLity to the commercial banking system.
Such a policy would mark a return to free market principles
and to reliance on unobstructed interest rate movements to
guitle decision-making, both on the par: of operators in the
financial markets and of Federal Reserve System policy-makers.
It would ne in Line with an objective of fostering stable
economic .,rowth and would be the opposite of what has been the
Comnittee's unimaginative and torpid pclicy directive of "no
change." Adoption of the kind of policy envisaged would have
the Manager of the System Open Market Account pay less atten
tion to a narrow "tone and feel" of the market and more
attentior to the magnitudes in the sup-,ly of reserves and
interest :ate responses thereto than hs been the case in his
following the Committee's directives this many a past moon.
It. Robertson commented as follows:
The Treasury financing schedule, of course, precludes
any significant change in monetary policy at this meeting,
and probably at the next meeting as well. It seems to me
that we ought to use this breathing spell to take a somewhat
longer range view of policy than is ordinarily our practice.
Over the last three years we have made varying degrees
of progress toward the ultimate economic goals commonly
espoused for monetary policy. We have had a moderate but
prolonged expansion in real GNP. Ther has been a grat
ifying degree of stability in over-all levels of industrial
prices and costs. Our balance of payments figures for a
good many quarters oscillated between bad and worse; but in
the last half-year a striking shrinkage of the deficit has
been reccrded. On the labor side, how'ver, we have won no
respite from the historically high levels of unemployment
that have plagued the economy in recent years.

1/7/64 -37-
We aLl know that there are statistical inadequacies
attaching to the indicators we use to gauge our progress
toward each of these goals. It is also true that many
factors more compelling :han monetary policy are at work
in each of these areas. But none of these qualifications
are enoug to erase the fact that we have fallen further
short of our employment objective than of any other basic
target, and, accordingly, that short fall needs to be
given prominent attention as we weigh ronetary policy for
the future.
I am convinced chat ample money and credit availability
can have a marginal stimulating effect on business activity
and employment, just as I also associate a marginal (though
more immediate and direct) stimulating influence with the
proposed tax cut. I think we have gaited some such stimulus
from the bank credit and monetary expalsion of this past
year, even though I would have expected greater stimulus
had the expansiou not been accompanied by an artificially
elevated Level of short-term interest rates.
I hoje we are able to maintain an expansive money and
credit atmosphere long enough to see some appreciable in
roads into the ranks of unemployed men and machines. To be
sure, such a policy will have to be curtailed if and when
any general price rise is generated, for price stability
seems to ae a practical prerequisite for sustainable high
emp oymen _ in the United States, in iLt, present competitive
world posLtion. Similarly, an expansive monetary policy
might have to be modified if the tax cut becomes a fact
and generates an overebullient business, and consumer response.
But it world be most unwise to change rlonetary policy in
anticipatLon of either of these eventualities. They are
far from cerLain, and our records as forecasters are frankly
not good enough to allow us to bet on ihef uture. Furthermore
we should remember that the tax cut itself will automatically
raise the after-tax cost of borrowed money and, to that
degree, provide the equivalent of a fractional tightening
of monetary policy.
The balance of payments deficit I recognize as a pervasive
constraint on the whole range of public policies. If it turns
bad enough at some time in the future, every weapon--including
an abrupt credit tightening--may have to be thrown into the
breach. For crisis conditions, a crisis-style monetary policy
is called for; and I think history indicates that such action
can be effective, when supported by other appropriate policy
measures. This is a kind of last ditch reassurance in which
I think we can Lake some comfort. But in the absence of such

1/7/64 -38-
an extremity, r think the weight of argument distinctly
favors a monetary policy aimed primarily at domestic
rather than international considerations.
Among other things, rate maneuverings for international
reasons are peculiarly subject to being offset by similar
adjustments in other countries, and the Dutch have provided
us with the Latest in a Long list of concrete demonstrations
of this unhappy fact.
The plain truth seems to be that there is still not much
hard evidence of any concrete improvements in our balance of
payments as a result of the increases in U. S. interest rates
during the past year. A comparison of the component parts of
our own balance of payments improvement since mid-year suggests
to me, at least, that a combination of other public policies
and various private developments accounted for the bulk of
that improvement--not our less easy moretary policy.
The Luch improved status of our cLrrent balance of
payments problem seems to me not to call for any further
tightening of monetary policy. Rather it would seem to provide us
with some greater freedom of maneuver in applying monetary policy
to cur domestic problems.
All these considerations together lead me to advocate
maintenance of money market and reserve conditions at least
as easy and certainly no tighter than those which prevailed
through December, not only for the duration of the Treasury
financing period, but thereafter as well, until we can see a
sigr.ificanzt change in the economic picture.
Yr. Shepardson said it seemed to his the expansion of credit. in
all areas, including rising consumer debt made possible by the easy
availability of credit, provided strong evidence of the adequacy of -he
monetary expansion. He would favor some move toward less ease at this
time were it not for the pending Treasury financing operations. Even
in the face of the Treasury's program, he agreed with Mr. Ellis'
suggestion that the Committee should, within the limits set by the
present directive, work toward a lower level of free reserves and
endeavor promptly to mop up return flows of currency, to the end of
at least maintaining the present degree of firmness in the money market.

1/7/64 -39
Mr. Mitchell said he aligned himself with those who thought
there wes no zeason at present for tightenig. He thought the concern
that had beert xpreised by some about the fiture course of the bill
rate was unnecessary; it seemed to him that the Desk had a rate objective
well in mind and ,jould not modify its approach unless so instructed by
the Committee. Mr. Koch's suggestion that the Desk operate in inter
mediate and longer term securities seemed to him to be a good one.
While hc had na great allegiance to the notion of "operation twist,"
and doubted that much could be accomplished in this direction, this
January was a good time to learn what could be done. If such. operations
were successfil tney would have important and significant advantages at
present
Mr. Detane said that the policy prescription for this meeting
seemed to him to be clear: an even-keel pclicy should be followed
during the current and prospective Treasury financing. He thought there
was no reason to believe that the Treasury would not have a financing
in January as usual. The financing was lilely to be outside the bill
area an' probably would take the form of ar advance refunding, as
suggested by both Mr. Koch and Mr. Stone. He thought the question
facing the Committee was not a matter of the Treasury's willingness
to accept a tighter monetary policy posture, but rather a matter of
realism in dealing with a major financing. The financing would face rather
rough sledding in the market even with an even-keel policy, he suspected.

1/7/64 .40
Mr. Daane expressed the view that the Desk had done a
particularly fine job recently. He observed that Mr. Stone, with
characteristic modesty, had described their operations as simply
standing at the edge of the market. Mr. Daane felt they had stood
at the right place at the right time and in the right way, and the
market's smooth performance was not divorcec from what the Desk had
done.
lMr.D aane then said he had two further observations. First,
he thought the Committee quite properly had gotten away from a rigid
view of xeserve targets. This was reflected in the recent fluctuations
of reserve figures concurrently with stability in the tone and feel of
the market. He hoped there would continue .o be flexibility of this
sort. His own judgment was that the difference between, say, $100
million and $15.0 million in free reserves had little significant effect
in terms of credit conditions throughout the country. He would not
carry this notion too far; if the Committee were to move to a net
borrowed reserve figure, clearly signaling a shift of gears, a con
siderable change in lenders' expectations and actions might be provoked.
But he thought there might be a tendency on the part of some to over
emphasize the importance of smaller changes.
Secondly, Mr. Daane said, he shared Mr. Mitchell's view that
there should be less allegiance to rate targets than there had been in
the recent past. He was impressed by the fact that on nearly every day

1/7/64 -41
in December the three-month Treasury bill rate closed in the range from
3.51 to 3.53 per cent. He did not think rigidity in rates was a healthy
thing for the market, for the System, or for the Treasury. In short,
he would not be inclined to resist downward seasonal pressures on till
rates; if seasonal forces pushed the bill rate 10 or more basis points
below the discount rate he would not view this as inappropriate. Nor
would he be concerned if seasonal forces failed to appear and the bill
rate moved in the other direction. Rigidity in the rate level, in his
view, was having an injurious effect on the market, and he would prefer
to see more fluctuation in some reasonable relation to the discount rate.
In coaclusion, Mr. Daane said he favored continuation of the
present policy and had no objection to mentioning Treasury financing
in the c.irectve. He did not favor a change in the discount rate.
Mr. Hickman reported that domestic business developments in the
Fourth District continued to be somewhat obscured by the usual hol:.day
oscillations. While signs of economic expansion had been visible
during December, there were no clear eviderces of an emerging boom.
The forecasters, on the other hand, were qtite uniform in their
expectations. In this respect, there was a striking contrast between
the tone currently being echoed by the forecasting fraternity and the
tone that had been characteristic at this time a year ago. Then, the
"standard forecast" had envisaged a mild recession for the first half
of 1963, a projection which had failed to materialize. Now, the tone
for 1964 was one of almost raucous optimism.

1/7/64 -42
As had been mentioned at the last meeting, Mr. Hickman said,
te business picture for November was mixed; figures available since
then corroborated that point. In December, auto dealers set new sales
records in each of the three 10-day periods. Department store sales
reached new heights during the Christmas season. The steel industry
was gearing itself to a strong output month in January, reflecting a
substantial pickup in new orders of major producers. Scrap prices
were rising sharply in response to new buying by the mills.
One further point on developments in the steel industry should
be mentioned, Mr. Hickman said. Information had come to light on trends
in productivity and labor costs in 1963 which indicated that, despite
the unevennes3 of steel production last year, considerable progress. was
made in cost-cutting and productivity increases. This augured well for
continuing improvement in steel profits. Altogether, business news
suggested continuation of moderate expansion, somewhat blurred by
random and seasonal factors.
In this climate, Mr. Hickman saw no need at present for a c"ange
in policy. Noting that the Committee probaAly would have an opportunity
to move in late February, if the need should arise, he summarized the
reasons for not moving now as follows: (1) There was no domestic boom;
(2) price changes were mixed, despite an underlying inflationary
potential; (3) bank credit expansion, though large since midyear, had
moderated in recent weeks, presumably in response to System policy;

1/7/64 -43
(4) the balance of payments position, athoagh still unsatisfactory,
improved in the second half of 1963 and, according to fragmentary
figures, turned in favor of the U. S. in December. Interest rate
relationships here and abroad continued to be reasonably satisfactory;
and (5) since year end, the dollar had strengthened against most
continental ctrrencies.
In conclusion, Mr. Hickman said, it seemed to him that the
situation was well balanced at the moment, that Committee policy had
been appropriate, and that it should be continued for the time being.
On the other fand, the Committee should be alert to arrest any tendency
towards slack in the money market, seasonal or otherwise. In view of
the unreliability of projections in this period, the Desk should be
guided by the feel of the market. He would not change the discount rate
but would charge the directive as Mr. Deming had suggested. He wotld let
the Treasury tailor its debt to the market as best it could, and would
not engage in support operationa in the long-term market.
Mr. Bopp reported that business in the Third District ended 1963
on about the same note as had prevailed during the year as a whole.
1963 was a gocd year only in a minority of third District areas. In the
majority there had been persistently high unemployment and withdrawals
from the labor force. Department store sales ended the year even with
1962; in other Districts the typical increase was between 3 and 5 per
cent.

11'7/64 -44-
Third District banking since the last meeting of the Committee
had been characterized by some relaxing of the tight conditions pre
vailing through most of November and early December, yet pressure was
still evident. Deposits and loans had been rising in recent weeks.
In view of current Treasury operations, Mr. Bopp said, no change
in policy should be made during the next three weeks. He would retain
the present directive except for adding a clause on Treasury financing,
and he would make no change in the discount rate.
Since this seemed to be the season for it, Mr. Bopp continued,
perhaps it was not inappropriate to look somewhat further ahead. As
he read the forecasts, monetary policy apparently was already formulated
for 1964. The economy would expand steadily at a quite respectable pace
demands for funds would press increasingly on available supply, and
interest rates; would rise. Money would tighten itself, and at most the
System uerely had to follow with appropriate adjustments in the discount
rate. It was almost a case of how to succeed at monetary policy without
really trying
Mr. Bopp said that the current forecasts were, of course, being
made in an atmosphere of over-optimism, and they cast monetary policy in
a role of passivity that belied the facts. This was not particularly
serious, he thought. But he was somewhat concerned about the easy
assumption that rising business meant, pari passu, tighter money.

1/7/64 -45
Even if the economy did behave as predicted, Mr. Bopp continued,
it would be important in 1964 to examine the unspoken assumptions which
linked rising business with tighter money. There were at least three
of these assumptions: First, rising economic activity would bring
excesses that contained the seeds of recession; second, it would bring
higher prices; and third, higher pr-c'es would make it harder to balance
the international payments. However, these assumptions might well not
be valid. Until there was evidence cof emerging excesses and maladjust
ments, that c;edit was financing mostly higher prices instead of more
production, or was intensifying the balance of payments problem, there
seemed to him to be no reason for System action to tighten credit or
to be inactive and permit expansion to tighten credit.
It was entirely possible, Mr. Bopp concluded, that the economy
would expand this year without these adverre conditions developing to
any serious e>.tent. So long as it wa.i possible, monetary policy should
be a positive stimulus and not a deterrent.
Mr. Biyan reported that businc3s conditions in the Sixth District
appeared excellent. Performance was better than nationally for non.
agricultural employment, factory payrolls, personal income, farm receipts,
and other series. Insured unemployment claims in the District had been
at a low rate since April, and in November reached their lowest rate
since the fall of 1953.

1/7/64 -46-
Nationally, Mr. Bryan said, the economy might have hesitated
in November but on the basis of fragmentary evidence he suspected that
there had been a strong comeback in December. There was optimism in
December and continued strong demand for business loans. Vigor in
automobiles, construction, and business investment did not indicate
an imminent reversal in the uptrend in the economy.
Mr. Bryan saw no clear case for an overt change in policy,
which he thought probably was ruled out in any case by the Treasury
financing. Therefore, he had no suggestions regarding reserve figures;
the Manager o: the Account would have to be guided largely by the
performance of market rates during the period of Treasury financing.
Mr. Bryan commented that he would like particularly to say,
with Mr. Wayne, that by every reserve and mrney supply test the Comittee
had been injecting reserves into the banking system at a rate that seemed
to him greater than sustainable in the long run without inflation, end
greater than was warranted by either domestic or international con
siderations. He agreed with the comme tary on the free market given by
Mr. Mills;.
In a final remark, Mr. Bryan said tiat inflation could occur even
when there was substantial unemployment, given the present structural
situation in the labor market. He did not believe that monetary policy
could do much about this kind of unemployment.

1/7/64 -47
Mr. Shuford reported that there had been no significant changes
in the economic situation in the Eighth District since the previous
meeting. The District had continued to operate at a high level and the
growth over the past year had been good--probably a little better than
in the nation as a whole.
Mr. Shuford said that he would favor no change in policy. As he
had noted at the preceding meeting, Committee policy over the last year
seemed to him to have been quite sound. The country had had a sustain
able, moderate growth, and at the same time the System had contributed
to meeting the international payments problem, although the problem had
not been solved.
Mr. Shuford observed that he agreed with those who hoped that
at some stage there would be less rigidity ,n short-term rates than in
the recent past. But he recognized that during the past year the
Committee had found it necessary to face up to a difficuLt problem-
which it had h-ped was a short-range problem--and had done so. This
contributed to the rigidity of market ates. Mr. Shuford also agreed
that the expani:ion in reserves had been large in recent months and should
be reduced; he did not think it desirable for reserve growth to continue
at its current rate for any extended period of time. On the other hand,
it seemed to him that by meeting the two-pronged problem and at the same
time providing moderate reserves over most of the year, the Committee
had facilitated moderate, sustainable growth iin the economy. On the

1/7/64 -48
whole, he thought that policy had been quite satisfactory. There was
much talk of extreme optimism, Mr. Shaford said, and it was possible that
inflationary pressures were building up, but it seemed to him from the
available statistics that inflation was not a pressing problem now.
Mr. Shuford favored a continued moderate supply of reserves at
a lower rate than over the last few ronths. Otherwise he would make no
change in policy. He did not favor a change in the discount rate. He
hoped that the short-term rate would fluctdate around 3-1/2 per cent,
but he would rtot be disturbed if seasonal forces pushed it lower. He
had no objection to changing the directive to refer to the Treasury
financing, but in general he preferred not to change the directive except
when a change seemed rather pressing, and he did not think this was such
an occasion.
Mr. Balderston said he agreed that a change in monetary policy,
except to encourage free reserves to return to their early December level,
was precluded between now and mid-February by Treasury financing activities.
Were it not for the Treasury financing which he thought should be mentionled
in the d.rective, he would have favored some tightening now.
It was not too early for the Committee to ponder the forces that
would be bearing on monetary policy in the months ahead, Mr. Balderston
remarked. He thought that the struggle of European countries and Japan
to contain inflation would lead toward higher interest rates abroad.
This would argue for higher rates domestically to inhibit outflows of

1/7/64 -49
funds. It was his judgment that the discaunt rate change of last July
might have been more helpful in slowing outflows than had been generally
recognized.
If razes moved upward, Mr. Balderston said, the System must
consider the loss of time certificates of deposit--especially those
with six-mont'h maturities--that banks would experience as market rates
approached the Regulation Q ceiling on such certificates. However, he
was concerned that lifting the ceiling might result in straining the
quality of credit further.
Mr. Balderston said that he had been impressed by Mr. Wayne's
statement, including his stress on the growing volume of consumer debt.
Certainly the growth of home mortgage debt at the recent rate of $1.3
billion per month was something to be watched. Also, the Committee woul
be concerned this year with the outcome of wage negotiations, particularly
those that wotld get under way in the auto industry in July. He had been
gratified that output per manhour had held up as well as it had, a
development w ich was not to have beet expected. Even though wage cates
increased 3 per cent last year, wage costs were kept down and this was
reflected in prices. The U. S. had benefited so far by not inflating so
fast as had France, Italy, and some other countries. If the struggle
to keep wage costs down were lost this year because of high profits, he
feared that the U. S. would join in the inflationary race.

1/7/64 -50
His present thinking, Mr. Balderston continued, was that the
Committee should await the position taken by the Congress and the
Administration with respect to the budget. If budget spending was
curbed, that would be a significant factor. He felt, therefore, that
even after mid-February the Committee might want to assess the sentiment
of the country, to see whether in fact the Federal Government was curbing
spending, and to determine how many countries were joining the effort to
curb inflation by raising their disceunt rates. If necessary, however,
the Committee should be prepared by late February to move toward some
further reduction in the reserves it was pouring into the banking system.
It seemed clear to him that the money supply variable to be watched was
not the narrowly defined one, which rose only 3.6 per cent last year.
Liquidity was abundant everywhere and was flowing into the stock market
and abroad. It was clearly beyond tha control of the Committee to mop
up that liquidity. If the future turned out as Mr. Balderston feared it
might, he thought that forceful, vigorous, overt action by the Committee
would be called for sometime after the middle of February.
Chairan Martin expressed the view That the Committee did not
have any real problem with respect to policy at this meeting. He thought
Mr. Balderston had pointed up effectively the fact that while the Committee
had some indications with respect to fiscal policy it did not yet know
what budgetary policy was going to be. A change in budgetary policy might
make quite a difference in its approach, and the Committee was fortunate,

1/7/64 -51
in a sense, that Treasury activities preclLded it from taking any action
at this moment. He had pointed out at the last meeting that by deciding
not to change policy then the Committee was deciding against such action
in the immediate future. At least, this wes the case if the Treasury
decided to go to the market, and he thought there was every indication
that it would.
Parenthetically, Chairman Martin emphasized that the fact that
the Treasury eras considering an advance refunding was confidential, and
should be so considered by all persons in the room.
After noting that the Committee members would not favor discount
rate action aL this time, the Chairman said that the Committee seemed to
be agreed on io change in the directive except for the addition of a
reference to Treasury financing.
It wa. decided after discussion that this reference should be
made by inserting the phrase, "and taking into account prospective
Treasury finarcing" after the phrase, "T imnplement this policy," ill
the second paragraph of the directive.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York was authorized and directed, until
otherwise directed by the Committee, to
execute transactions in the System Account
in accordance with the following economic
policy directive:

1/7/64 -52-
It is the Federal Open Market Committee's current policy
to acconrmodate moderate growth in bank credit, while maintain
ing conditions in the money market that would contribute to
centinued improvement in the capital account of the U. S. balance
of payments. This policy takes into consideration the fact that
domestic economic activity is expanding further, although with
a margin of underutilized resources; and the fact that the
balance of payments position is still adverse despite a tendency
to reduced deficils. It also recognizes the increases in bank
credit, money supply, and the reserve base of recent months.
To implement this policy, and taking into account prospec
tive Treasury financing, System open market operations shall be
conducted with a view to maintaining about the same conditions
in the money market as have prevailed in recent weeks, while
accommcdating moderate expansion in aggregate bank reserves.
Votes for this action: Messrs.
Martin, Hayes, Balderston, Bopp, Clay,
Daane, Mitchell, Robertson, Scanlon,
Shepardson, and Shuford. Vote against
this action: Mr. Mills.
In dissenting, Mr. Mills commented that, in accordance with his
previously stated position against a policy of "no change" and his
concern that damage to the economy was implicit in the continuation of
that policy, he believed that a somewiat more liberal provision of
reserves would yield beneficial economic returns, and without complicating
the Treaury's financing prograra.
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, section 1(a) of
the continuing authority directive was
amended, in line with the earlier sug
gestion of the Account Manager, to
authorize the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, to the extent necessary to
carry out the current economic policy
directive:
(a) To hby or sell United States Government securities
in the open market, from or to Government securities dealers

1/7/64 -53-
and foreign and internationaL accounts maintained at the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or
deferred delivery basis, for the Systemn Open Market Account
at market prices and, for such Account, to exchange maturing
United Scates Government securities wi:h the Treasury or
allow them to mature without replaceme-t; provided that the
aggregate amount of such securities held in such Account
(including forward commitments, but not including such
special short term certificates of indebtedness as may be purchased
from the Treasury under paragraph 2 hereof) shall not be increased
or decreased by more than $1.5 bi.llion during any period between
meetings of the Committee.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on January 28, 1964.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secr$ry *