A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, September 8: 1964. at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Balderston, Acting Chairman
Mr. Hickman
Mr. Mills
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. R obertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Shuford
Mr. Swan
Mr. W ayne
Mr. Treiber, Altern.te for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Ellis, Bryar., Scanlon, and Deming, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bopp and Clay, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Kansas City,
respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Econcmist
Messrs. Brill, Furth, Garvy, Grove, Holland,
Jones, Koch, Mann. and Ratchford, Associate
Economists
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of
Governors
Mr. Partee, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Reynolds, Associate Adviser, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Axilrod, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors

9/8/64 -22-
Mr. Coldwell, First Vice President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas
Messrs. Sanford, B.ughman, Tow, and Green, Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
New York, Chicago, Kansas City, and Dallas,
respectively
Mr. Brandt, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Mr. Eisenmenger, Director of Research, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston
Mr. Meek, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Kareken, Econcmic Consultant, Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis
Mr. Rothwell, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, Mr. Balderston was elected
Acting Chairman for this meeting.
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the ninutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Mark.t Committee held on
August 18, 1964, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System
Open Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open
Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the
period August 18 through September 2, 1964, and a supplementary report
for the period September 3 and 4, 1964. Copies of these reports have
been placed in the files of the Committee.
Supplemerting the written reports, Mr. Sanford said the weekly
published ;old stock figure would remain unchanged again this week
as it had since mid-February. The Stabilization Fund now had $214

9/8/64
million on hand as the Pool picked up gold in London fairly rapidly
toward the end of August--the U.S. share of the monthly distribution
was $21 million--and the Bank of England sold the U.S. $50 million
of gold to replenish its dollar balances. There had been a modest
increase in demand for gold in London in the past week, but supplies
had been more than adequate and the Pool had continued to receive
small accretions.
On che exchange markets, Mr. Sanford commented, the selling
pressure on sterling that reappeared prior to the last meeting of the
Committee continued through most of the past three weeks. The selling,
mainly of French and German origin, tended to come in waves and
reached a peak just prior to the end of August. The British stayed
with the tactic of letting the rate take the brunt of the pressure
until sterling reached a seven-year Low of about $2.7840. At that
point, they resisted rather more forcefully than they had earlier in
the summer and effectively prevented a fur:her decline in sterling.
United Kingdom reserves declined some $92 nillion in August, which
included debt payments of $39 million. The loss would have been
$15 million greater except for a $15 million month-end drawing by the
Bank of England on the swap arrangement with the System.
With the spot rate for sterling so low, Mr. Sanford said, the
three-month forwards were selling below the $2.78 spot floor and there
began to be some interest in forward sterling. Since the U.S. bill

9/8/64
rates were easing a few basis point at about the same time, any tendency
for the fcrward discount to shrink could have opened up the arbitrage
incentive ir favor of London sufficiently to attract funds. Conse
quently, on August 27, the New York Bank entered the market, as it
had in July, to sell forward sterling on a swap basis against spot
purchases. With the forward rate already below the spot floor, the
Bank had to be very careful in operating so as not to touch off
speculation against sterling. In all, over three days the Bank
purchased arother $26 million of spot sterling and sold an equal amount
of forward sterling, just slightly less than in July. The operations
seemed to have accomplished the immediate objective of preventing any
narrowing o: the forward discount and thus of discouraging any further
arbitrage flows. At the same time, of course, they provided some
support for spot sterling as well. So far in September the sterling
market had been fairly quiet.
The other major activity in the New York market, Mr. Sanford
continued, had been in the Canadian dollar. The liquidity squeeze in
Canada eased sufficiently for interest rates to stop rising, but the
demand for Canadian dollars had continued and the rate rose to a new
high for the year. The demand seemed to have been a result in good
part of a shift in leads and lags induced by reports of prospective
Canadian borrowing in this country. There were indications of a
fairly substantial amount of borrowing in the works--as much as

9/8/64 -5
$220 million--although in the past week two additional large issues
had been dropped, one of which was being placed in Canada. Meanwhile,
however, the ruling discount on the forward Canadian dollar seemed
to have braked the short-term outflow to Canada to the extent t at
in the past few weeks new placements and repatriation of funds had
been about in balance.
Mr. Sanford reported that the Continental exchanges were very
quiet for a number of weeks, but there had been a pickup in actvity
in the past few days. Some tightness had developed in the Dutch money
market resulting largely from Dutch banks' subscriptions to a new
issue of Treasury bills. The Netherlands Bank had been taking .n
dollars in excess of its usual limit. Consequently, the New Yo-k Bank
used $3 million of guilders from an earlier swap drawing to acquire
excess dollars from the Netherlands Bank, and tomorrow (September 9)
it would draw an additional $30 million on the swap to absorb dollars
taken in by the Dutch at the end of last week. This would bring total
drawings on that arrangement to $60 million. In addition, the New
York Bank used $30 million of Belgian francs held under the swap with
the Belgian National Bank to absorb excess dollars from that Bank.
Part of the increase in Belgian holdings of dollars resulted from
a Belgian Government borrowing from a U.S. bank. A total of $37.5
million of the $50 million of Belgian francs held under the swap
drawing now had. been used. On the other hand, Mr. Sanford noted,

9/8/64 -6
there was a heavy demand for dollars in Germany last Friday (September
4) and the Bundesbank sold $40 milliona; nd today the dollar rate had
risen a bit. This brought to $60 million the Bundesbank's sales of
dollars since the last meeting of the Committee.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the System
Open Market transactions in foreign cur
rencies during the period August 18 through
September 4, 1964, were approved, ratified,
and confirmed.
Mr. Sanford noted that on September 15 the $100 million swap
arrangement with the Netherlands Bank would mature. The Dutch had
indicated that they wished to renew the arrangement again for a three
month period, and he requested Committee approval of a three-month
renewal of that swap facility.
Mr. Shepardson remarked that the Committee had been gradually
lengthening the terms of its swap arrangements, and he asked if this
was the only arrangement still on the three-month basis. Mr. Sanford
replied that the arrangement with the Bank of France also was on a
three-month basis. He added that in discssions with officials of
the Netherlands Bank it had been fairly evident that they preferred
to retain a three-month term for their ar;:angement with the System,
and therefore no suggestion of a longer term had been made by the
New York Bank. Accordingly, he was recommending renewal with no
lengthening of term.

9/8/64 -7
Renewal of the swap arrangement with
the Netherlands Bank for a further period
of three months, as recommended by
Mr. Sanford, was approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market
Account coverirg open market operations in U.S. Government securities
and bankers' acceptances for the period August 18 through September 4,
1964. A copy of this report has been placed in the files of the
Committee.
In supplementation of the written report, Mr. Stone commented
as follows:
The past three weeks have been particularly interesting
ones. We interpreted the Committee's decision at the last
meeting as instructing us to undertake a moderate shift in
policy but with the qualification that the shift be executed
in such a way as to avoid upsetting the market. Given this
qualification, and given also the fact that around the time
of the last meeting the bond market--on its own and quite
independertly of the Committee's decision--began to weaken,
it was clear that the shift could not be fully achieved by
the time cf this meeting. Rather it was necessary to set
in motion a gradual process, the aim of which would be to
convey to the public that a decision to shift policy had been
made but that the shift was to be a gentle one. This meant
that the results the Committee wished to achieve with respect
to such market indicators as free reserves, borrowings, and
bill rates could not all be achieved quickly and decisively.
Progress has been made in raising the level of member bank
borrowings, and progress has also been made in reducing
free reserves--although large after-the-fact revisions in
the free reserve figures have tended to blunt the effective
ness of our efforts in that regard.
The bill rate has posed particularly difficult problems.
We recently moved into a period in which the three-month bills
carry December maturity dates. December bills typically sell

9/8/64
at rates several basis points below rates on surrounding
issues, since the demand for them is relatively strong.
At the time of the last meeting, for example, rates on two
or three issues of December bills were in the low 3.40's,
while surrounding issues were close to 3.50 per cent.
While we were, of course, aware of the Committee's wish to
see the bill rate rise, the immediate problem we faced-
given die aberration in rates on December maturities and
given also some contra-seasonal strength in demand for bills
throug.out much of the period--was to prevent the rate from
falling.
The Treasury's decision to increase by $100 million
each of the hills maturing from December 10 through
December 31 was helpful in this respect. That action,
together with the slightly firmer market atmosphere that has
begun to emerge and the opportunity afforded us recently to
supply a good many reserves away from the bill market, has
succeeded in holding the rate in check until the fuller
effect; of the Committee's policy shift take hold.
I should note that those effects are already in process
of being felt, for the market is coming to feel that a policy
shift Ls under way. The problem, to repeat, is to convey
to the public that a change in policy has been made but to
convey also that that change is a gentle and not a sharp one.
Two or three more weeks should suffice to complete the job
of conveying these ideas.
I am hopeful that the reserve figures--which are still
distre.,singly erratic--will behave well over the next few
weeks, since the market situation remains rather sensitive.
The market is paying a good deal of attention to the auto
wage negotiations and to the approach of the fall season of
rising credit demands, against the background of further
gains in the economy generally; it is also paying close
attention to the balance of payments problem, waiting to
see if the third quarter figures show any further deteriora
tion f:-om the second quarter results. Dealers continue
their efforts to reduce inventories, and while they have
had some success in doing so, they still have a distance to
go. Finally, the calendar of new corporate and municipal
security offerings ahead is building up to sizeable propor
tions. It is against such a market background that the process
of executing the Committee's policy shift will have to be
completed. I am confident that it can be done, but the job
will continue to require caution and delicacy.

9/8/64 -9-
In reply to a question by Mr. Mitchell concerning the reasons
for the sensitive situation in the bond market, Mr. Stone noted that a
substantial volume of investment funds had appeared in the market in
July, of which the Treasury had been able to take advantage in its
advarce refunding. Concurrently, there had been a surge of activity
in the bond market, in the course of which many investors changed the
composition of their portfolios. This bulge in activity receded in
August, and at the same time the market began to react to the factors
he had mertioned in his statement--including the gains in the economy,
the auto wage negotiations, balance of payments developments, and rising
credit demands. These factors led to a desire on the part of dealers
to increase the rate at which they were reducing their inventories.
Mr. Stone added that when he had described the current m rket
situation as "sensitive" he had used the word advisedly. He did not
think the market was in any danger of collapse. The market had the
job of continuing to digest the rather large volume of coupon issues
still in dealers' hands. So far the process had been orderly. While
it seemed likely that prices would have to go down before they could
go up, the market was not weak; it was performing rather well.
Mr. Mitchell commented that the Committee's policy decision at
the last meeting had been aimed at strengthening the bill rate and had
not been directec at affecting bond prices. He asked about the volume
of the Desk's recent purchases of securities with maturities of one
year and more.

9/8/64 -10
Mr. Stone replied that there had been a substantial increase
in such purchases in August and early Septenber. Since the last
meeting the Desk had bought a little over $400 million of securities
with a maturity of one year or more. He agreed with Mr. Mitchell's
comment that the Desk had been lending a considerable amount of
support to the bond market in this period. The Desk's purchases, in
his judgnent, had been instrumental in making the price decline gentle;
without them the decline would have been more precipitous. However,
he said, the purchases had been addressed to the problem of the bill
rate. There had been powerful forces tending to push the three-month
bill rate dowr, including the advance refunding, strong private demand
for bills, and the fact that bills maturing in December were especially
attractive. It had been necessary for the ,ystem to provide a sub
stantial volume of reserves before Labor Day, and the operations in
coupon issues had been undertaken to avoid adding to these strong
downward pressures.
In reply to a further question by Mr. Mitchell concerning
dealer inventories of coupon issues, Mr. Stone supplied the following
figures relating to dealer holdings in trad:.ng accounts as of the date
of the previous meeting (August 18) and as of September 3, respectively:
bonds maturing in 20 years or more, $283 million and $232 million;
bonds maturing in 5-10 years, $418 million and $168 million; notes
maturing in 1-5 years, $460 million and $426 million; and bonds

9/8/64 -11
maturing in 1-5 years, $16 million (net long position) and $64 million
(net short position). (Figures for the 10-20 year maturities were
omitted because dealer holdings in that area were quite small.) He
noted that there had been some reduction in each of these maturity
areas, and a substantial reduction in the 5-10 year area.
Mr. Mitchell then remarked that while dealers evidently were
gradually reducing their position in longer term issues, commercial
banks still held a large volume of such issues. He was concerned
that banks might be in an uneasy frame of mind with respect to the size
of their holdings, and asked whether they might not attempt to reduce
their holdings if they concluded that longer rates were going to rise,
and thus produce a substantial yield adjustment.
Mr. Stone said he would not necessarily expect such a develop
ment. Many of the bonds in bank portfolios were high-eoupon issues
acquired in the last refunding which, he thought, were likely to be
held for an extended period. He then cited figures reflecting gross
dealer purchases from and sales to banks in the latter part of August.
The figures indicated that banks had increased their holdings of
securities maturing in 5-10 years; in his opinion, they were taking
advantage of the gently declining prices to build up their portfolios
in this area. Over the same period they had reduced their holdings
in the 1-5 year area, and slightly increased those in the over 10-year
maturity range.

9/8/64 -12
Mr. Mitchell said he was disturbed by the operation the Desk
had underway in accordance with the policy decision taken at the
previous meeting; he thought it was extremely hazardous. Underwriters
still had not completed distribution of the securities issued in the
advance refunding. If the message the Desk was trying to convey got
through while the distribution was still in process, there was apt to
be either a sharp price reaction or a need for the Desk to buy coupon
issues in substantial volume.
Mr. Stone replied that he would rot expect this outcome if the
Desk was successful in conveying to the public the fact that the policy
adjus:ment was a gentle one. In this cornection, he noted that
publication. in the preceding week of a free reserve figure of $44 million
had led to considerable discussion of the possibility that the System
was shifting policy. Prices had been marked down as a consequence,
but only very moderately--by 1/32-2/32. Given the continued heavy flow
of savings, he saw no reason for prices to fall much below recent
levels indeed, before the year was out they might be back above present
levels. The market looked for general stability in interest rates,
although it understood that there were apt to be small price swings within
a generally stable pattern. The principal factor behind this confidence
was the commitment by the Treasury to stay out of the longer term
market for the rest of the year. Barring some extraordinary event,

9/8/64 -13
Mr. Stone thought the Account could complete the job with very little
impact on the longer term market if the reserve estimates turned out
to be reasonably accurate.
Mr. Mitchell asked if the market was aware of the magnitude
of the System operations in coupon issues, and Mr. Stone replied in
the affirmative. He said he would like to emphasize that while on
some days the System had been the largest buyer, it was not the only
buyer by any means. For example, in the period August 17-28, official
Account purchases of securities in the 1-5 year area were $160 million
out of gross cealer sales of $487 million; and in the over 5 year area
they were $200 million out of gross dealer sales of $660 million.
Purchases on individual days were relatively small compared with the
volume of offerings made to the Account Management. The Desk was not
dominating the market; rather, it was just nibbling away at the edges
of the offerings made to it. And the fact that prices had declined
indicated that the market was not pegged.
In response to a question by Mr. Deming, Mr. Stone said that
he thought the market understood that the Desk's operations in coupon
issues were addressed to the bill rate. The Account Management
deliberately had not operated in the bond market at times when private
demand was pushing prices up; it had been buying only in a declining
market and on a declining scale in order to permit bond prices
primarily to reflect private decisions.

9/8/64 -14
Thereupon, upon notion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the open
market transactions in Government securities
and bankers' acceptances during the period
August 18 through September 4, 1964, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Balderston then called for the staff economic and financial
reports, supplementing the written reports that had been distributed
prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed in the files
of the Commit:ee.
Mr. Koch presented the following statement on economic condi
tions:
Basically, I find the recent course of the economy
little different from what I had expected earlier in the
summer. The business expansion has continued its moderately
vigorous pace in an atmosphere of confidence but not ebul
lience. Some elements of demand have ,een less expansionary
than earlier but others have developed to take their place.
Few excesses are apparent. The expansion still appears
sustainable under conditions of general price stability.
Some welcome increases have been made in utilization of labor
and capital, but such resources still appear to be adequate
for further expansion of production without causing widespread
or cumulative upward wage or price pressures.
Spending by both consumers and businesses has continued
to rise, reflecting in part the cumulative effects of the
tax cut, now six months old, as well as steady improvement
in before-tax personal incomes and corporate profits. As
expected, the effects of the tax cut on spending have been
gradual. They can be expected to continue to spread in the
months ahead as the so-called multiplier effects take hold.
For consumers, spending on nondurable goods continues
to highlight the upswing. Such spending has had an uninter
rupted rise now for nine months. Perhaps this was to be
expected--and it was in the Administration's January model-
as the first effect of the tax cut was, in general, to
raise weekly take-home pay by a dollar or two.

9/8/64 -15-
Durable goods purchases by consumers have been less
expansionary, though continuing at a high level. Most
recently, auto sales have been stronger again, partly due
to the transportation strike in the East in July which
caused the postponement of some auto purchases until August,
a month during which sales are usually low because of the
imminence of model changes. On the other hand, sales of
other du:able goods, like household furniture and appliances,
have leveled off. The housing market, as represented by
starts and building permit figures, has been drifting
downward since late last fall. Continuation of this down
drift would be of considerable significance for the
near-term economic outlook, employment opportunities, and
long-term interest rates.
As for business demands, inventory accumulation at
manufacturers in July as in earlier months was small.
Busines; spending for plant and equipment, as revealed by
data on new orders for durable manufactures and by the
recently released August Ccmmerce-SEC survey, continues to
increase steadily. The upward revisions over the May
survey, though, are quite modest and reflect not only the
confidence of businessmen for continued growth in aggregate
demand but also caution not to repeat the over-expansion of
capacity that occurred in 1956-57.
The State and local government contribution to the
economic expansion continues to grow steadily and substan
tially. That of the Federal Government took a significant
jump this past spring as a result of both the tax cut and
a rise ir spending. For some tine ahead, however, the
Federal Government, except for the continuing effects of the
tax cut, can be thought of as going more or less into
neutral with respect to its contribution to further economic
expansion.
But what about the ability of the economy to support
further sizeable expansion without speculative excesses or
inflation? Here, too, I think the situation continues to
look reasonably favorable. The unemployment rate has
drifted down irregularly a half point since the beginning
of the year, but at 5.1 per cent in August it is still
uncomfortably high, particularly since the total conceals
the much higher rates among teenagers, nonwhites, and those
unemployed for long periods. Of course, the more the
unemployment problem becomes a structural one, the greater
become the chances for inflationary wage bidding for
skilled workers.

9/8/64 -16
Rates of utilization of materials producing and
manufacturing capacity have been drifting up some. While
there is a considerable range of capacity utilization rates
among the various industries--and some rates are quite high-
on the whole, capacity appears sufficient to support a
further increase in output without contributing significantly
to strong, general upward price pressures. I may add that
manufacturing capacity is showing a larger increase in
1964 than for some years past.
The wholesale price index for industrial commodities
showed little change in August, and the small July rise in
the consumer index reflected mainly seasonal influences.
In general, price pressures continue to be concentrated in
the nonferrous metals area and to be a reflection of special
industry factors as well as the general economic situation.
In manufacturing, unit labor costs continue steady or
slightly down.
Although it is too early to speak with any assurance
about the likely auto settlement, prospects are favorable
that it will not involve more than, say, a 3.5 per cent or
so increase in hourly labor costs on an annual rate basis.
With the rise in money wages perhaps amounting to about
2-1/2 per cent a year, the same rate increase that has
occurred annually since 1955, it is also unlikely that such
a settlement would be a precedent for unsound settlements
in steel and other industries later. "his type of auto
set:lement would still be more or less in line with the
Administration's wage guidelines and with the maintenance
of stable labor costs per unit of output.
All in all, therefore, I conclude that the domestic
economic situation continues to behave very well, responding
in a salutary fashion to an appropriate mix of monetary a:d
fiscal policies. To my mind, the domestic economic situation
does not now call for any lessening in the degree of monetary
stimulation.
Mr. Noyes made the following statement concerning financial
developments:
It seemed to me, as I reviewed the most recent financial
data, that I might be most helpful to the Committee if I
made some attempt to interpret these data in the perspective
of the last several months. Doubtless, when we are able to
look back on what happened in the late summer of 1964 with

9/8/64 -17-
the benefit of more hindsight, a reasonable pattern will
emerge, but for the time being many uncertainties and
apparent inconsistencies bedevil the analyst.
One explanation of part cf what has happened may be
that we (and by "we" here I do not mean the Committee, or
its staff, but the whole official and private financial
community) have given less weight than it deserves to the
Treasury's refunding operation in mid-July.
In academic discussion of the tools of policy, debt
management has always been a stepchild--subordinated to
monetary and fiscal policy, and often dismissed as of very
little significance; both because of the limited room for
maneuver available to the Treasury in conventional refunding
and borrowing operations, and because of the value judgment
that noderate changes in the term structure of the
publicly-held debt were of linited over-all economic sig
nificance. Hence, we--and ag in I am using "we" in the
broadest sense--have tended to breathe a sigh of relief
when a major financing operation was successfully completed
and than to forget about it. The Treasury pre-refunding
in July of this year, in which over $9 billion of public
holdings were pushed out into longer maturity areas, and
the average maturity of the entire narketable debt extended
by almost 5 months, may well prove one to be remembered.
All of our theories of the role that the total
liquidity of the public plays in the pace of economic
activity are rudimentary. We are not even agreed as to how
we should define such liquidity, much less measure it.
But, however defined and however measured, there was a
profound change in the liquidity of the public as a result
of the July financing, and I suspect that many of the
developments of recent weeks are importantly related to and
in par t explained by it. The failure of the 90-day bill
rate to move up much, in the face of general firmer con
dition; in money and credit markets, is but one example.
Another is the dramatic drop in bank liquidity, coming on
top of a long declining trend, whic is analyzed in some
detail in the first appendix of the staff memorandum.
But probably the most significant development in the
last few weeks has been the change in long-term rates. In
what might be characterized as an orderly but thin and
nervous--or, accepting Mr. Stone's term, sensitive--market.
yields on long-term Government bonds have edged up about
5 basic points, as dealers have sold $750 million of their
unusually large holdings of over 5-year issues, built up

9/8/64 -18-
during the refunding. In the same period one commercial
bank is reported to have sold in the neighborhood of $100
million of coupon issues, about halt of which were over 5
years. On the other side, the System and Treasury accounts
acquired about $400 million bonds in the over 5-year range.
To partly offset the perverse twist, in terms of official
policy, imparted to the rate structure by the refunding,
the Treasury has added to its bill offerings more rapidly
than its immediate cash needs would have dictated, with
the result that its balances at commercial banks have been
maintained at a higher level than might otherwise have
been the case. Furthermore, as indicated above, the desk
has concentrated its operations outside the bill area.
Even so, 90-day rates have not moved much above 3.5 per
cent.
This leads us directly to recent money supply behavior
and suggests, at the outset, that it would be unwise to
read too much significance into the change in the pace of
money supply expansion after mid-July. This may also turn
out to be related to the Treasury's financing activities
and the time span of their influence is hard to judge. In
fact, there are already some signs cf a resumption of more
vigorous expansion in the aggregate reserve figures for
the week ending September 2.
Bank credit figures are also hard to put in perspec
tive. The regular monthly series, based on "last Wednesday"
figures, declined in July and then rose sharply in August.
This erratic behavior is again partly a reflection of the
response of the banks to the Treasury's financing activity,
and it is not clear that even the average of the two months
taken together accurately reflects the underlying trend of
credit demand in the private sector. Perhaps the business
loan figures, which have moved up at an annual rate of about
11 per cent since April, provide the best clue to the
strength of private credit demand.
Thus far, I have intentionally avoided any reference tc
monetary policy and the possible effects of the changes
that have occurred. One reason is that this period illus
trates as well as, if not better than, any other the difficulty
of identifying the impact of slight changes in policy in
the short-run. If one takes the point of view that the
System's policy is reflected in the tone and feel of the
market and .n the various indicators of ease or firmness in
the money market, including such marginal reserve
availability measures as free reserves or member bank
borrowing, then one can observe, over the past several

9/8/64 -19-
months--using hindsight for all it is worth--some slight
but distinct variations. The market was relatively firm
in June; a little easier in July, especially after mid
month; and then slightly firmer again in the last six
weeks or so. There undoubtedly was a change in tone from
the three weeks just preceding the last meeting of the
Committee to the three weeks just ended, but it is almost
impossible to see in the figures.
For those who prefer to think of policy in terms of
aggregate reserve provision, over and above normal
seasonal changes, it is difficult to see any change in
trend behind the wide week-to-week and month-to-month
fluctuations that have occurred in recent months. Taking
the figures at their face value, most of the growth in
either total or nonborrowed reserves occurred in two
months--March and June; there were minor variations, in
bcth di--ections, in other months.
Let me conclude briefly, because I think the
conclusion is evident. The changes in monetary policy
in recent months--either intentional or inadvertent-
have been so slight that it is virtually impossible to
discern them or their subsequent effects in the data
now available. However, the Treasury refunding in July
has had a sizeable effect on public liquidity and on
financial markets, the full impact of which may not yet
be apparent. Hence, the posture of monetary and debt
management policy combined is somewhat less stimulative
than it was at midyear. Even those who feel that a less
stimulative financial policy is called for might well
wish to observe a little more of the combined effect of
recent nonetary and debt management policies hefore
taking further action.
Mr. Mills said we gathered from the comment, of Messr . Koch
and Noyes that both would like to see the Committee retreat from the
policy shift it had made at the last meeting. Mr. Noyes replied
that, speaking for himself, that was not Lhe case. The thought he
had tried to convey was that there had been some firming in
financial markets during the past few weeks. It was not clear to
what extent this was the result of Treasury operations, of Federal

9/8/64. -20
Reserve operations, or of outside influences; nor could one say
how far the firming would carry. In these circumstances he would
advise caution with respect to any further firming action by the
Committee.
Mr. Furth presented the following statement on the balance
of payments:
The U.S. payments position remains unsatisfactory.
Complete data reveal for July an even higher deficit-
nearly $700 million--than had preliminary reports; and
the latest weekly figures suggest a deficit for August
only slightly lower than that suggested by the figures
for the first two weeks of the month. Even allowing for
the adverse seasonality of July and August, the aggregate
deficit in the two months could hardly have been less
than at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of $4 billion,
as compared with the $3 billion rate of the second
quarter.
No information concerning the underlying payments
items is available as yet for August. And the
fragmentary information available for July is puzzling
rather than enlightening.
Both exports and imports rose in July. In absolute
terms, the increase in exports was somewhat larger, and
the trade surplus rose to a seasonally adjusted annual
rate of $6.2 billion, $20O million more than for the
second quarter.
The improvement in flows of financial capital was
even more startling. Expansion of long-term bank credit
to foreigners remained modest. The expansion of short-
term bank credit to foreigners ceased completely, with
repayments virtually offsetting new credits. And banks
reported a heavy reflux of money-market funds, offs etting
the equally large outflow of June. Nonfinancial concerns
apparently placed money-market funds abroad, offsetting
the repatriation of such funds that occurred in June.
But unless these placements were abnormal y large--and
there is so far no indication that they were--it seems
that the net outflow of short-term funds, which averaged
$170 million per month in the second quarter, was
reduced to nearly zero.

9/8/64 -21
Hence, the two important items on which information
for July is available indicate an improvement in the
payments; balance over the second quarter at an annual
rate of $2 billion. Since the over-all balance probably
deteriorated by $1 billion (annual rate), a deterioration
by $3 billion must have occurred in the aggregate of the
following items:
(1) Travel abroad--which, however, was reported
to have been unusually large as early as May and June-
must have further risen more than seasonally. In this
respect, the price increases in Europe, which help our
trade balance, may have hurt our travel balance; as long
as travel to Europe is a status symbol, it probably has
a perverse price elasticity so that the increased cost
may actually have encouraged rather than discouraged
travel--as well as having raised the amounts spent by
U.S. travellers abroad.
(2) Continued prosperity at home and a leveling
off in the boom-in some European coun:ries probably have
reduced our net capital income for fo:eign investments.
But it would be astonishing indeed if such a reduction
had been large enough to affect significantly a
month-to-month comparison.
(3) Government expenditures abroad may have increased,
perhaps in connection with the troubles in Southeast Asia
and Central Africa.
(4) As repeatedly stated in these presentations,
the reports of new acquisitions of European firms by
U.S. concerns strongly suggest that direct investments
abroad have risen.
(5) Nonrecorded transactions--the so-called errors
and omi;sions--may have resulted in an increased deficit,
with funds being covertly shifted abroad because of political
uncertainties and to avoid the interest equalization tax.
In a sense it is heartening that items which are
usually taken as indicating the commercial and financial
health of a community--merchandise trade and flows of
financial capital--have been developing favorably. But
from the point of view of practical policies, this very
fact seems discouraging.
If a rise in domestic costs and prices hampers the
competitiveness of domestic industry and results in a
deterioration in the trade balance; or if imbalances in
interest rates, or even worse, distrust in the maintenance
of exchange rates, lead to excessive financial flows abroad;

9/8/64 -22-
or finally, if stagnation at home and boom abroad lead
to excessive outflows of equity capital--in all these
cases the underlying conditions are deplorable indeed
but the policy implications are clear.
However, if a payments deficit increases in spite
of favorable developments in cost and price relationships
and a rising trade surplus; in spite of equilibrium in
financial accounts; and in spite of an unprecedented rise
in domestic profits at a time of faltering profits in
many foreign countries--what are the monetary authorities
to do? Ask the Congress for interference with foreign
travel? Ask for an extension of the interest equaliza
tion tax to direct investments? Urge utmost economy in
Governmert expenditures abroad even more seriously but
probably not more effectively than hitherto? Or just
wait for foreign diplomatic and military troubles, and
domestic political uncertainties, to disappear--which
the latter presumably will but the former presumably
won't?
Developments abroad on the whole do not help either
to explain the rise in our payments deficit. Britain's
payments balance is obviously in trouble, with an August
deficit that, in relation to the size of the British
economy, is even larger than our own. These difficulties
may be partly cyclical and partly due to the disturbing
effect of the impending British elections; but many
observers--though not British official sources--believe
that their basic cause is a continual deterioration in
Britain's competitive position in world trade.
Continental Europe has shown litt e change. Italy's
payments position is rapidly improving, in August, its
paynents surplus rose to $150 million, partly on account
of seasonal travel receipts and cf capital inflows, but
also reflecting an improvement in its trade situation,
Recent fiscal measures should further .timulate exports
and decrease imports, and at the same time halt the
decline in the country's industrial production which has
accompanied the improvement in its international payments
position.
No other European country reported large official
reserve increases in August; Germany and Switzerland
even reported sizable declines. But Belgium and
Netherlands took further measures resulting in the in
flow of funds from abroad: Belgium by floating a loan
with U.S. commercial banks, and the Netherlands by further

9/8/64 -23-
tightening its money market. While there is no evidence
of significant direct flows from the United States to
the Netherlands, there is evidence of a substantial flow
of Euro-dollars from Germany to that country. Since
Germany holds large dollar balances while Netherlands
holds only very modest ones, this flow, although it does
not increase the U.S. payments deficit, makes its financing
by means other than gold sales more difficult. In fact,
as Belgium and the Netherlands experienced increases in
their dollar holdings, they requested the System (as
Mr. Sanford reported) to draw once more on its swaps with
these countries, in an aggregate amount of $60 million.
To sum up, perhaps for the first time in recent
h-story, the United States had an unusually large payments
deficit at a time when Britain also had a large deficit
and Continental Europe as a whole had only a moderate
surplus From the point of view of an equitable distri
bution of world liquidity, it is preferable if U.S. and
U.K. reserves flow to relatively weak countries such as
Italy, Canada, Japan, the smaller European countries, and
the less developed nations in other continents, rather
than, as usually happened in previous years, to the
leading financial powers of Continental Europe. But the
distribution of the payments surpluses corresponding to
our deficit seems to be as puzzling as the factors under
lying that deficit itself.
Mr. Balderston then called for the usual go-around of comments
and views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning
with Mr. Treber, who presented the following statement:
Domestic economic activity continues to move ahead
on a solid base. Business prospects are good. Business
optimism is supported by the Census Bureau's July survey
of consumer buying intentions, the Commerce-SEC August
survey cf plant and equipment spending plans, and the
various order series.
It is good to see the recent unemployment rate range
about 1/2 per cent lower than the range of several months
ago. It is unlikely, however, that increased business
activity will substantially reduce the rate of unemployment
quickly.

9/8/64 -24-
The price situation deserves close attention. While
over-all prices continue stable, individual price and wage
increases are being reported with increased frequency. The
results of the intensified wage negotiations now in process
in the automobile industry could have an important effect
on the cost of doing business in general and on prices.
There was a strong expansion of bank credit in August.
Loan officers of the principal New York City banks expect
a further, but not dramatic, increase in loan demand.
Our balance of payments deficit continues to be the
most disturbing policy problem confronting us. While a
variety of reasons may be advanced to explain away part
of the bad showing in July and August the plain fact remains
that the size and persistency of the deficit are highly
disturbing. The balance of payments figures for the first
half of 1964 were encouraging to our friends abroad. Unless
the figures for September are extraordinarily favorable, the
publication of the third quarter figures will reveal dra
matically our lack of progress in moving our international
accounts into balance. Foreign monetary authorities might
be less willing to accumulate more dollars; and there could
be a resumption of gold losses.
Sirce the last meeting of the Committee, there has been
a gradual and undramatic move toward slightly firmer
conditions in the money market. Member bank borrowings have
been somewhat greater, free reserves have been somewhat lower
and there has been a small rise in yields of most issues of
Treasury securities. The operation has been initiated smoothly,
without upsetting any segment of the market.
As the demand for credit rises in the fall period against
the background of a strong and expanding economy, there
should be some natural tightening effect on money markets
and short-term rates. In this setting it should not be
difficult for the Federal Reserve to achieve a further firming
of short-term money market condi:ions and interest rates.
The rate of progress in attaining such a goal would continue,
of course, to be influenced by the need to give due regard
to the impact of such operations on the longer term capital
markets. I would look forward toward a further increase
in member bank borrowing, a further decline in free reserves
to a range fluctuating around or somewhat below zero, and,
in due course, January Treasury bills in a rate range of
3-5/8 to 3-3/4 per cent. After such a change has occurred,
an increase in the discount rate would probably be
advisable.

9/8/64 -25-
I would suggest a modification of the first paragraph
of the directive to reflect the latest information
available. The first paragraph of the September 4 draft
of directive prepared by the staff would be acceptable
provided :here were deleted the refererce to the slackening
in the ra:e of money supply expansion in recent weeks; such
a reference overemphasizes the significance of the slackening
following large gains in July. I see ro need for any change
in the second paragraph, for there is still more to be done
to carry out the modest shift in policy voted at the last
meeting. Thus I favor alternative A of the draft directive.1/
In the closing months of the year the banking system will
need a large amount of reserves to mee: seasonal and longer
term growth needs. I endorse Governor Balderston's suggestion
at the last meeting of the Committee that some reduction
in reserve requirements would be an appropriate way to meet
part. of such needs. Such a reduction would also provide
for the Federal Reserve Banks a greater cushion in the
future in meeting the 25 per cent gold reserve requirement
in respect of the notes and deposits of the Federal Reserve
Banks. Member bank reserve requirements were reduced in
1962. At that time the Board explainer, that this method
of supplying reserves would minimize downward pressures
from System purchases upon short-term narket rates, which
was desirable to keep incentives for short-term capital
flows abroad from becoming stronger. With such a precedert
and an appropriate explanation the sophisticated public
would understand that a reduction in reserve requirements
in the fall of 1964 would not be an act of monetary ease
but, rather, an act to avoid a downward pressure on short
term rates.
Mr. Ellis observed that the New England economy was sailing
smoothly, under no apparent strains. Perhaps the most significant
development that had come to light in the past 3 weeks was the slowing
down in July in the rate of construction contract awards. But the
1/ The draft directive referred to by Mr. Treiber, and
subsequently by others, is appended to these minutes as
Attachment A.

9/8/64 -26
decline had been from an inflated level that could hardly have been
sustained. For the first time this year, residential contract
awards is July were below year-ago levels--by one per cent. For the
first seven months as a whole, hcwever, they were running 19 per
cent above a year ago. Manufacturing output and factory manhours
turned up slightly in July.
Growth was more evident in the banking field, Mr. Ellis
continued. Commercial and industrial loan, were accounting for some
what more strength in bank asset growth in the District than in the
nation. Deposit growth also was strong, with the accent on time
deposits; over the past year, deposits had grown at twice the
national rate, Since the first of the year, certificates of deposit
had growth 50 per cent in the District, compared with 28 per cent in
the nation. Even nonnegotiable time deposits had grown since the first
of the year by 27 per cent, three times the national rate. Savings
banks had continued to experience substantial inflows of funds.
Since April, about 10 per cent of the regularly reporting mutual
savings banks had lowered their rates on mortgages by one-quarter
of one per cent.
Mr. Ellis said he had studied recent money market indicators
closely, looking for evidence of the slight change that the Committee
had been wanting to see, and it was hard to find such evidence in the
figures. However, he was willing to accept the Manager's judgment

9/8/64 -27
that a beginning had been made on the policy shift, that it had not
been possible to complete it by now, and that it could be completed
with due caution and delicacy. In light of the bad news on the
balance of payments reported by Mr. Furth, he thought that the
Committee should not reverse the decision made at the last meeting,
but should continue the gradual shift.
With respect to the directive, Mr. Ellis said, the choice
between alternatives A and B in the s:aff draft depended on how much
of a change nad materialized since the last meeting. He was inclined
toward alternative A. His targets were rather more modest than
Mr. Treiber's, however, He would like to see free reserves in the
zero to $50 million range, the Federal funds rate consistently at
3.50 per cent, member bank borrowings above $300 million, and the
bill rate move up gradually to 3.55 or 3.60 per cent during the next
few weeks--but not to 3.75 per cent. He did not favor a change in
the discount rate at this time. He was attracted to the oifd ea
supplying reserves this fall through a reserve requirement decrease.
Mr. Coldwell reported that economic cnditions in the
Eleventh District had shown little change in the past month.
Industrial production was up slightly in July, but it probably
down a little in August. The principal change had beeittnnho en e
of the crude oil production and refining industry. Crude oil
output was now scheduled to be higher in September despite heavy

9/8/64 -28-
inventories of some refined products and price weakness early in the
spring. The production increase was largely due to interstate com
petition, especially among Texas, Louisiana, and New Mexico, and
might result in over-supply and a new round of price cutting. The
level of refinery runs already was at a high point.
Construction activity was still providing strong support
for the District's economy, especially ccnstruction for roads and
other municipal services. Retail trade continued strong, although
perhaps not quite so ebullient as in July. Agricultural production
varied widely; rice production was at a :ecord high, while cotton
and grain sorghum yields were expected tc be down 5 and 17 per cent,
respectively, from a year ago. Recent rains had improved pasture
conditions, but heavy cattle marketings continued. Only strong
consumer demand prevented additional price declines.
Mr. Coldwell commented that finarcial conditions in the
District continued about as before. Loars had expanded moderate'y
and investments and deposits had declined. Loan pressure on reserves
and and apparently reduced availability of Federal funds had brought
increased activity at the Reserve Bank's discount window. Thus,
the margin of unutilized reserves to meet a further loan demand,
even of seasonal proportions, had narrowed considerably. Loan-deposit
ratios were up considerably, and some excesses were appearing,
especially among the newer national banks. A sizable proportion of

9/8/64 -29
banks chartered during the past two years had loan-deposit ratios
in excess of 70 per cent, and some had ratios above 90 per cent.
Newly-chartered banks continued to open at a fast pace.
Mr. Swan said little August data were available as yet for
the Twelfth District, but the situation seemed to be continuing
about as he had indicated at the last meeting of the Committee.
As early figures for July had indicated then, there was a sharp
increase for the District as a whole in agricultural employment,
accompanied by a slight increase in nonagricultural employment, but
the unemplorment rate still rose by about one-tenth of one per cent.
In contrast with the rest of the country, District housing starts
rose in July but for the year to date they were still well below
the 1963 level. Department store sales continued to run well above
a year ago. Loan demand seemed to be continuing at relatively high
levels, and in August District banks were under substantial reserve
pressure. Borrowings from the Reserve Bank had been considerabl
larger in the last several weeks than in recent months. Another
District bank had borrowed under section 10(b) of the Federal
Reserve Act, with its problems relating in part to certificates o.
deposit.
On the subject of policy, Mr. Swan noted that the Committee
had acted at the last meeting to move toward slightly firmer money
market conditions. He was not advocating a retreat from that decision,

9/8/64 -30
but in light of the domestic business situation and in light of
what was known--or rather, not known--about the increase in the
balance of payments deficit, he certainly would not advocate any
further lessening of ease. In his judgment the Committee should
wait to see what further market reactions occurred to the step
already taken before considering a further change.
In this connection, Mr. Swan said, he was concerned about
the point that had been made regarding the effect on the three-month
bill rate of the attractiveness to investors of a December maturity.
As Mr. Stone had indicated, surrounding maturities had somewhat higher
rates. Mr. Swan wondered if the Committee had not accomplished a
little more than it thought it had with respect to putting upward
pressure on bill rates--as might be evident if the rates were
seasonally adjusted, and as might appear in the actual three-month
rate as its, maturity date moved past December. The Committee might
find that it was underestimating the rate effect that had alread,
occured. This possibility reinforced Mr. Swan's feeling that it
was undesirable to tighten by more than was envisaged at the previous
meeting. His impression had been that the policy shift agreed to was
to be a gentle one and not very marked.
With respect to the draft directive, Mr. Swan said he would
accept the first paragraph of the staff draft, except for the
statement that the balance of payments deficit "was disturbingly large

9/8/64 -31
in July and August." He did not necessarily disagree with the
statement, but he would avoid using an adverb such as "disturbingly"
in the directive, particularly since it was not yet known what
factors underlay the recent deficit and therefore what its impli
cations for policy were. He would prefer to make the reference
factual, perhaps by saying the deficit "increased significantly"
in July and August.
With respect to the two alternatives for the second paragraph
Mr. Swan thought it was desirable to avoid the possible implication
of alternative A that the Committee was moving to a still firmer
policy than it had adopted at the previous meeting. Accordingly,
he would much prefer alternative B. He would not change the discount
rate at this time, and he thought the question of a reduction in
reserve requirements later in the year should be given serious
consideration.
Mr. Deming reported that the business statistics available
for the Ninth District since mid-year--on employment, industrial
production, department store sales, bank debits, shipments of
materials, personal incomes, and so forth--indicated moderate economic
expansion in the nonagricultural area. The agricultural performance
however, had been somewhat difficult to measure because of unusual
drought patterns this summer and because one of the farmer groups
had been acting to withhold cattle from the market. In the west,

9/8/64 -32-
the important wheat crop probably would be even better than estimated
at mid-year. In the eastern district, where corn and late feed
crops were particularly important, output might be sharply lower than
last year. The total District agricultural output might not quite
equal last year's near record level. If this assumption was correct,
over the rest of 1964 the District's cver a1lr ate of economic
expansicn might be less than that of the country as a whole.
Nevertheless, Mr. Deming said, the Reserve Bank's early
September survey of business opinion among District bankers and
businessmen indicated that optimism prevailed. Almost all reporters
in the larger commercial centers were expecting higher business
activity this month. Optimism was much more subdued in the smaller
centers serving agriculture.
In general, Mr. Deming said, he believed that nonagricultural
employment, industrial output, sales, over-all construction activity,
and personal incomes would continue to expand moderately in the
District during the balance of 1964. He would be happy but a little
surprised if the District's rate of expansion over the next few
months matched that of the U.S.
District banking developments in August did not parallel
those of the nation, Mr. Deming continued. The rate of bank credit
expansion was about the same as last year, and not as strong as in
the nation as a whole. The liquidity position of banks in the

9/8/64 -33-
District seemed to have improved in August. Deposits rose, and loan
deposit ratios improved. However, there still were some signs of low
liquidity; the level of Federal funds purchases had expanded since
July, and member bank borrowings since the spring had been significantly
higher than a year ago.
As to policy, Mr. Deming said he thought it desirable to make
no change, waiting to see what reactions developed to the shift,
decided on at the previous meeting He would interpret "no change in
policy" as leaving room for the continued implementation of that decision.
Accordingly, he preferred alternative A of the staff draft for the second
paragraph of the directive. As to the first paragraph, he had some
sympathy both with Mr. Treiber's suggestion for striking the reference
to the slackening in the rate of money supply expansion and with
Mr. Swan's objection to use of the phrase "disturbingly large" in
describing the recent payments deficit. On the latter point, he
suggested saying that the deficit "was appreciably larger in July and
August than in the preceding quarter."
Mr. Deming said he did not favor a change in dtihsec ount
rate during the next three weeks. And, as bhaMBonetrahd. l derstone
had suggested at the previous meeting, a reserve requirement
reduction might be an appropriate means for meeting at least part
of the reserve needs for the balance of the year.

9/8/64 -34
Mr. Scanlon reported that economic activity had continued
to increase in the Seventh District. Personal income apparently had
continued a strong rise; retail sales con:inued to show gains;
consumer loans at District banks had been rising at a moderate pace;
and in recent months increases in savings at commercial banks and
savings associations had exceeded last year's gains.
A recent spot check of some major Midwest firms indicated
that there was capacity available for further increases in output
in the major industries in the District, although there was pressure
on capacity for some individual products such as steel plates and
wide sheets. Even for plates and sheets, there still was little
evidence of inventory building by customers, although buying for in
ventory could become a problem if expectations of substantial price
increases became widespread, or if speculation should begin that a
strike would occur next May 1. Customers continued to hold to rigid
quality standards.
Employment prospects continued to improve in most District
centers, Mr. Scanlon noted, and unemployment in the District
continued to decline. Upward price pressures appeared to be significant
largely in the case of nonferrous metals, as indicated in the staff
report. In July, 15 per cent of the purchasing agents of Chicago
reported paying higher prices than the month before, about the same

9/8/64 -35
proportion as a year earlier. Only a small percentage of the
purchasing agents reported longer lead times on new orders than
a year earlier.
Homebuilding activity had been relatively stronger in the
District than in the U.S. thus far in 1964, Mr. Scanlon said. In
the first six months, permits were 18 per cent above last year
compared to a rise of 2 per cent for the nation. In recent months,
however, the picture in this area appeared to have weakened
considerably. Effective rates on mortgages eased slightly in recent
months in Chicago and Detroit.
Major District banks reported a very strong rise in loans
during August and accounted for three-fourths of the national increase,
Mr. Scanlon observed. Business loan expansion in the District
matched that for last year and was broadly based among industry
groups. Net paydowns by retail firms were large, offsetting the sharp
rise in July. A large part of the August loan increase was to
securities dealers and finance companies. Real estate loans also
rose substantially. Despite loan increases, reserve positions of
Chicago banks remained fairly comfortable with moderat net purchases
of Federal funds and little borrowing. These banks reportase mda ll
further net sell-off of Governments--in contrast to an increase in
holdings elsewhere in the U.S.--but they acquired a substantial
amount of municipal and agency securities.

9/8/64 -36-
As to a directive, Mr. Scanlon said, the draft of
September 4 p::epared by the staff was acceptable to him. Like
Mr. Ellis and others, he had difficulty finding in the figures
evidence of the change in policy adopted at the last meeting. He
would not favor retreating from the positicn previously taken, and
he assumed the adoption of alternative B as a second paragraph would
not imply this. Therefore, he favored alternative B. Mr. Seanlon
would continue the current discount rate.
Mr. Clay commented that the domestic economy was performing
essentially in line with the goals of public policy. The most
recent data in any one month might give a somewhat more sober or a
somewhat more ebullient view, he noted. Ir. the longer perspective,
however, there had been a rather steady advance involving some
shifting in the components of greatest forward thrust. Significant
inroads had been made this year on the sticky problem of the utiliza
tion of manpower and other resources. Neve:theless, the expanding
resource base permitted further growth in an orderly and sustainable
manner. In fact, continued advancement in economic activity was
necessary in order to maintain the manpower utilization problem
within tolerable proportions, to say nothing of attaining the goal
of further improvement.
While there had been an increase in some prices, Mr. Clay
said, the broad averages had demonstrated an impressive degree of

9/8/64 -37
stability. One expected prices to be more sensitive on the upside
as the business upswing progressed, but special situations rather
than general demand forces appeared to be the explanation for most
price increases thus far. In considering the future role of mone
tary policy relative to prices, it also has necessary to recognize
special institutional forces that were no: readily dealt with
through the broad impact of monetary policy and which required other
solutions. Notable among these were the industrial wage negotiations
with their potential effect upon prices. The terms of these
settlements in major industries were of the utmost importance to
price developments and to the economy generally, both domestic
and international. It was to be hoped, Mr. Clay said, that some
way would be found to give the national economy the benefit of non
inflationary wage settlements.
In Mr. Clay's opinion, the domestic economy continued Lo
require the pursuit of an expansive monetary policy In terms of
intermediate financial targets, it appeared logical to provide reserves
in sufficient volume to permit commercial bank credit expansion in
line with the average increase thus far this year. At the last
meeting of the Committee, he noted, it was decided to maask lei ght
shift in the short-run policy targets in view of recent developments
in the international balance of payments. In his judgment the small
change decided upon, if contained within those limits, would not

9/8/64 -38
likely be a deterrent to the domestic economy. One of the principal
issues at the last meeting, however, was the risk that the small
change in the short-run targets might trigger further developments
in the money and capital markets with repercussions upon domestic
economic activity. That issue still remained, Mr. Clay remarked,
as the market might come to recognize that some shift in policy
objectives had taken place without knowing the degree of the shift.
It would appear logical to continue the monetary policy decision
made only three weeks ago, within the linits determined at the
last meeting, but the situation called for the same cautious
handling as was underscored at that session.
Mr. Clay considered the staff draft of the first paragraph
of the economic policy directive to be quite satisfactory. He
thought alternative A of the second paragraph drafts would be
suitable providing its reference to "slightly firmer conditions
in the money market" was limited to the charge voted at the last
meeting. To make that crystal cler, he would prefer to see
alternative A amended to read as follows: add "the" after "main
taining," and add "agreed upon at the last meeting" after
"market." Moreover, he continued, it should be recognized that
there were special circumstances affecting yields of the December
Treasury bills and that the somewhat higher yields of the
adjacent maturities might have been a better measure of the degree

9/8/64 -39-
of accomplishment of the change sought. Mr. Clay added that no
change should be made in the Federal Reserve Bank discount rate.
Mr. Wayne said that substartial strength was reflected in
both the latest Fifth District statistics and the Reserve Bank's
most recent survey. July activity broke a number of previous
records with new highs in bank debits, nonfarm employment, building
permits, department store sales, and cigarette production.
Contract awards rose sharply for the second month in a row, nearly
matching the previous high, and factory man-hours gained as
manufacturing industries continued to experience strong demand.
Prices were strong in both textiles and furniture, and leading firms
in both industries had announced wage increases, expected to average
around 5 per cent, effective immediately or in the near future.
Reports that furniture makers would rais prices in time for the
fall markets had received wide circulation. Opinions, expressed in
the Bank's latest survey were divided about even between further
improvement and stability at present high levels. Returns from
manufacturers indicated generally stable cond tions except in the
textile industry where increases in new nd unfilled orders were
widely reported along with more limited evidence of further gains
in employment and hours. Respondents in constructiaonnd retail trade
reported further advances in already high levels of activity
Flue-cured tobacco markets had made a fast start, well ahead of last

9/8/64 -40
year on both price and quantity, but prices had wavered recently
as farmers flooded the market with early offerings so that com
parisons made at this early stage might not prove representative.
The national economy seemec to be continuing its moderate
upward course, Mr. Wayne said, with no setback or interruption
visible on the horizon.. Retail sales apparently rose moderately
in August and automobile dealers seemed to be doing an excellent
job of moving their large inventor:es of 1964 model cars. The
latest survey of consumers' buying intentions afforded a reasonable
basis for expecting continued strong conumer demand. Barring a
strike, automobile production would be high in the coming weeks, and
steel production seemed headed for a record year. Expenditures
for new plant and equipment still were providing much of the impetus
for the present high rate of activity. Conflicting movements among
varicus components of the construction industry had produced fairly
stable tot ls since last October, a condition worthy of note,
comin, after 18 years of strong and almo;t uninterrupted growth.
The behavicr of prices and uncertainty at, to the outcome of current
wage negotiations were two possible disturbing elements in this
generally favorable situation. Wholesale prices generally were not
appreciably higher than they were six months ago or a year ago,
but in the past three weeks certain commodity groups had shown rather
sharp price rises,. These had been principally foods, especially

9/8/64 -41
meats, and to a less extent raw materials. The large jump in meat
prices was very largely the result of the farmers' program of
withholding livestock from the markets and it was doubtful whether
that would have any permanent effect: on prices.
Mr. Wayne commended the Desk for its skillful job in the
past three weeks in walking the tightrope erected at the Committee's
last meeting. Thus far, the slight move :oward less ease which
was them made apparently had registered in the markets only in the
form of lower free reserves last week and a slight softening in
bond prices at the week end. This might well have been because of
an unusually strong but temporary nonbank demand for short bills.
Domestically, the recent behavior of commodity prices might suggest
increa;ed inflationary pressures, but to a large extent recent
price rises had been confined to limited segments of the economy and
appeared to be related to factors other than basic money and credit
conditions. Early resolution of the present situation in livestock
markets and of current labor negotiations in the metals and
automotive industries could change the picture significantly.
In the international area, Mr. Wayne continued, a substantial
covered spread in favor of London persisted, but there was no evidence
of any significant movement of short-term funds abroad. In fact,
there seemed to have been some small return flows recently. For
these reasons, he felt that the Committee should allow more time

9/8/64 -42
for the effects of its latest policy change to work themselves out.
Free reserves were now about as close to zero as they could get
without a serious risk of showing net borrowed reserves fairly
frequently, and Mr. Wayne did not believe that such a risk was
warranted at this juncture. He remained concerned over the pos
sibility of short-term outflows, however, and he agreed with the
reasoning that the large seasonal increase in reserves just ahead
could best be provided by reducing reserve requirements rather than
through the open market. For the present, he favored no change
in policy and would leave the discount rate at the present level.
The draft directive was acceptable to Mr. Wayne, except
that he shared Mr. Swan's concern about the words "disturbingly
large" in the last sentence of the first paragraph. He preferred
alternative B for the second paragraph.
Mr. Mills commented that Mr. Stone's report of the operations
of the System Open Market Account recorded results that were consistent
with the Committee's directive of moving toward a slightly firmer
market on an experimental and cautious basis. There seemed to be
as good reasons today as there were at the previous meeting for
continuing the policy that had been adopted. This policy seemed
to have had the advantage of tending to jar the market out of its
apathy, and out of its belief that the System was prepared to so
control and manipulate the interest rate structure that operators

9/8/64 -43
in the market were free to over-position themselves with confidence
that there would be no change. He thought the results of the minor
change in policy had already been helpful in altering that attitude,
and in bringing about responses and atti:udes that were more in
keeping with the kind of market that the System historically had
attempted to foster.
Mr. Mills said he found the growing discussion of the pos
sibility of reducing reserve requirements to be disconcerting.
If he read the staff report correctly, it would be necessary to
provide about $1.2 billion in reserves during the fall months, but
then to withdraw about $1.1 billion by the end of January. In his
opinion it might be difficult to accomplish successfully an operation
in which reserves were supplied in volume by a reduction in require
ments and then withdrawn by open market operations. Moreover, if the
balance of payments problem worsened rapidly, and it was necessary
to increase the discount rate and make the higher rate effect.ve
by withholding reserves, the operation would be more difficult
if reserve requirements had been reduced. It seemed to Mr. Mills
that this discussion was premature, at the least, and that the
Board should be wary about moving in this direction .
Mr. Mills commented that the Treasury approach to the balance
of payments problem through the interest equalization tax seemed
likely to prove ineffective, and the Treasury had not seen fit to

9/8/64 -44
move toward fiscal controls. Thus, it might be that the System
ultimately would have to be the chosen instrument for dealing with
the balance of payments problem through restrictive monetary policy.
The discipline of such a policy might be helpful, Mr. Mills said,
but, as Mr. Furth had explained, interest rate considerations were
not the principal reason for the losses of gold and the movement
of dollars abroad. It seemed quixotic that the System might have
to use an interest rate approach to correct a situation whose origin
was not based on interest rate factors. Mr. Mills concluded by
saying he would prefer alternative B for the directive.
Mr. Robertson made the following statement:
Over the past three weeks, the performance of the
financial markets in general, and of the System Account
Manager in particular, has reminded me very much of a man
balancing on a tightrope. There he has been, poised in
a precarious balance of natural fores, with a sharp drop
awaiting him if he makes the slightest misstep; and the
majority of the Open Market Committee, at our last meeting,
urged him to lean just slightly fur.her. I hate to
think that would have happened. if he had leaned far enough
to push the bill rate to the levels some members of the
Committee wished him to attair.
Now there is a limit to what any acrobat (even the
most adept) can do. I think we have been very lucky to
be able to maintain the posture we have over the last
three weeks, and nothing that has been said around this
table leads me to believe that either the Manager or the
market can lean over any further withold danger of top
pling. That risk is simply not worth taking at this t me.
I do not believe any of the broader measures of
significance for policy have moved in a direction that
would call for further monetary tightening at this time.
Indeed, the latest figures give a more moderate cast to
recent domestic developments. The unemployment uptick

9/8/64 -45-
in August confirms the view that improvement in this vital
area is still a painfully slow proess, with plenty of
distance yet to go. Prices are still bubbling in the non
ferrous metals area. This particular kind of price action,
however, is not unusual in an expansion, and the sectors of
the economy directly involved are so small as to have little
significance by themselves. The striking thing about these
nonferrous price advances is that they do not seem to be
spreading into other and more important lines of business.
By any general standard, we are still in the midst of a
noninflationary business expansion.
On the monetary side, the money supply in August
expanded at barely a 3 per cent annual rate, well below
the rapid 8 per cent rate posted in June and July. Thus,
no tauter rein on reserves seems to be called for at this
time in order to moderate monetary growth.
The one bad set of numbers continues to be the balance
of payments accounts. Here we may be approaching the time
when new policy steps to staunch the capital outflow will
be needed. We must be careful, however, to choose steps
that are appropriate to the kinds of drains being experi
enced. For example, bankers' actions seem to be an
important contributor to these drains, but clearly the
significant actions are confined to a very small handful
of banks, concentrated largely in New York City. Those
actions consist not only of lending abroad in response to
established customer needs, but also, we hear, of shifts
of loanable funds abroad and other anticipatory actions
designed to avoid the impact of any subsequent Presidential
invocation of the Gore amendment extending the scope of
the interest equalization tax to banks. It is a cruel
irony that a measure designe to help the balance of pay
ments may be hurting it seriously. To stop this kind of
banker action, the Open Market Committee may need to con
sider recommending to the President that he proceed to
invoke the Gore amendment forthwith. Whether or not we
like that law or its implications, it is there and its
consequences must be dealt with accordingly. One thing
I am sure of: it would be ridiculous to blame general
monetary conditions for such a specific development, and
to try to offset it by a tighter general monetary policy
with its attendant risk of impairing our domestic economic
strength and lessening our ability to achieve fuller
employment and greater utilization of resources.

9/8/64 -44
I think the proper policy prescription for the next
three weeks is to hold conditions just about as they have
been on the average over the last three weeks. A degree
of snugness has returned to the money market, and I would
be willing to see it continued rather than reversed so
soon after a change in policy. But I would be opposed
to any further move toward tightness during this period.
There.fore, I would favor the second of the two alternative
wordings of the current directive submitted by the staff.
Mr.Robertson added that he shared the reservations that had
been expressed about the phrase "disturbingly large" in the proposed
directive. On the other hand, he would not take out the reference
to "some slackening in the rate of money supply expansion in recent
weeks." As to the comments that had been made with respect to
lowering reserve requirements, he had prepared a statement on this
subject before the previous meeting but had decided to withhold it
for the time being. He would like it to be known, however, that
he was not persuaded that such an action would be desirable.
Mr. Shepardson commented that all of the reports seemed to
indicate that the economy was experiencing a healthy and consistent
advare. There were upward pressures, or potential pressures, on
prices, including the current wage negotiations whose outcome
could not be foretold at present. There also were reports from
a number of sources of shortages of available competent labor,
nothwithstanding the unemployment rate. In some industries opera
tions were approaching plant capacity. All of these factors,
together with recent balance of payments developments, seemed to

9/8/64 -47
him to jus ify fully the action the Committee had taken at its
previous meeting. He would have voted in favor of that action
if he had been present.
Mr. Shepardson said that current reports seemed to indicate
that there was still some distance to go in implementing the policy
change tha: had been decided on. Accordingly, he favored alterna
tive A for the second paragraph of the cirective, since it
indicated an intent to move toward what had been contemplated
but not yet attained. He thought the reference to the money
supply in the first paragraph was inappropriate and should be
deleted. From time to time there had been substantial swings in
the money supply in both directions, and calling attention to the
fact that the growth rate recently had slackened would give thi.
change more emphasis than he thought was justified. He also
agreed with the comment that the word "disturbingly" in the last
line of the first paragraph might be over-severe, and he approved
of the change in wording that had been suggested.
Mr. Mitchell said that the reason for the shift in policy
agreed upon at the previous meeting had to be the fact of some
deterioration in the balance of payment; he dd not think that
the domestic economy would derive any benefit from the moderate
firming of conditions in the past few weeks. If the Committee
concurred in Mr. Furth's analyses at this meeting and the previous

9/8/64 -48
one, he felt it would have to conclude that monetary tightening
was not going to help the balance of payments in any respect.
At the previous meeting Mr. Furth had pointed out that the
reported deficits were in part illusory, and at this meeting he
had noted that the worsening of the deficit was not due to capital
outflows. It was hard to understand how the Committee could use
the paymerts deficit as an excuse for tightening when its own
analysts indicated that any action it might take would have no
effect on the deficit.
At the previous meeting, Mr. Mitchell continued,
Chairman Martin had expressed the view that the probing action
decided or, was of a somewhat hazardous nature and should be
carried out with great care. This certainly was the way in which
the Desk had been implementing the decision. The movement the
Committee had contemplated was quite modest; yet three weeks
already had passed, and the Manager estimated that it would
take three more weeks to carry out his instructions. Mr. Mitchell
submitted that if it took six weeks to put a modest change into
effect, that change must involve considerable hazards. The
Account Management might have been successful in tranquilizing
the bond market, but he did not think the Committee should be
tranquilized; the situation was explosive. In his judgment, in

9/8/64 -49
the absence of some strong and compelling reason the Committee
should not change its course at all.
Mr. Mitchell said he preferred alternative B for the second
paragraph of the directive. With respect to the money supply
reference in the first paragraph, he note that on an earlier
occasion he had questioned the desirability of referring in the
directive to a sharp increase in the money supply until it was
known whether that change would persist. Others had commented
then that the increase up to that point was a fact, and
accordingly deserved mention; and he had withdrawn his objection.
He agreed that the recent slackening was likely to be reversed
later, but as of this date it was a fact, and he thought the
reference should be retained.
Mr. Mitchell then suggested the following alternative
wording for the balance of payments reference in the first para
graph: "It also gives consideration to the fact that although
the deficit in the balance of payments appears to have been
significantly larger in July and August, the worsening does
not seem to have been related to interest rate differentials."
Mr. Hickman commented that aggregate measures of economic
activity were still showing strength in late summer, with the near
term outlook generally favorable. Retail sales moved up again in
August, and perhaps more important, the latest survey of plant

9/8/64 -50
and equipment spending indicated another sight upward revision.
On the other hand, there were a few signs of possible imbalance
in the economy, which might become more important later on.
The steel industry had again revised upward its estimates
for ingot output in 1964. Latest indications were that output
this year might approach 125 million ingot tons, with "economical"
capacity (as distinct from "physical" capacity) being a possible
constraint on future output. In the Fourth District, as well
as elsewhere, there were instances of steel mills, formerly
regarded as obsolete, now being reactivated. Steel customers
now seemed to be attempting to re-establish more comfortable
ratios of in entories to consumption. Such rebuilding of customer
stocks, if it became excessive, would result in the kind of un
desirable inventory cycle that had unbalanced the economy in the
past. Further distortions might result from a possible reopening
of the steel Labor contract next January, and from a developing
shortage of freight cars.
Mr. Hickman said plans of the auto industry for production
in September indicated a phenomenally high output for the month,
unless serious strike interruptions occurred. Domestic new car
sales for August were 18 per cent above a year earlier, and were
the highest for that month since 1955.

9/8/64 -51
Recent developments in the Fourth District confirmed the
moderate advances in business activity, Mr. Hickman remarked.
In the most recent three weeks, steel procuction had moved up
ward in all District centers. Department store sales had been
maintained a: a near-record level. Insured unemployment in most
labor market centers was again performing favorably, after a
spotty showing in midsummer.
The revised balance of payments figures for July and the
preliminary estimates for August confirmed the appropriateness of
the modest policy shift adopted by the Committee three weeks ago,
Mr. Hickman said. On the other hand, little progress seemed to
have been made in achieving the Committee's new policy objective.
The bid price on 91-day Treasury bills had held at about 3.50 per
cent. Differentials between Euro-dollar rates and yields on
three-month CD's, as well as between yields on U.S. and British
bills, had w:dened slightly since the last meeting, while the
covered differential between Montrea1 and New York hid turned
slightly in favor of the U.S. The absence of weekly balance of
payments figures made it impossible to evaluate these relatior
ships, although a century of British monetary history suggest
that existing differentials were hardly likely to attract funds
to the U.S. The fact that the recent worsening of the deficit
did not reflect an increase in capital outflows did not mean

9/8/64 -52
that such flows had no effect; capital lows had been adverse to
the U.S. for many months.
Mr. Hickman remarked that the difficulty experienced by
the Desk in executing the Committee's policy in the past three
weeks illustrated once again the handicap of operating with in
complete and inaccurate figures on reserve availability. Time
and again, one found the Desk operating on the basis of preliminary
figures that were virtually on target, only to find later on that
there were major revisions out of the target range. In the
recent dialogue on the desirability of a new directive and the
need for research on various aspects of monetary theory, the
Committee might have lost sight of the fact that its most pressing
problem was the ability to forecast accurately the factors affecting
bank reserves. One part of the problem was the lack of a system of
daily reporting of reserve positions by all member banks. This
information was now collected in four of the Federal Reserve
Districts and, in his opinion, should be collected nationwide.
Turning to the directive, Mr. Hickman commented that the
fact that the recent change in the money supply growth rate had
been of brief duration was reason enough to delete the reference
to "some slackening" in that rate. He also would delete the
words "disturbingly large" in the reference to the balance of
payments deficit, as Mr. Swan had suggested. He favored

9/8/64 -53
alternative A for the second paragraph on the ground that only
minor progress had been made as yet in ach:.eving the objective
decided upon at the previous meeting. On the other hand, the
aim should be to achieve only a modest change in conditions.
The targets he had in mind included a three-month bill rate of
about 3.60 per cent when the maturity date of three-month bills
moved past December, and free reserves raning around $50 million.
He thought that a reduction in free reserves to zero would trigger
undesirable changes in expectations. He was in sympathy with the
view Mr. Balderston had expressed at the previous meeting that a
change in reserve requirements was desirable, and that it be
scheduled for the latter part of October. If such an action were
to be taken it would probably be most apprcpriate then. On the
other hand, if the Committee should find it necessary to shift
to a firmer policy in the interim, a reduction in requirements
might be unnecessary.
Mr. Bopp commented business was good in the third District.
Unemployment continued to decline; construction co tract awards an
electric power consumption showed gains over 1963; and, while not
matching national increases, department store sales remained ahead
of last year.
In July, unemployment rates (seasonally adjusted) decreased
moderately in most labor market areas. Preliminary insured rates
indicated that this moderate decline continued in August.

9/8/64 -54.
Construction contract awards gained in July both nationally and in
the District. Electric power consumption by Third District manu
facturers continued to increase steadily. Steel production in the
Northeast Coast district had remained at the national level in
recent weeks.
Mr. Bopp reported that reserve pressures on District member
banks had increased slightly since August 12. The average deficit
in the basic reserve position of reserve city banks increased to
$60 million from $49 million in the previous three-week period.
On Friday, two reserve city banks borrowed at the discount window;
the activity of the country banks was light and declining.
As, the fall of the year approached, business activity con
tinued to expand at a brisk pace when compared with historical
growth rates, Mr. Bopp said. Nevertheless, employment, prices,
and anticipations continued to reflect moderation. Business wa.
good enough to support a near-record level of employment but not
good enough to reduce unemployment to an acceptable level.
Business was good enough to send corporate profits to record
levels and production closer to the preferred rate of capacity
but not sufficiently heated to push wage rates and unit costs into
a spiral of price inflation. Indeed, unemployment remained un
comfortably hgh while unit costs and the broad indexes of prices
remained stable.

9/8/64 -55
As for the future, Mr. Bopp continued, the immediate out
look provided little evidence that the business expansion was
getting out of hand. Production and distribution of goods re
mained orderly and inventories stable. In his opinion, moreover,
the policies followed by the Federal Reserve System since the
spring of 1961 had resulted in a rate of increase in money and
credit that had been appropriate to the increase in real output
which had occurred.
On the international front, the disappointing second
quarter deficit in the balance of payments had been followed by
further sizable deficits in the months of July and August. Part
of the problem seemed to be a cyclical increase in imports; part
of it seemed to stem from continuing flows of short-term money
and capital abroad.
A gererally tighter monetary policy, it seemed to Mr. Bopp,
would not be a suitable remedy for these problems. The rise in
imports was related more to a rise in incomes than to a rise in
prices. Capital flows abroad were related in large measure to
the breadth and depth of the capital markets. Moreover, while
short-term money movements might respond favorably to higher
domestic rates, such higher rates were not justified in view of
domestic economic conditions. On balance, Mr. Bopp felt that
the existing monetary posture was appropriate to the current

9/8/64 -56
environment, and he would recommend that further provision of
reserves to the banking system continue to be made with a minimum
impact on short-term interest rates.
Mr. Bopp thought the draft directive proposed by the staff
was appropriate, with alternative B used for the second paragraph.
He would leave in the reference to the money supply, primarily
because it was well to indicate that its growth rate fluctuated,
for the benefit of those critics who had been concerned about the
recently high growth rate. He did not favor using the phrase
"disturbingly large" in referring to the payments deficit.
Mr. Bryan said that nearly all of the new figures for the
Sixth District were up sharply, including nonfarm and manufacturing
employment, construction contract awards, personal income, manu
facturing payrolls, and average hours worked. Insured unemploymen,
was now almost negligible--the figure for the entire District was
only 110,000.
As to national policy, Mr. Bryan said that at the previous
meeting he had felt that the Committee could snug up the situation
slightly, largely on the ground that the economy was in a healthy
trend, by allowing the expected fall credit demands to do the
tightening. As he understood it, the Committee's decision had
been to snug up policy, but so slightly as to be almost impercep
tible. It seemed to Mr. Bryan that this had been accomplished,

9/8/64 -57
and at present he would not advocate any :urther overt moves in
the direction of a less easy policy.
Mr. Bryan remarked that he would repeat a comment he had
made on an earlier occasion: he did not believe the price situa
:ion was nearly as reassuring as many of his colleagues and staff
seemed to feel. Consumer prices continued to creep up at an
annual rate that he thought would satisfy those who advocated
creeping inflation.
Mr. Bryan did not favor an increase in the discount rate at
this time, and he withheld judgment on the subject of a possible
reduction in reserve requirements.
Mr. Bryan was inclined to retain the reference to the money
supply in the directive for the reason that Mr. Bopp had mentioned.
As for the words "disturbingly large" in reference to the balance
of payments deficit, he would have preferred "frighteningly large"
were it not for the argument that had been advanced by Mr. Mitchell
to the effect that the Committee did not know what was causing the
recent worsening.
Mr. Shuford reported that economic activity in the Eighth
District had shown little change since January on the whole, but
there had been some gains in the latest figures. Payroll employ
ment in major labor markets had risen at a 2.6 per cent annual
rate since April. Check payments and business loans had risen

9/8/64 -58
markedly since April and had more than offset declines earlier
in the ye.r. However, manufacturing emrloyment and output had
shown only slight gains since spring.
Deposits of District banks had risen at an 8 per cent
annual rate since April, and total loans had increased at a
17 per cent rate. Investments had been reduced, and the District's
large banks had been net purchasers of Federal funds. Borrowings
fro the Reserve Bank had increased substantially; daily average
outstanding advances were $10 million in August, nearly double
the average for the three previous months, although slightly less
than the average for the past five years.
Mr. Shuford commented that at the previous meeting he had
mentioned inquiries from two of the larger District banks with
respect to methods of borrowing on the security of customer paper.
One of those banks subsequently had borrowed in this manner, the
first instance of such borrowing in the District for some time.
Nationally, Mr.. Shuford said, economic activity had con
tinued to advance in the summer, with strength in all areas except
construction. In addition to the underlying business trength,
both monetary and fiscal policy had been stimulative since spring.
Mr. Shuford thought the policy action taken by the Committee
at the previous meeting had been appropriate. The change was
intended to be slight and gradual, and it seemed to him that the

9/8/64 -59
decision had been implemented in this manner. He felt the Desk
had performed its delicate assignment well. He favored no change
in policy now, and he would not want to see any more tightening
than had been contemplated at the previous meeting. In his opinion
it was desirable to hold the ground that had been won, and to firm
up conditions to complete the shift that had been envisaged.
Mr. Shuford leaned toward deleting the reference to the
money supply in the draft directive in view of the short time
pericd during which growth had slackened, although he did not feel
strongly on the point. As to "disturbingly," he thought a more
appropriate word probably could be found but again he was not
inclined to press the point. The choice between the alternatives
proposed for the second paragraph turned on what the Committee had
in mini with respect to policy. If the intent was to indicate that
the Committee was simply firming up the nove it already had made, as
he recommended, this could be accomplished best by alternative A.
Mr. Shuford did not favor a change in the discount rate.
Mr. Balderston noted that a majority of the voting members
of the Committee seemed inclined to revise the statement referring
to the payments deficit in the draft directive. Tadhvosoec ating
deletion of the money supply reference seemed to be in a minority.
As to the choice between the alternatives fc; the second paragraph,
four members favored A and five favored B. His own preference,

9/8/64 -60
Mr. Balderston said, was mildly in favor of A, but he did not
consider the matter of great moment and he would be prepared to
accept B.
Mr. Ireiber remarked that he thought the phrase "disturbingly
large" had been well chosen, and unlike others who had commented on
it he would have found it acceptable for the directive. With
respect to the proposed adoption of alternative B for the second
paragraph, he was unclear what significance this choice would have
for the Manager's operations. Did the Committee contemplate that
the Manager should continue to carry out .he policy shift envisaged
at the last meeting or that he should stop short?
Mr. Balderston said that he understood the consensus to
favor continuing the prior policy, not retreating from the decision
taken at the previous meeting.
Mr. Stone commented that the question in his mind did not
involve the alternatives of continuing or retreating, but rather
those of continuing and stopping the operation in midpassage. As
he understood the intent of the Committee, it was not to stop the
operation.
Mr. Mitchell asked what quantitative targets the Manager
would consider consistent with an instruction to continue the
policy shift agreed upon at the previous meeting. Mr. Stone
replied that it was useful to distinguish two senses in which the

9/8/64 -61
operation thus far was incomplete. First, the fact that the
Committee had made a modest change in policy had not yet been
conveyed fully to the public; and second, the shift had not yet
been reflected fully in the figures. In his judgment a completed
operation would involve a continuation of free reserves close to
the $44 million level of the previous week--in the narrow range
of $40-$60 million, if possible. Several weeks of figures in
this range would convey effectively to the public the fact that
a gentle shift had occurred, after which the range might be
broadened--perhaps to $25-$75 million, and later to $0-$100 million.
With respect to the bill rate, ne did not think the Committee
favored a rate as high as 3.60 per cent for three-month bills
maturing in December because of the seasonal factors tending to
depress that particular rate. However, he noted, yields on bills
maturing in January currently were in the 3.53-3.60 per cent
range. If the policy shift was continued, he would contemplate
that when three-month bills with January maturities were issued-
i.e., when bills were auctioned early in October, following the
Committee's next meeting--their yield would be in the neighborhood
of 3.60 per cent.
Mr. Shuford commented that on the basis of Mr. Stone's
statement he would be prepared to vote in favor of alternative B.
Mr. Balderston suggested that the Committee vote on a
directive composed of the staff draft for the first paragraph,

9/8/64 -62-
except that the balance of payments reference would be amended in
the manner Mr. Deming had suggested; and with alternative B for
the second paragraph.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York was; authorized and
directed, until otherwise directed by the
Committee, to execute transactions in the
System Account in accordance with the follow
ing current economic policy directive:
It is the Federal Open Market Committee's current policy
to accommodate moderate growth in the reserve base, bank
credit, and the money supply for the purpose of facilitating
continued expansion of the economy, while fostering improve
ment in the capital account of U.S. ir.ternational payments,
and seeking to avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures.
This policy takes into account the continued orderly expan
sion in economic activity, some slackening in the rate of
money supply expansion in recent weeks, and relative stability
in broad commodity price averages. It also gives considera
tion to indications that the deficit in the U.S. balance of
payments was appreciably larger in July and August than in
the preceding quarter.
To implement this policy, System open market operations
shall be conducted with a view to mairtaining the slightly
firmer conditions in the money market that have prevailed in
recent weeks, while accommodating moderate expansion in
aggregate bank reserves.
Mr. Stone referred to Mr. Hickman's remarks on the problems
posed by inaccuracies in reserve estimates and the desirability of
extending the daily reporting of reserve positions to all Districts.
He commented that System-wide daily reporting would be most helpful
to the operations of the Desk.

9/8/64 -63
It was agreed the next meeting of the Comnittee would be
held on Tuesday, September 29, 1964, at 9:30 a.m.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary

9/8/64 Attachment A
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) September 4, 1964.
Draft current economic policy direccives for consideration by the
Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting on
September 8, 1964
First Pararaph
It is the Federal Open Market Ccntnittee's current policy to
accommodate moderate growth in the resezve base, bank credit, and
the money supply for the purpose of facilitating continued expan
sion of the economy, while fostering improvement in the capital
account ot U.S. international payments, and seeking to avoid the
emergence of inflationary pressures. This policy takes into
account the continued orderly expansion in economic activity,
some slackening in the rate of money supply expansion in recent
week3, and relative stability in broad commodity price averages.
It also gives consideration to indications that the deficit in
the U.S. balance of payments was disturbingly large in July and
August.
Second Paragraph
Alternative A:
To implement this policy, System open market operations
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining slightly firmer
conditions in the money market, while accommodating moderate
expansion in aggregate bank reserves.
Alternative B:
To implement this policy, System open market operations
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining the slightly firmer
conditions in the money market that have prevailed in recent weeks,
while accommodating moderate expansion in aggregate bank reserves.