A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday, May 5, 1964, at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairmanl /
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Daane
Mr. Hickman
Mr. Mills
Mr. M itchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Shuford
Mr. Swan
Mr. Wayne
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Ellis, Scanlon, .and Deming, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bopp, Clay, and Irons, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Brill, Garvy, Grove, Holland, Jones,
Koch, and Mann, Associate Economists
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market
Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Partee and Williams, Advisers, Division
of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Wood, Associate Adviser, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
1/ Left the meeting at the point indicated.

5/5/64 -2
Mr. Axilrod, Chief Covernment Finance
Section, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
Messrs. Heflin and Patterson, First Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Richmond and Atlanta, respectively
Messrs. Taylor, Baughman, Parsons, Tow, and
Green, Vice Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Chicago,
Minneapolis, Kansas City, and Dallas,
respectively
Mr. Sternlight, Assistant Vice President,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston
Mr. Rothwell, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market
Account covering open market operations in U. S. Government securities
and bankers' acceptances for the period April 14 through April 29,
1964, and a supplemental report covering the period April 30 through
May 4, 1964. Copies of these reports have been placed in the files
of the Commit:ee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone commented
as follows:

5/5/64
The climate of reserve availability during the period
since the last meeting has remained within the range of
variation established during the past several months. Federal
funds have traded in good volume and mainly at 3-1/2 per
cent, although dipping slightly lower on a few days,
Member bank borrowing was largely within a daily range of
about $100 to $400 million, although it climbed higher on
occasion--most notably on Wednesday, April 15, a double
settlement date which was complicated by large flows of
funds in connection with the Treasury's paydown of $2-1/2
billion of maturing bills. In order to make that outpayment,
the Treasury made heavy special calls on its major commercial
bank depositaries (the "C" banks) and this tended to con
centrate reserve pressures on the central money market.
The money market continued quite firm through April 17 as
the Treasury made additional special calls on the "C"
banks to cover net cash outflows.
After the 17th, however, the pressures on the central
money market began to abate--particularly after April 22
when the Treasury began to redeposit the earlier special
calls on the "C" banks and made further net redeposits with
those banks. Over the 10-day period from April 22 to May 1
the redeposit of earlier calls plus further net deposits to
the "C" banks came to more than $2 billion. This situation
came about as heavy individual income tax receipts flowed
into the Treasury's account at the Reserve Banks; to keep
member banks reserves from being absorbed through this
process, it was necessary to make the large redeposits to
the "C" banks. Yesterday, it was possible to begin reversing
the heavy net redeposits with the "C" banks and this should
help to restore the position of basic reserve deficiency
under which many of the large money market banks, particu
larly those in New York, typically operate.
In the Treasury bill market rates edged gradually lower
through most of the past three-week period--largely in
reflection of vigorous demand growing out of investment of
some State and local tax receipts and reinvestment of the
proceeds of the Treasury's April 15 bill maturity. These
demands encountered market supplies that were already
depleted through factors operating in March and early April-
such as the reinvestment of the telephone company's stock
sale proceeds. Investor demand was augmented by increased
dealer demand as the dealers sought to rebuild inventories
in anticipation of a Treasury exchange offering in which

5/5/64
selling of "rights" would generate demand for bills. At
their low point, the three-month bill dipped to about 3.45
per cent while the six-month issue declined to 3.59 per
cent compared with rates of about 3.50 and 3.70 per cent
at the start of the period,
In the last few days a more cautious atmosphere has
developed in the bill market and rates have inched a little
higher despite the very substantial purchases by the Open
Market Account to offset month-end reserve drains. In
part, the heavier tone seems to have resulted from a smaller
than expected demand for bills coming out of selling of
refunding "rights." In the bill auction yesterday, average
issuing rates were set at about 3.48 and 3.63 per cent for
the three- and six-month bills, respectively, about un
changed and down 6 basis points from the rates three weeks
earlier.
In the Treasury bond market the center of attention
has been the anticipation of, and reaction to, the Treasury's
May exchange offering. Through most of the recent period
the market awaited the Treasury's offering in an atmosphere
of growing confidence in current rate levels, following
the uneasy period and price markdowns that occurred through
most of March. Heartened by the improving market atmosphere,
the Treasury offered a 10-year 4-1/4 per cent bond at par
in addition to a widely anticipated 18-month note, and the
offering s being very well received. There has been a
particularly strong interest in the 10-year 4-1/4's--an
offering that would have seemed quite unpalatable a scant
few weeks ago. Relatively few macuring "rights" have been
coming into the market, with the result that at the close
last night, the new 4-1/4 per cent bonds were bid at about
100-1/4 in when-issued trading, while the various "rights"
issues carried comparable premium, Interest in the 4 per
cent notes is moderate in comparison, bat it is expected
that a good many rights holders will choose to exchange
for the shorter issue. I should add in this connection
that the System holds approximately $6.3 billion of the
maturing May 15 issues and we plan to exchange these for the
18-month 4 per cent note.
The corporate and municipal bond markets were also
steady and quiet while awaiting the Treasury's refunding
terms. New issues were fairly well received although no
great enthusiasm developed. Thus, the $100 million telephone
issue offered during the period was some 70 per cent sold

5/5/64
the first day but subsequent progress was slow and yesterday
the remaining quarter of the issue was released from
syndicate with a modest upward yield adjustment of 3 basis
points (to 4.51 per cent).
In response to questions, Mr. Stone commented that it was diffi
cult to say whether the sizable premiums at which rights were trading
would lead to problems in the aftermarket, but he felt the situation
might be healthier if the premiums came down somewhat before the books
closed on Wednesday. Attrition was expected to be larger than usual in
this exchange. Some market observers were guessing that exchanges would
be made into the two issues in about equal amounts, but others thought
that somewhat more than half would be made into the 18-month notes.
There appeared to be little or no speculative interest in the 4-1/4 per
cent bond.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimcus vote,
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances
during the period April 14 through May 4,
1964, were approved, ratified and con
firmed.
Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and financial
reports, supplementing the written reports that had been distributed
prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed in the files of
the Committee,
Mr. Koch presented a statement on economic conditions as follows:
Most of the business and economic news that has become
available since our last meeting has been consistent with the

5/5/64 -6
course of developments the staff has been sketching out at
these meetings for some time now, namely, a moderate and
relatively well balanced economic expansion. Industrial
production was probably up a little more in April and employ
ment rose further, but the rate of unemployment continued
around 5-1/2 per cent. Preliminary March and revised February
inventory figures suggest that accumulation of stocks was
even less in the first quarter than had been thought earlier.
Both the leading and coincident economic indicators con
tinue strong, an unusual development for a business cycle
over three years old. The leading indicators generally become
weak several months before general business.
The evidence is still by no means all in on the initial
effects cf the tax cut in stimulating spending, but thus far
they seen to have been mild. Total retail sales in March
were down from those in February, and thus far in April they
appear to be down a little further. Whether this recent be
havior of consumer spending can be fully explained by such
factors as cool and rainy weather and the early date of
Easter is doubtful. A more satisfactory explanation seems to
be that the tax cut was in part anticipated by consumers,
thereby contributing to the heavy retail sales and consumer
credit extensions during the winter, and in part that the
cut has lagged spending effects. A recent econometric study,
for example, suggests that spending re.ponse in the first
quarter following the cut may be less than half of the
eventual over-all spending impact. Moreover, some individuals
are increasing their tax withholdings, thereby temporarily
increasing their savings. In any case, it is now evident
that the cut has not created an immediate buying spree on the
part of consumers.
The economic news that has probably received the most
widespread comment during the past three weeks has been the
new McGraw-Hill survey of anticipated plant and equipment
spending by business concerns in 1964. The 12 per cent in
crease in such spending over 1963 suggested by the new
survey is not significantly different from the 10 per cent
estimated rise obtained in the Commerce-SEC survey taken in
February. The McGraw-Hill data are more heavily weighted by
the larger corporations which are apparently engaging in
heavier capital expansion programs than smaller ones.
The revised McGraw-Hill survey does not suggest an in
vestment boom this year. Nor do recent data on new orders
for durable goods, which are down from their January peak.
Using the McGraw-Hill anticipation figures, business plant

5/5/64 -7
and equipment spending on a constant dollar basis would total
only 6.8 per cent of a projected GNP of $625 billion this
year, as compared with 7.8 per cent in 1957. Thus, the rate
of investment does not as yet appear to be getting out of
line with consumption.
It must also be remembered that business capital spending
adds after a time to the capacity to produce goods and services
although the initial effect is to add to the aggregate demand
for such goods and services. In the new survey, McGraw-Hill
notes that for the first time in several years businesses are
increasing somewhat the proportion of their total capital
spending that provides new capacity, as contrasted to that
which mocernizes and improves existing capacity. The increase
in total manufacturing capacity estimated to be achieved in
1964 is about 5 per cent. Thus, if McGraw-Hill's estimated
sales increase of 6 per cent in 1964 is achieved, the rate of
utilization of manufacturing capacity would only be a little
higher at the end of the year than the 35-87 per cent rate
estimated for the beginning.
As for the strategic area of prices, decreases as well as
increases have appeared in the news recently, but with the
increases still more frequent. Decreases, however, have
occurred in meats, petroleum, textiles--reflecting the reduced
cotton prices for domestic producers--and selected steel
products, reflecting import competition. On balance, since
the beginning of the year most of the broad general price
indices have changed little.
As for the labor area, there has bean no change in hourly
earnings in manufacturing in recent months and productivity
is still apparently continuing to rise. As a result of these
developments, unit labor costs in manufacturing are no higher
than a year ago and below the 1957-59 average.
Greater volume, firm prices, and steady labor costs have
resulted in sharply higher corporate profits. A preliminary
estimate of manufacturing profits after taxes in the first
quarter of 1964 showed an increase of 23 per cent over the
comparable period a year ago. Moreover, a dollar of corporate
profits today no doubt means more for the stockholder than
the same amount some years ago both because it contains
relatively little erratic inventory profits and because it is
computed after more generous allowances for depreciation and
obsolescence of facilities.

5/5/64 -8
These higher current corporate profit figures have no
doubt been discounted in part by the stock market where, even
though common stock prices have fluctuated rather widely
recently, they remain 7 per cent above their level at the
beginning of the year and 10 per cent above their earlier
peak in December 1961,
To sum up, my reaction to current domestic economic de
velopments is that they are reassuring and not yet suggestive
of a speculative boom. The expansion continues moderate and
the response of consumers and businesses to the tax cut has
been cautious and exploratory. There is as yet little evidence
that either capacity limitations or an unsustainably rapid
rate of increase in over-all demand threatens the expansion's
sustainability.
Mr. Brill made the following statement concerning financial
developments:
The lack of ebullience that seems to characterize non
financial areas of the economy carries over to most financial
markets as well. Earlier this year there was a widely-held
conviction in the financial community that interest rates
would move up promptly after enactment of the tax cut, partly
as a result of surging credit demands and partly as a result
of monetary policy actions. Neither has transpired. Credit
expansion, at least bank credit growth, seems to have moderated
in recent weeks, and the market isn't able to read any policy
move toward restraint into recent fluctuations in the free
reserve figures. Market convictions, therefore, seem to be
shifting to the other extreme. Some investors were shortening
portfolio positions earlier in March; many are now apparently
anxi us to acquire the 10-year bond offered by the Treasury
last week, rights to which have gone to a 7/32 premium.
It is tempting to say that the market is as wrong now as
it was two months ago, but the evidence isn't all that clear.
Investors could be right in behaving as though the peak of
upward pressure on interest rates has passed. Nevertheless,
there are some alternative explanations for recent developments
that leave the future course of credit flows and interest rate
pressures as murky as ever.
In long-term markets we have been getting a pattern of
saving and borrowing flows reminiscent of earlier postwar
upswings: large demands on capital markets, a leveling off and
perhaps a decline in the flow of savings to financial inter
mediaries, an increase in direct investment in market

5/5/64
instruments and, until recently, an upward drift in long-term
rates. Security flotations by corporations and State and
local governments were as large in the first quarter of the
year as in the comparable months of th: past two years, and
mortgage debt expansion was one-tenth larger than the rate a
year ago.
Or the other hand, the inflow of savings to major finan
cial institutions has continued to run well below the pace of
early 1963. Savings and loan associat:.ons were hard hit in
January and, although inflows recovered some in February and
March, the total for the first quarter was one-fourth less
than a year ago. Mutual savings banks inflows were excep
tionally large in January, following a ceiling rate adjustment
in New York, but by March inflows were lagging the 1963 pace.
Commercial bank time and savings deposits continued to expand
rapidly through January, but in February and March the rate of
growth dropped sharply. In light of these reduced saving
flows but continued large credit demands, and in light of the
expectations prevailing through most of the period, it is
surprising that the rise in long-term rates from the end of
the year through March was as mild as that which actually
occurred--about one-eighth of a per cent on new corporate
issues and less than that or seasoned corporates and munici
pals and long-term Governments.
Since April, long-term rate pressures appear to have
receded. The turn-about is hard to explain in terms of what
little we know of saving and borrowing flows. Corporate and
municipal security financing was in near record volume for
the month, with the AT&T issue and several large municipal
flotations hitting the market. While inflows picked up some
what at commercial banks in the second half of April, the
gain for the month as a whole in time and savings deposits
was not dramatic. We have no data for April on other institu
tions, but there has been no indication to suggest a resumption
of large savings inflows. In fact, payments for the AT&T issue
may have resulted in some decline. The moderate easing in
long-term rates that has occurred since March, then, must be
chalked up to shifts in investor attitudes rather than to any
observable change in the balance of long-term credit demand
and supply.
The easing that has occurred in short-term rates has
somewhat more foundation in fund-flow relationships, although
it also has reflected some shift in market expectations. On
the supply of funds side, corporations have been in better

5/5/64 -10-
position to add to their holdings of liquid financial assets.
The margin of retained earnings and charges over actual
expenditures for fixed capital and inventories remained high
in the first quarter, while at the same time corporations
were floating a large volume of securities, proceeds for which
were apparently not needed for immediate disbursement. Com
mercial banks also added to the supply of funds for short-term
investment as they shortened portfolios in March in prepara
tion for business loan demands, but these as yet have not
materialized to the extent anticipated.
On the demands for funds side, the Treasury has not been
adding to the net supply of bills in its weekly auctions. In
the first four months of this year the Treasury just rolled
over all maturing issues. In the comparable period last year,
the Treasury raised new cash in seven of the weekly auctions,
thereby adding $1 billion to the total of bills outstanding.
In 1962 they raised new cash in 12 weekly auctions during the
January-April period, adding $1.2 billion to the supply of
outstanding bills.
With earlier years' experience as background, the market
kept expecting similar developments this year, particularly
after the British Bank rate was raised. But when the British
action was not followed by action on our discount rate, and
when the volume of maturing bills dropped from $2.2 to $2.1
billion in the early part of April and the Treasury let the
new auction drop to the lower level, the market took this as
a signal that official policy was changing to permit more
flexibility in short-term rates.
This new market conviction was reinforced by the results
of System operations. Free reserves since late March have
generally run above the February and March averages, with
borrowing generally much lower, and there has been somewhat
less tautness in the Federal funds market. The flow of
Federal funds has been quite large, and the rate on funds
has been below the discount rate quite a bit more frequently
than earlier this year.
Developments in short-term markets can be summarized as
follows: seasonal downward pressures on bill rates have been
accentuated by exceptional corporate affluence and by com
mercial bank portfolio positioning and, for the first time
since 1961, the Treasury and the System have allowed these
seasonal, and to some extent cyclical, pressures to be
reflected, at least partially, in short-term rates.

5/5/64 -11-
What does this all add up to as far as clues to the
economy's performance and to the appropriate posture for
policy? The recent easing in long- and short-term rates does
not suggest any fundamental change in basic financial forces,
despite the shifts in investor expectations. There is no
reason, from the evidence to date. to suspect that continued
economic expansion and normal seasonal developments won't
begin to bring upward pressure on the rate structure by mid
year, and perhaps earlier if the Treasury decides to anticipate
some of its second-half financing needs or if the market
begins to feel it has over-shifted on expectations.
Whether it will be appropriate to let these upward
pressures be reflected in the market will depend on the state
of the economy at that time. For the present, with a mod
erate and orderly expansion going on in the nonfinancial
arena, there doesn't seem to be any domestic reason for the
System to fight this return to more nornal seasonal rate
patterns. There is certainly nothing in the picture of suf
ficient urgency to suggest a departure at this time from
traditional "even-keeling" during the Treasury's financing.
Mr. Wcod presented a statement on the balance of payments as
follows:
In April, the U.S. payments balance reverted to a large
deficit, perhaps in the range of S300 to $400 million, ac
cording to the tentative weekly data. It seems, however,
that this deficit reflected mainly or exclusively an outflow
of liquid funds to Canada, offsetting a similar inflow in
March. Thus, the change from March to April may have been a
new kind of seasonal movement, perhaps .n part connected with
the Illinois State property tax, which already bedevils
statistics on domestic money supply. Illinois corporations
have become accustomed to investing about $100 million of
their liquid funds in Canada; they may have converted these
assets temporarily into tax-exempt U.S. Treasury bills over
the first-of-April tax date, just as they do with their U.S.
deposits.
Interpretation of the April deficit as reflecting to a
large extent financial movement of volatile funds is supported
by the fact that U.S. monetary reserves remained unchanged,
with an increase in U.S. gold holdings of $175 million offset
by a similar decline in official holdings of foreign con
vertible currencies. Liabilities to foreign official holders

5/5/64 -12-.
apparently declined further, according to the tentative weekly
data; but this decline reflected at least in part the "swaps"
between the Bundesbank and the German commercial banks, which
have been reducing German official in favor of German private
dollar holdings continually since mid-March.
Foreign private dollar holdings, which had declined sub
stantially in March, showed a rise of more than $500 million
in April, on the basis of the weekly tentative data. Even
after deducting $100 million for the intra-German swaps just
mentioned, this rise is abnormally large. In the entire year
1963, the increase in foreign private dollar holdings was just
$1 billion, and this figure was higher than for any other
recent year.
Taking the first four months of the year as a whole, the
deficit, conventionally calculated, world be at a seasohally
adjusted rate of about $1 billion. On the basis of "official
settlements," adjusted for the intra-German swaps, the balance
would show a substantial surplus. U.S. monetary-reserves
increased in that period by $50 million. U.S. gold holdings
rose $130 million and official holdings of foreign convertible
currencies $50 million, while the net L.S. position in the
IMF deteriorated by $130 million, mainly reflecting the U.S.
drawing of $125 million.
Abroad, the most recent period has shown little change.
It remains uncertain how far the advice to member countries
of the Common Market authorities to give price stability.
priority over all other policy goals will be followed, and
whether the anti-inflationary measures of Italy, France, and
the Low Countries will turn out to be adequate, or insuffi
cient, or excessive. Germany, the one member country where
inflationary price and wage increases do not seem to pose an
immediate problem, has so far done little or nothing to cor
rect its trade surplus, which is now running at an annual rate
of nearly $2-1/2 billion.
Chairman Martin then called for the usual go-around of comments
and views on economic conditions and monetary policy beginning with Mr.
Treiber, who presented the following statement:
The business situation continues to be characterized by
strength and good prospects for further growth. There is
no evidence yet, however, that we are entering upon an un
sustainable boom. The estimated Gross National Product for

5/5/64 -13-
the first quarter of 1964 ($608.5 billion at an annual rate)
is larger than most observers had expected. Final expendi
tures (GNP excluding inventory investment) showed the largest
rise since late 1961. On the other hand, some indicators for
March and April were not buoyant. Presumably it is too early
for the effects of the recent Federal tax cut to show up in
increased retail sales. The most recent estimate of expen
ditures for plant and equipment shows a good increase but not
necessarily of boom proportions.
Recent corporate reports have shown great increases in
corporate profits. In many cases there has been merely a
return to former ratios of profits to sales and of profits
to capital that in the past have been considered reasonable
and appropriate to promote further investment. It is good
to see increased corporate profits, after more than three
years of continuing rising business activity; perhaps the
most significant aspect of this performance is the generally
good cost control which it reflects. Improved corporate
profits will be, undoubtedly, a factor in wage negotiations
later in the year.
The broadest price indexes continue to show considerable
stability. In the last few weeks there have been few
announcements of price increases for individual commodities.
Over the last couple of months, the prices of sensitive in
dustrial raw materials have shot up strongly; but during the
last week or so they appear to have leveled off.
The interpretation of recent commercial bank credit data
is especially difficult because of the problems of seasonal
adjustmenc. There is no clear evidence as yet that the under
lying pace of bank credit expansion is significantly different
fron the 1963 average, which was rather substantial. Senior
loan officers at the large New York City banks consider loan
demand good but not exuberant. There is some evidence that
increased loan demand is felt more in areas outside of New
York City, Many business concerns have sufficient resources
to enable them to make large expenditures without substantial
recourse to the banks.
After recording a good surplus in March, our balance of
payments has registered a large deficit in April. To some
extent, however, the March surplus and the April deficit
reflect movements out of and then into U.S. dollar time
deposits in Canadian banks. The large expansion of our ex
ports in recent months has been most welcome, but we cannot
count on a continued large increase; indeed, exports could
decline in the coming months. Imports rose in March and it

5/5/64 -14
appears likely that there will be a further increase. Long
term bank lending to foreigners continues strong. We can
also expect an increase in foreign capital issues in U.S.
markets. The confidential, highly tentative estimate made
by an intra-Governmental group indicates a balance of payments
deficit of $1.9 billion for 1964. Another deficit this year
in such a sizable amount, following a sequence of even larger
deficits over the last several years, raises serious questions
as to how this year's deficit will be financed. Inflation
at home could make the deficit worse.
The domestic economy is continuing to expand without
either great pressure in the financial markets or generally
rising prices. A variety of developments, such as closer
to-capacity output in some industries, the forthcoming wage
negotiations and the continuing ample liquidity of business,
could change this situation and lead to inflationary pressures.
At least for the moment, however, there appear to be a number
of forces serving to restrain these pressures. These forces
include lack of speculative excesses in the current expansion,
a high level of savings, the settlement of the railway-labor
dispute, and the psychological restraint arising from
uncertainty about the impact of prospective cutbacks in defense
spending.
On the balance of payments side, the disappointing figures
for the f:.rst weeks of April underline the need to regard the
unexpectedly favorable first-quarter results as due in part to
special circumstances. It is likely that the balance of pay
ments will continue to be a problem throughout the year, and
efforts to improve our international payments position must be
pursued relentlessly. Recent declines in U.S. Treasury bill
rates have apparently not led to significant adverse short
term capital movements, but this result has been due mainly to
simultaneous declines in such foreign short-term rates as the
Canadian Treasury bill rate and the Euro-dollar rate. Lower
rates in competing financial markets cannot be counted on in
the future. Indeed, it is likely that a number of important
foreign countries will move toward firmer monetary policies
with accompanying rises in interest rates.
"Even-keel" considerations in connection with the current
Treasury refunding operation preclude a significant policy
change at this time. No change in the directive appears to be
called for, except an insertion of the usual reference to the
Treasury financing and some rewording of the reference to the
balance of payments in order to reflect the most recent

5/5/64 -15-
developments with respect thereto. Specifically, I would
suggest that the last sentence of the first paragraph of the
present directive be revised to read substantially as follows:
"This policy also takes into account the fact
that the sharp improvement in the balance of
payments in the first quarter of 1964 reflects
some temporary favorable factors and that
efforts to achieve a lasting improvement in
our international payments position must con
tinue undiminished."
In the absence of the "even-keel" constraint, it would
seem desirable to take action to reverse the recent declines
in Treasury bill rates. The downward trend in bill rates has
been accompanied by some tendency toward an easier tone in
the money market generally; I think that the restoration of
a somewhat firmer tone in the market would be entirely con-,
sistent w:th the policy objectives of recent months. Hope
fully, this would come about through a natural reversal of
some of the factors that have tended to produce an easier tone.
If it does not, it should be possible, when "even-keel" con
siderations cease to be a constraint, to move toward the
restoration of a firmer tone. By the time of the next meeting
of the Committee, it may be that some move toward less ease
will command itself in the light of the balance of payments
problem.
Mr. Ellis commented that New England illustrated that a manufac
turing region could prosper without growth in manufacturing employment.
Factory output was holding about 2-1/2 per cent above year-ago levels, but
factory employment, which accounted for 36 per cent of total employment in
the District, currently was running 1.7 per :ent below a year ago and
somewhat below the level of three years ago. The answer, of course, was
that the decline in manufacturing employment was offset by rises in other
kinds of employment, including government, services, and trade. Construc
tion contract awards in the early part of the year were 21 per cent higher
than a year ago, and construction employment was more than 12 per cent

5/5/64 -16
ahead of last year. Somewhat inconsistently, March construction awards.
for manufacturing were 6 per cent below year-ago levels although final
tabulations of manufacturers' capital outlay intentions in the Reserve
Bank survey suggested a 16 per cent gain for the year as a whole.
Commercial banks in the District faced a strong loan demand,
Mr. Ellis said. On a seasonally adjusted basis, business loans had
increased in each month since last November with the first quarter total
showing a gair of 4.4 per cent. Demand deposits in April showed little
change frcm the first quarter level, but time deposits were up con
siderably, largely because of increases in negotiable certificates of
deposit. Asset shifting out of short-term Goverments and into municipals
had continued to the point where holdings of these Governments by weekly
reporting banks outside of Boston were at the lowest point since 1957.
Loan-deposit ratios for all banks in the District had reached 70.4 per
cent, a postwar record high.
Mr. Ellis said he would like to congratulate the staff on the
improvement in the memorandum on economic and financial conditions. He
thought it quite accurately documented the statement that economic expan
sion continued at a moderate pace. However, he would want to deliberate
about the proposition that we were witnessing a "balanced" economic
growth. With bank credit increasing at an annual rate of 11 per cent, as
it had in the past three months, he was unwilling to conclude in advance
that the situation was necessarily balanced. He had found helpful the

5/5/64 -17
appendix note on the duration of business expansions. Of course, this
subject was of significance only if one believed the economy was still
subject to cycles of boom and recession. If one operated on such a belief,
by the thirty-eighth month of expansion it would seem almost as a matter
of definition that monetary policy, which had been almost unchanged for
nine months in a posture of ease, should be gradually shifted into a
position of neutrality to help contain any inflationary pressures that
might be developing. During the present Treasury financing, however, it
was important to follow an even-keel policy.
With respect to the directive, Mr. Ellis said that he preferred
alternative B of the staff drafts for the first paragraph. In a final
comment, he suggested that the staff include an appendix in its next
economic and f:nancial report discussing the relationship between measures
of capacity ut:lization and the existence of upward price pressures.
Mr. Irons reported that economic activity in the Eleventh District
was strong in March, but advancing only moderately. Prospects were that
the figures would show further moderate advances in April and May.
Industrial production dropped a bit in March due to a decline in petroleum
output, but some improvement in April and May seemed probable as a result
of increases in manufacturing output. Construction of virtually all types
was very strong, and further advances probably occurred in April and were
expected in May. The employment situation in the District was satisfac
tory. Unemployment in March was at a seasonally unadjusted rate of 4.6
per cent. The estimates of employment agencies for April and May were
favorable.

5/5/64 -18
District department store sales were steady at a high level,
Mr. Irons continued, and automobile registrations were running ahead
of a year ago. Agriculture was mixed; there were generally improved
soil conditions as a result of scattered rains, but weaknesses in
cattle markets were having an adverse effect.
In the financial area, Mr. Irons said, bank loans were down a
bit in all categories except consumer and real estate. Investments
were up slightly in total; holdings of Governments were down and non
Governments were up. Demand deposits showed strong growth, but there
had been some moderate decline in time and savings deposits.
As he saw the national economic situation, Mr. Irons said,
moderate expansion was continuing with no signs of ebullience giving
warning of imminent inflationary developments. The situation was pretty
well balanced, although he recognized the deterioration of the balance
of payments in April. He thought the current Treasury financing called
for maintaining the status quo in the money market, and maintaining
bank reserves about as in the past three weeks. Such a policy would
be desirable, in his opinion, even if the Treasury financing was not
in the picture. He would hope that free reserves would be around
$100 million plus or minus $25 million, and member bank borrowings in
the $150-$250 million range. He would like the Treasury bill rate to be
within a range of about five basis points or so of the discount rate,
and the Federal funds rate mostly at the discount rate.

5/5/64 -19.
Mr. Irons said he would not change the directive except to in
clude a reference to the Treasury financing and possibly to make some
reference to the deterioration of the balance of payments in April. In
his judgnent the economic situation probably was strong enough to with
stand some slight firming without adverse effect if conditions were to
move that way, but he also thought there would be no danger in maintain
ing the status quo for the next three .eeks. However, he would lean
toward resolving doubts on the side of less rather than more ease.
Mr. Swan commented that in the Twelth District economic activity
seemed to be about keeping pace with that of the country as a whole in
March and early April, but he would characterize the advances in both the
District and the nation as modest. Total employment in the District in
March was up slightly, but the unemployment rate remained unchanged from
February. Manufacturing employment declined again in March and was now
about 1 per cent below the December figure. The decline was due to con
tinued cutbacks in defense and space-related industries, which were causing
some concern. Notwithstanding the decline in the manufacturing sector,
the first-quarter gain in total employment just about matched the gain in
the rest of the country.
In the lumber industry, Mr. Swan said, there was some indication
in April of a leveling off in orders and prices. Perhaps the mild winter
weather had led to some borrowing from the usual spring increase. How
ever, production and shipments were still at relatively high levels.

5/5/64 -20
Producers were encouraged by their success in recovering a significant
portion of what they had lost of the Atlantic Coast market to Canadian
mills during last year's strike--although Canadian producers continued
to be the major suppliers to that market.
During the first three weeks in April, Mr. Swan said, District
weekly reporting banks showed an increase in loans which was more than
offset by a decline in security holdings--just the reverse of the changes
at the national level. Major banks were still net sellers of Federal
funds. The recent decline in bill rates had led to some shift from bill
holdings to the Federal funds market. In the first quarter as a whole,
total loans and investments of weekly reporting banks declined somewhat
more than in the first quarter of 1963. An increase in loans was more
than offset by a decline in security holdings. The loan increase, how
ever, also was short of the increase a year ago.
Mr. Swan commented that the Treasury financing required an even
keel at the moment. In addition, he saw nothing in terms of consumer
or business spending or in the rates of increase so far this year in
the money supply and bank reserves that would lead to a need for changing
the Committee's. general policy position. He would favor no change in
the period ahead. The present directive, with the addition of a reference
to the Treasury financing, seemed appropriate to him.
Mr. Deming commented that fairly complete economic data for March
showed that some slowdown in economic activity had taken place in the

5/5/64 -21
Ninth District. Both personal income and industrial output showed
virtually no change from February. This result apparently reflected
adverse weather as much as anything. In April, however, the expansion
characteristic of the first part of 1964 seemed to have been renewed.
Construction activity was strong; employment seemingly rose more than
seasonally, and manufacturing employment was expected to continue to rise
more than seasonally for the next several months.
In the important farm sector, Mr. Deming said, prospects seemed
generally favorable but there were spotty areas with insufficient sub
soil moisture. The livestock picture was not encouraging, with prices
showing quite pronounced weakness.
Banking developments in the Ninth D:strict in April were mixed.
Loan demand at city banks continued to show the weakness characteristic
of this year so far. Bank investments, however, had shown some increase
in 1964 in contrast to a usual pattern of decline. Still, total credit
at these banks showed a decline for the first four months, similar to
the behavior list year but contraseasonal in general. At country banks,
both loans and total credit expanded more than usual in April, and the
first four months of 1964 showed strength in both loans and investments.
Deposit behavior in both types of banks was quite strong in April, more
than offsetting the relative weakness seen in the first quarter. Time
deposit growth at both city and country banks was very sharp in April.

5/5/64 -22
The late April opinion survey of the Minneapolis Bank showed a
sharp upward swing in optimism about current economic conditions and
near-term prospects, although reporters from farm areas were less
optimistic than others. For almost the first time in the current up
swing the optimism touched on exuberance in the nonfarm areas.
With respect to policy, Mr. Deming favored an even-keel position.
He thought the directive might be left as it was, with the insertion
of a clause referring to the Treasury financing. However, he had no
particular objection to alternative A of the staff drafts.
Mr. Scanlon said that recent developments in the Seventh District
had not altered the favorable outlook reposted at previous meetings,
Output based on electric power data had been rising in most
major industrial areas in recent months and was well above last year
in all centers. Prospects for a furter increase in employment, beyond
seasonal proportions, appeared good and unemployment compensation claims
had been at a low level.
Evidence on retail sales continued mixed, but as yet there had
been no sharp upsurge in consumption purchases following the effective
date of the tax cut. Savings increases at savings associations had
been less than last year in recent months. High withdrawals in March
had been associated by savings and loan spokesmen with the need for funds
to purchase AT&T stock.

5/5/64 -23
According to reports of bankers, farm land values continued to
increase appreciably in the District despite declines in farm income.
Farm income continued to be affected adversely by relatively low cattle
prices, and the current prospect was that prices would continue relatively
low with marketings during the second quarter expected to exceed the year
earlier level by about 6 per cent.
Mr. Scanlon said there was nothing in District banking statistics
to suggest mere than ordinary credit demands by businesses and consumers.
In fact, the rise in business loans since the end of January was the
smallest in the past five years. Nevertheless, outstandings, especially
for manufacturing and trade borrowers, remaned at high levels compared
with a year ago.
Meanwile, major Chicago banks showed a greatly improved basic
position, although this was mainly attributable to the switch of one
bank from heavy buying to heavy selling in the Federal funds market.
While their loans and investments declined, these banks sold a substantial
volume of CDs last month, presumably in anticipation of future needs, or
rising rates, or both.
As to policy, Mr. Scanlon thought there should be no change
during the next three weeks. If the directive were changed, it should
be for the purpose of clarification, to make reference to the Treasury
financing and such minor changes in the language dealing with the balance
of payments figures as were necessary, and not to change policy at this
time. The current discount rate should be continued, in his opinion.

5/5/64 -24
Mr. Clay reported that weather conditions had shown marked
improvement for agriculture this,spring in both the Tenth District and
nationally. Although temperatures had been cool, causing the growing
season to be late, moisture conditions were substantially better than
a year earlier in most regions. In the Tenth District, extreme drought
conditions had been broken, except for an area including the Oklahoma
panhandle, parts of northern New Mexico, southeastern Colorado, and
southwestern Kansas. Prospects for irrigation water, which were
unusually poor during the winter, were about normal now because of heavy
snow in the mountain areas during March and April.
Contacts with a variety of trade associations composed of
retailers who deal with farmers and large distributors of farm supplies
indicated tha: sales to farmers were near or above year-earlier levels.
However, there was considerable regional variation in such sales. In
areas where cattle feeding was important or where drought prevailed,
sales tended to be down. On the other hand, in areas where production
of such commodities as cash grain, cotton, and sheep predominated, and
where weather conditions were favorable, sales tended to be above year
earlier levels. Nationally, farm tractor sales in the early months this
year had been higher than in early 1963, but tractor sales had been off in
most of the Tenth District. Wholesale farm machinery sales to dealers
for the last six months were up about 5 per cent from a year ago nationally;
in the Tenth District such sales appeared to have been about in line

5/5/64 -25
with a year earlier. Sales of fertilizer and petroleum products had been
slightly above year-earlier levels and feed concentrate sales had been
slightly below.
Mr. Clay commented that many individual farmers were in financial
difficulty because of a combination of factors such as the intense price
cost squeeze ard the lower level of some farm commodity prices, and to a
substantial degree because of inefficient operating farm units. There
continued to be substantial hidden unemployment in American agriculture,
and merchants heavily dependent upon those farmers for sales were
experiencing difficulty.
In view of the Treasury financing now under way, monetary policy
should remain essentially unchanged barring some compelling reason for
change, Mr. Clay said. There appeared to be no such reason in terms of
either the domestic or the international situations. In fact, economic
and financial developments did not call for any shift in monetary policy,
even apart from Treasury financing.
So far as the economic policy directive was concerned, Mr. Clay
thought that either one of the drafts suggested by the staff for the
first paragraph could serve satisfactorily, but alternative B appeared
preferable to him. The proposed modification of the second paragraph to
take into account the Treasury financing was in order. He believed that
no change should be made in the Federal Reserve Bank discount rate.

5/5/64 -26
Mr. Wayne observed that general business activity in the Fifth
District continued to improve, apparently following the national pattern
fairly closely. Total nonfarm employment and factory man-hours were at
record levels. The Richmond Bank's business conditions survey continued
to reflect strong optimism, with manufacturers reporting further gains in
new orders, backlogs, shipments, employment, and hours worked. Some labor
bottlenecks in construction and manufacturing had reportedly continued to
develop in par.s of the District and might be contributing to upward pres
sure on wages.
Among Fifth District major industries, furniture was probably in
the strongest position. The Southern Furniture Market two weeks ago added
considerably to an already large backlog of orders and some producers were
scheduling additional overtime to meet the demand. Cigarette production
had apparently returned to about the normal seasonal level after sharp
drops in January and February. In the textile industry a tug of war was
going on between manufacturers and buyers over the extent to which the
recent reduction in the cost of cotton would be reflected in the pieces
of yarn and cloth. So far little of this reduction had been passed on,
and no sharp rebound in forward buying had yet occurred. Thus, the textile
situation remained quite confused, but mill operators nevertheless expected
the lower costs to improve their profits. Recent legislation had helped
improve the farm outlook and 1964 income projections, originally set at
5 per cent or more below 1963 levels, were undergoing some upward revision.

5/5/64 -27
Loan demand was generally strong, Mr. Wayne continued. Major
banks in the District had increased their net purchases of Federal
funds and the number of smaller banks at the discount window had risen
from an average of 5 or 6 to around 18 or 20.
On the national scene, Mr. Wayne said, the buoyant tone in
business expectations had apparently generated renewed fears of upward
price pressures. in some quarters. The statistical facts, however,
lent little support to these fears. The economy currently appeared
to be moving ahead at about the first quarter pace, and the leading
information to date suggested no impending takeoff toward unsustainable
levels. Despite widely publicized increases in some materials prices,
general price measures remained remarkably stable and no significant
supply bottlenecks appeared imminent. Recent data on housing starts,
new and unfilled orders, and business investment intentions showed good
strength but no evidence of excesses. Similarly, the current behavior
of stock prices and the apparently changing pattern of expectations
in the long end of the bond market did not support inflationary fears.
The restraining effects of sluggish retail sales and a sticky unem
ployment rate also appeared to point to the conclusion that, over the
near-term future at any rate, no more than a moderate pace of
expansion was likely.
In the policy field, the Committee had made no overt change
for a number of weeks, Mr. Wayne observed. Favorable developments

5/5/64 -28
in the balance of payments over the past several months and the absence
of any unsettling developments in the domestic economy had allowed the
Committee to maintain a comparatively easy reserve situation as a
background against which the tax cut could work out its effect
relatively free of influence from monetary policy. It was clear that
so far the tax cut had not generated any significant inflationary
pressures. It had added some strength and staying power, particularly
in the area of business investment, to the business expansion which
had been going on for more than three years, but that was one of the
main purposes of the move and one much to be desired. Consequently,
it seemed to Mr. Wayne that Committee policy had been fully justified.
The awaited signal that some policy change was needed had not come,
and he could see none developing at the moment. For that reason and
also because the Treasury would be in the market for the next ten
days Mr. Wayne saw no need to change the Committee's policy. He would
not change the discount rate. With respect to the directive, the draft
of the first paragraph prepared three weeks ago--presented now as
alternative B--appealed to Mr. Wayne although some small language
changes might be appropriate. However, a renewal of the present first
paragraph was acceptable to him. A change in the second paragraph to
acknowledge the Treasury financing, as suggested in the proposed draft,
was in order.

5/5/64 -29-
Mr. Mills made the following statement:
In my opinion, the national economy is in no immediate
danger of damaging inflationary pressures that would justify
a positive policy of Federal Reserve System credit restraint.
On the contrary, available statistical evidence calls for
a policy that will foster further expansion in commercial
bank credit and thereby encourage a reasonable increase in
the money supply.
The first paragraph in the outstanding directive to
the Manager of the System Open Market Account seemingly
declares for a moderately expansionary monetary and credit
policy but, as set out in the second paragraph, only if
attainable within the context of existing conditions in the
money market. In other words, unless an economically con
structive credit policy can be conducted within the
boundaries of the existing interest rate structure, credit
policy motivations are to be sacrificed to interest rate
considerations. As it is impossible to enjoy the better
of two relatively incompatible policy worlds, the
Committee's directive taken at face value is burdened with
a credit restriction bias.
Under these circumstances, the Committee must make a
policy choice which, in my opinion, opts for the policy
spirit declared in the first paragraph of the directive
Adoption of such a policy would require elimination of the
interest rate considerations embodied in the second
paragraph. To do so would free the operations of the
System Open Market Account from the oppressive atmosphere
of interest-rate pegging instructions without having
embarked the Federal Reserve System on an aggressive
and objectionable policy of credit expansion. This is so
because as long as the commercial banking system is permitted
to operate on a margin of free reserves, credit expansion
can follow. Under present conditions, a small margin of
free reserves is sufficient to accommodate a reasonable
expansion of commercial bank credit along the line of
increasing commercial and industrial loans. The major
expansion of bank credit over the last year and more was
propelled by the availability of a steadily rising volume
of time and savings deposits on which reserves of only 4
per cent are required. This credit expansion in the time
and savings deposits area of commercial bank deposits has
dangerous implications which will retrospectively deserve
study to devise means to prevent a future repetition of
whatever evils have resulted.

5/5/64 -30-
The upshot of these comments is that reserves should
continue to be supplied in a volume sufficient to leave a
small margin of free reserves on which commercial bank
credit can expand safely. Negat.ve free reserves should
be studiously avoided because their existence on a con
tinuous basis would evidence a restrictive credit policy
compelling a contraction of credit and placing the money
supply under downward pressure.
Mr. Mills added that if credit demands rose as anticipated,
the kind of policy he had outlined would lead to a firming of interest
rates without the Committee's asserting any drastic policy change.
Mr. Robertson commented that he had great sympathy with
Mr. Mills' point of view. He then made the following statement:
With the Treasury engaged in a substantial exercise in
debt lengthening at this moment, reducing the liquidity of
the private economy in the process, this is certainly no
time for us to be rocking the boat. Moreover, even if we
were outside an "even keel" period, I would favor a policy
of "no change." To me our measures show a more or less
appropriate rate of monetary expansion on average over
recent months. With the tax cut impact proving gradual
(to say the least) and the price picture remarkably stable
for this stage of economic expansion, I would not want
us to tug on the monetary reins. To call for a little
tightenin; now, in anticipation of trouble that might
otherwise develop a number of months down the road, is to
demonstrate too little faith in the flexibility and speed
of influence of monetary policy, and too much faith in
our ability to forecast business. In this one instance,
I wish I could say "I'm from Missouri" rather than Broken
Bow, to signify that before voting to tighten policy to
fight an inflation I want to be shown one.
In a further comment, Mr. Robertson said that he thought the
second paragraph of the directive should be revised to refer to the
Treasury refunding. He did not see a great deal of difference between

5/5/64 -31
the staff's alternatives A and B for the first paragraph, although
B seemed to read a little more smoothly. He would be willing to
accept the present first paragraph without change.
Mr. Shepardson noted that the staff reports indicated a
desirable continuing moderate expansion. It was encouraging that there
had not been more signs of distortions or of inflationary pressures,
such as might possibly have occurred. Also, with the Treasury
financing activity at present, the Committee obviously was under
some constraint with respect to policy. It was still his feeling that
the Committee was in no sense in a posture of restraint; the Committee's
policy was one of ease, and the degree of ease was a little greater at
this point than seemed desirable. He recognized that any immediate
change would be inappropriate because of the Treasury financing.
However, he hoped there would be no action to offset any lessening
of ease that might occur in the market following the financing. He
felt as Mr. Ellis did, that there had been a long period of expansion
in credit, and that it might be well to ease off in the rate of that
expansion as soon as the Treasury situation permitted.
Mr. Mitchell said he favored no charge in policy. He did
not think a change in the directive was necessary, although he had no
objection to small language changes if the Committee felt they were
desirable.

5/5/64 -32
Mr. Daane said the Treasury financing clearly called for an
even keel policy. He did not subscribe to Mr. Irons' view that the
Desk should resolve doubts on the side of less ease in implementing such
a policy. With respect to Mr. Irons' proposed free reserve target of
$100 million plus or minus $25 million, Mr. Daane said he had a strong
feeling that such an instruction to the Desk was too restrictive, and
that it was unwise to seek so narrow a range of fluctuation. He would
like to see a much wider range given as a guide to the Desk, and he
would hope that this would represent the consensus of the Committee.
Apart from the Treasury financing, Mr. Daane said, there seemed
to be nothing in the domestic economic or credit situation or in
international rate relationships that would call for a change in policy.
He was puzzled by Mr. Treiber's statement that he would like to see
a restoration of a firmer tone in the money market. The review of
the New York Bank clearly characterized conditions as generally firm
except for comfortable conditions near the end of statement weeks,
associated with sharp changes in float or with redistributions of re
serves towards the money markets. There was nothing in the supplemental
report of the Manager that indicated anything other than a steadily
firm money market. Accordingly, he would dissent from the view that
the Committee should restore a firmer tone in the money market.
Mr. Daane favored no change in policy and no change in the
directive except the addition of a reference to the Treasury refunding.

5/5/64 -33
Mr. Hickman said that despite a sharp rise in disposable
personal income since the tax cut, consumer spending for goods had
not yet exhibited any evidence of the progressive stimulus expected
in some quarters. In fact, on the basis of incomplete data for
April, retail sales had held just about even with March, after ad
justment for seasonal variation and the changing date of Easter, or
possibly had declined slightly.
Production, on the other hand. had been more buoyant, largely
because of strength in steel and autos, with an assist from other
durables. In the case of steel, production during the first 25 days
of April was at a seasonally-adjusted annual rate of 125 million ingot
tons as compared with March's figure of 118 million tons. Fourth
District orders were especially strong in April, according to
confidential reports, suggesting continued strength in ingot output in
May. Auto output in April amounted to about 780 thousand cars
domestically produced. That would amount to a seasonally-adjusted
annual rate of 8.51 million cars, including output of cars for export.
The corresponding March figure was an annual rate of 8.26 million
cars. Auto inventories, already at record levels, increased further
during April. Industry sources reporting to the Cleveland Bank
suggested that no further production strength should be looked for
from this industry during the current model year, barring an
unexpected surge in sales.

5/5/64 -34
Turning to policy for the next three weeks, Mr. Hickman
said that with the Treasury's exchange of securities scheduled for
May 15 the Committee's hands were tied for the next ten days.
Following customary procedures, the Comittee would not want to
shift policy significantly between meetings.
In his opinion, Mr. Hickman continued, the tone of the money
market had shown continued ease since the last meeting of the
Committee, as reflected in the lower yield curve for U.S. Government
securities, the rate on Federal funds, and municipal yields. Free
reserves during the past three weeks appeared to have been somewhat
more closely on target than during the previous three weeks, but
reserves had been distributed in favor of the central money markets,
which largely accounted for the easier tone.
Thus far this year the money supply narrowly defined had
increased at an estimated annual rate of 3.9 per cent. This com
pared with a 3 per cent increase in the corresponding period a year
ago and 2 8 per cent for all of 1963. Money supply plus time deposits
had increased at a 7.1 per cent annual rate thus far in 1964, which
compared with 8.1 per cent in both the year-ago period and all of
1963. These percentages were based on seasonal adjustments made by
the Board staff. Using seasonal factors developed by the St. Louis
Bank, the increases this year and in the corresponding period of
1963 were even larger. Thus, recent growth of the money supply had
been substantial, no matter how measured.

5/1/64 -35
Hr. Hickman said he concluded, as he had three weeks ago, that
recent policy had been easier than was desirable. The Treasury
refunding required an even keel policy, but this should not prevent
the Committee from probing towards money market conditions that
were consistent with a more modest rate of monetary expansion. He
would opt for Mr. Irons' suggestion of a free reserve target of $100
million plus cr minus $25 million. He recognized, however, that it
might be necessary to widen the range of problems were created by a
change in the distribution of reserves. With respect to the directive
he preferred alternative B of the staff drafts for the first
paragraph.
Mr. Bopp reported the economy of the Third District was
showing gradua. improvement, with unemployment claims lower than for
two years. Retail sales remained sluggish relative to those in the
nation. Banks in the Third District had been able to cover most of
their basic deficiencies in reserves through the Federal funds market.
As even keel policy was called for ii the next three weeks to
facilitate the Treasury financing currently under way, Mr. Bopp said.
Even in the absence of Treasury financing, however, a policy aimed at
maintaining prevailing conditions of reserve availability and interest
rates seemed to him the most prudent course. Conditions with respect
to resource utilization, prices, and balance of payments did not
justify a movement toward greater restraint at this time.

5/5/64 -36
Moreover, Mr. Bopp continued, the strength of future expansion
was still an unknown quantity. Symptomatic of this uncertainty was
some concern over the lack of visible effects of the tax cut. While
this concern might prove to be ill-founded, it seemed sufficient reason
for a wait-and-see position.
Mr. Bopp said he would not change the directive, except to
include a reference to Treasury financing, nor the discount rate.
Mr. Patterson reported that a general feeling of confidence
prevailed among businessmen and bankers in the Sixth District that
the current economic expansion will continue. Although the degree of
ebullience seemed to exceed performance as measured by the statistics,
it had to be admitted that the most recent data provided more support
for such a view than did the figures earlier this year.
There was a strong loan demand at the Sixth District leading
city banks during April. This April's substantial increase compared
with a decline in the corresponding weeks of 1963 and a more modest
increase in 1962. Real estate, interbank, security, business, and
consumer loans all contributed to the gain.
Sixth District leading city banks were apparently in a
stronger cash reserve position to meet the loan demand than banks
throughout the country. The April loan increase was accompanied by
no decline in U.S. Government security holdings, contrary to the
experience of banks elsewhere. District banks also increased their

5/5/64 -37
holdings of muricipals, although the rise was weaker than in the
comparable period of 1963. During the week ended April 22, the banks
maintained their reserve positions partly by a substantial net
purchase of Federal funds, but purchases about equaled sales on an
average during the preceding four-week period. Relatively few banks
were borrowing, and total borrowings in April averaged about the same
as in March.
The March loan figures, available for all member banks as
well as for those in leading cities, showed a seasonally adjusted rate
of increase sl:ghtly under that for the United States although the
rate of increase from a year ago was greater, Mr. Patterson said.
The vigorous loan demand reflected what was apparently a
slightly greater rate of economic expansion in the District than in the
United States. For example, in March nonfarm employment in the
District was 3.2 per cent above that of a year earlier compared with
an increase of 2.7 per cent for the nation. The seasonally adjusted
month-to-month increases this year had exceeded the national gains.
Insured unemployment at 3.3 per cent had been reduced to the lowest
level since 1953.
Employment in most manufacturing categories was up in March,
Mr. Patterson said, with the strongest increases in primary and
fabricated metals and in transportation equipment. An unauthorized
walk-out at the Atlanta General Motors plant of 275 chassis workers

5/5/64 -38
that threatened to idle 3,150 workers was settled last week. Most
of the increase in nonfarm employment had come outside the manufact
uring area, however, with improvement in construction being the most
pronounced.
Prospects for increased employment were implied by recent
announcements in connection with the NASA Apollo manned lunar landing
program activities. These activities directly affected four of the
six District States: in Florida at Cape Canaveral (or Cape Kennedy)
where the rockets were launched; Michoudat New Orleans where the
Saturn I, Saturn IB, and Saturn V first stages were being manufactured;
in Mississippi where ground test operation facilities were being
constructed on the Pearl River in Hancock County (west of Gulfport),
and in Alabama at Huntsville where the Marshall Space Flight Center
was located. The Federal budget proposal for fiscal 1965 included
construction expenditures of $61.9 million at the Mississippi test
center, $15.2 million at Huntsville, and $6.5 at New Orleans. Large
expenditures had, of course, already been made and were being made
at all these operations. Last week IBM anncunced that it would add
800 employees to its operations in Huntsville where it was developing
the instrument units.
On the other hand, Mr. Patterson said, the net impact of
cutbacks in defense installations and the reduction in the production
of nuclear materials had been minor. No closings of major defense

5/5/64 -39
installations had been announced for the District. The cutback in the
United States production of enriched uranium at Oak Ridge, Tennessee,
was expected to reduce employment by only 125. The principal effect
will be a 445,000 kwh reduction in the consumption of TVA electric
ity. Growing demands elsewhere would more than absorb the output
released.
Textile executives were expecting some pick-up in demand, at
least in the short run, to develop from the recent cotton legislation.
They believed that buyers who had been holding off would enter the
market as soon as the price situation was clarified. On the other
hand, there were rumors of a forthcoming wage increase, partly
reflecting the difficulty the industry was experiencing in retaining
a work force because of competition from other types of manufacturirg.
There were less rosy reports, of course. Consumer spending,
although high, had not increased as much as some persons had hoped
it would in response to the tax cut. There were metropolitan areas
where residential construction activity was apparently lower than
last year, although contracts for the first three months this year
exceeded those of the corresponding period last year in 21 of the
26 metropolitan areas. In Atlanta and Birmingham, mortgage bankers
were concerned about the possibility of excessive commercial and
apartment building. At the same time they were talking about the
possibility that the cost of mortgage money would increase, basing

5/5/64 -40
their forecast upon the reduced inflow of funds at savings and loan
associations and the narrow spread between current yields on
Government securities and mortgages. In general, however, such
worries were well submerged by a feeling of optimism.
Mr. Shuford said that in the St. Louis District the indicators
were mixed but there appeared to have been some hesitation since
January in the upswing of business activity. Employment and indus
trial use of electric power in the major metropolitan areas had
changed only slightly since January. Spending, as measured by bank
debits and department store sales, had declined somewhat. Business
loans at weekly reporting banks had regained a major portion of the
decline of late last fall, Bank deposits had continued to rise at
a rapid rate,
As had been indicated around the table, Mr. Shuford said, in
view of the current Treasury refunding it was clear that the Committee
should follow a policy of even keel. However, he would not be
disappointed if after the even keel period the bill rate moved back
to 3.50 per cent. Free reserves might average somewhere around the
$100 million level, and there might be a somewhat reduced rate of
expansion in the money supply. As Mr. Hickman had indicated, using
the St. Louis Bank's seasonal adjustment factors, the money supply
had been rising at an annual rate of 5-1/2 per cent since the first
of the year.

5/5/64 -41
Mr. Shuford said he thought that the first paragraph of the
current directive would be satisfactory, perhaps with a small change
in the sentence relating to the balance of payments. He also found
alternatives A and B acceptable, and he approved of the staff draft
for the second paragraph,
Mr. Balderston said it was clear that the Treasury financing
took precedence between this and the next meeting. He would note only
that the level of member bank borrowings in April did not seem to
indicate as much restraint as the Committee might have thought was
being applied. As to the directive, he preferred alternative B with
the language changes suggested.
Chairman Martin said he had little to add to the discussion.
He liked alterrative B of the staff drafts, although he had no objec
tion to some changes in its language. He had concluded from the
comments around the table that alternative B also was preferred by a
number of othe s.
After further discussion, Chairman Martin suggested that the
Committee vote on a directive the first paragraph of which would
consist of alternative B as originally drafted, and the second
paragraph of which would include a reference to the current Treasury
refunding but would be unchanged otherwise.

5/5/64 -42-
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimcus vote,
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
was authorized and directed, until
otherwise directed by the Committee,
to execute transactions in the System
Account in accordance with the follow
ing current economic policy directive:
It is the Federal Open Market Committee's current
policy to accomodate moderate growth in the reserve base,
bank credit, and the money supply for the purpose of
facilitating continued expansion of the economy, while
fostering further improvement in the capital account of
U.S. international payments, and seeking to avoid the
emergence of inflationary pressures. This policy takes
into account the expected stimulus to domestic activity
from the recent Federal income tax reduction, and the
increases projected for the year in business capital
expenditures. It also gives consideration to the continued
relative stability in average commodity prices; the
country's improved, though still difficult, international
payments position; and the interest rate advances over
past months in important markets abroad.
To implement this policy, and taking the current
Treasury refunding into account, Systen open market opera
tions shal1 be conducted with a view to maintaining about
the same conditions in the money market as have prevailed
in recent weeks, while accommodating moderate expansion in
aggregate bank reserves.
Chairman Martin then noted that copies had been distributed to
the Committee of a letter dated April 22, 1954, from the Honorable
Wright Patman, Chairman of the House Banking and Currency Committee
and of its Subcommittee on Domestic Finance, discussing further the
question of making available to the Subcommittee the Federal Open
Market Committee's minutes for the years 1961-1963,

5/5/64 -43
Copies also had been distributed of a proposed reply,
reaffirming the position taken by the Committee at its. meeting of
April 14, 1964, that it would not be in the public interest to make
the minutes for years subsequent to 1960 available to the Subcom
mittee at this time. Chairman Martin indicated that he would have to
leave the present meeting shortly and he would appreciate having an
expression of views with regard to the position in the proposed reply,
as distinct from the language employed.
Mr. Mills indicated that he was inclined to reverse the
position the Committee had taken at the April 14 meeting, in light of
Mr. Patman's statement that the Subcomnittee would cooperate fully
in deleting from the minutes references to materials that should not
be made public. He doubted that the Open Market Committee should
imply that a committee of Congress was not suited to see its minutes
because cf their confidentiality. He also was concerned about
certain statements in the draft letter,
Mr. Robertson said that he, too, was inclined to reverse the
Committee's earlier position. He did not see how the request could
be denied if sensitive material was to be deleted before the minutes
were made public. He doubted that the public interest would be injured
by turning over minutes five months after the fact; the only possible
injury would be to the Committee itself, by reducing the freedom of
discussion at meetings. He did not think this aloae was sufficient
grounds for refusing to comply with the request.

5/5/64 -44-
Mr. Mitchell commented that it was not clear to him from
Mr. Patman's letter what the Subcommittee's intent was with respect
to who would decide on necessary deletions. If the Subcommittee
intended to reserve the right to make such decisions, he would agree
with the position taken in the proposed reply.
Mr. Balderston commented that this question had been covered
in the course of the hearings, and he had no doubt that the Sub
committee intended to make such decisions itself. Mr. Daane concurred
in this view.
Chairman Martin said that an effort to delete sensitive material
would require a line-by-line study of the minutes, and he did not think
that this was feasible. In his view it would be a mistake for the
Committee to modify the position it had taken on the matter at its
April 14 meetirg. Messrs. Treiber, Balderston, Daane, Shepardson,
Hickman, and Wayne expressed agreement.
Chairman Martin then withdrew from the meeting. Upon motion
duly made and seconded, and by unanimot vote, Mr, Balderston was
elected to serve as Acting Chairman for the remainder of the meeting,
Thereupon, Mr. Balderston called for a vote on the question
of whether the position taken at the April 14 meeting with respect
to the request of the Domestic Finance Subcommittee for Committee's
1961-63 minutes should be reaffirmed. It was unanimously agreed
that Chairman Martin should be recorded in favor of reaffirming this
position, in view of his statement before leaving the meeting.

5/5/64
Votes in favor of reaffirming the
position taken previously: Messrs.
Martin, Balderston, Daane, Pickman,
Mitchell, Shepardson, Shuford, Swan,
Wayne, and Treiber. Votes against
reaffirming this position: Messrs..
Mills and Robertson.
Messrs. Bopp, Clay, Deming, Ellis, Irons, and Scanlon indicated
that they would have voted in favor of reaffirming the previous
position if they had been members of the Committee at the present
time.
It was agreed that any suggestions for revisions of the
language of the proposed reply to Mr. Patman should be transmitted to
the Secretary, and that decisions with respect to the specific lan
guage of the reply would be left to the judgment of Chairman Martin,
Secretary's Note: Under date of May 6,
1964, the following letter was sent to
the Honorable Wright Patman, Chairman
of the Banking and Currency Committee,
House of Representatives, over the
signature of Chairman Martin:
After carefully considering your letter of April 22,
1961, reiterating your request for the 1961-1963 minutes
of the Federal Open Market Committee, the Committee has
reaffirmed its decision as reported to you in my letter
of April 14.
Your letter expresses your disappointment with this
decision, but we feel this may arise from a misunderstanding
of the situation. You describe our decision about the
minutes as "a refusal to allow the Members of the House
whose duty it is to oversee the administration of the
Nation's money, information vital for determining whether
the Federal Reserve is carrying out the mandate of the
Federal Reserve and Full Employment Acts." If this were
the case, you would have every right to be not only

5/5/64 -46-
disappointed but deeply disturbed. But let me try to show
you why it is not the case,
The Federal Reserve System has cooperated fully with
your Subcommittee, and will continue to do so. The members
of the Board of Governors, the Presiderts of the Federal
Reserve Banks, and the staffs of the Board and the Banks
have given freely of their time to discuss our operations
with members of your Subcommittee and your staff. Your
staff has been given every item of information they have
asked for about System operations, ever including the
handwritten notes in the worktrunks that the Board's
examiners use in examining the Reserve Banks. Thousands
of man-hours have been devoted to answering questions sub
mitted by you and your staff regarding the Federal Reserve
and the commercial banking system. Where we have not had
the information, the staffs of the Board and the Banks
have worked assiduously to develop it. In some cases where
your inquiries ran beyond our immediate internal operations,
the Board has arranged and paid for outside contractors to
help in developing and processing the data requested. We
have thus demonstrated our desire to respond fully to your
requests for information, and you have publicly acknowledged
our cooperation.
You have often ascribed great power to the Federal
Open Market Committee, greater power than I think we have.
But we both agree that the Committee has an important job
to do, The other members of the Committee and I are con
vinced we can do a better job if we are allowed some
privacy when we meet together to discuss how best to
perform the functions the Congress has assigned to us.
Congress and the public are entitled to know what actions
are taken as a result of these discussions and the reasons
for these actions, and we make this information public in
a variety of ways, as you know. But, for the reasons
previously explained to you, we think our most recent
minutes should not be published. These reasons were set
forth in my letter of April 14, copy attached, and in a
letter of September 11, 1962, to you as Chairman of the
Joint Economic Committee, the pertinent portion of which
is also attached.
If the System's performance cannot be evaluated on the
basis of information already supplied, it is difficult to
understand what will be derived from the minutes to aid in
this endeavor. You have publicly described the minutes as
written in an "unknown language" and expressed doubt that
you would get any information from them if you had them.

5/5/64 -47-
You have said that when you had the 1960 minutes you "had
to ask the staff to explain them, and the staff could not
explain them, so we got two of the best experts in the
United States, and they were going to interpret them for
us and tell us what they meant" but un:ortunately it "took
them nearly a year." (Hearings, "The Federal Reserve
System After Fifty Years," Vol. 1, p. 737.) Let us suggest
that there is an easier and more effective way: tell us
what you are looking for, and we will see if we cannot
get you the answers more quickly than that.
We recognize that there may be interest in the proce
dures of the Federal Open Market Committee, that is, in
the conduct of the Committee's meetings and the nature of
discussions that take place in them, aid for that reason
we are waking the minutes available to interested persons
for years prior to 1961 by depositing chem in the National
Archives. This will serve the needs of both the Congress
and students of monetary policy, without running the risk
of disclosing matters sufficiently current to be damaging
to the public interest.
We think that this risk is real, despite your
assurance of cooperation in minimizing it. The difficulty
of avoiding inadvertent disclosures is a fact of life,
casting no reflection on any individual, On the one
occasion when we furnished minutes to a Committee of
Congress, the "translation" of them, containing lengthy,
quotations from them, found its way into the hands of
the press. These things happen, and we think it best not
to take the chance of their happening again, when we are
ready to supply whatever information you seek without
running this risk.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Cmmittee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open
Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open
Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the
period April 14 through April 29, 1964, and a supplementary report
covering the period April 30 through May 4, 1964. Copies of these
reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.

5/5/64 -48
Supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs said he expected
no change in the gold stock this week for the twelfth week in a row.
The Stabilization Fund now held $283 million in gold. The Austrians
probably would not take any gold this month but the French might
be in for their usual 30 tons. They had been taking 30 tons every
month for a year or more.
On the exchange markets the most striking--and disappointing-
development had been the contraseasonal strengthening of the Swiss
franc to its ceiling, at which level the Swiss National Bank had been
forced to take in somewhat more than $40 million. The main reasons
for this influx of dollars into Switzerland seemed to have been some
backwash of funds from Germany following the withholding tax proposal
by the German Government and, more importantly, a further tightening
of credit conditions in Switzerland. Swiss National Bank officials
continued to suggest that the tightnes; of credit was attributable to
temporary factors. Mr. Coombs had the impression, however, that the
problem was more deep-seated and might remain troublesome for some
time to come. Furthermore, the Swiss would be moving into their
period of seasonal surplus within a few weeks' time and this might
accentuate still further the buying pressure on the Swiss franc.
Meanwhile, Mr. Coombs said, the Account had lost ground in its
efforts to liquidate the outstanding drawings of Swiss francs, having
been forced to make a $25 million drawing on the Swiss National Bank

5/5/64 -49
to absorb part of its surplus dollar holdings, and it might have to
make another $25 million drawing on the Bank for International
Settlements within the next week or so to clean up the remaining
dollar surplus on the books of the Swiss National Bank. Such a
second drawing of $25 million would increase the U.S. Swiss franc
debt to $225 million as compared with the total Swiss franc credit
lines of $300 million.
Mr. Coombs said he hoped that at the Basle meeting this coming
week end arrangements would be completed for a swap deal between the
Swiss and Italians which would provide the Bank of Italy with possibly
as much as $100 million of Swiss francs. He was hopeful that the Bank
of Italy would sell these Swiss francs to the System against dollars,
which would enable the Account to cut its Swiss franc debt by $100
million, while the Bank of Italy would simultaneously use the dollars
to clean up the remaining $100 million of its swap drawing upon the
System. This, he thought, would be a useful and logical operation.
Even if this deal should go through, however, the Account
would be left with a Swiss franc debt of $100-$125 million equivalent,
with time rapidly running out before the Swiss moved into their sea
sonal surplus during the summer months. The Fund and Bank meetings
in September, the British election in October, and the U.S. election
in November might well result in further buying pressure on the Swiss
franc. There was some risk, therefore, thac serious delays might be

5/5/64 -50
encountered in liquidating the Swiss franc debt through open market
purchases of Swiss francs.
In view of this prospect, Mr. Coombs thought it was prudent to
assume that special operations might be required to pay off the Swiss
franc debt. As far as he could see, there were two main alternatives:
first, that the Account simply buy Swiss francs with dollars, which
would probably force the Swiss National Bank to convert such dollars
into gold; or, secondly, that an effort be made to negotiate the
placement, with either the Swiss National Bank or the Swiss
Confederation, of a Swiss franc bond issued by the U.S. Treasury. He
was inclined to favor the second alternative. If, however, this was
not acceptable to the Swiss and they chose to take gold, there would
be some advantage in the fact that the transaction would reconfirm
the willingness of the United States to honor these obligations in
gold if necessary. He would be exploring the problem with both the
Treasury and the Swiss and would hope to be able to report to the
Committee more fully at the next meeting.
Mr, Hickman commented that announcement of a large gold sale
might possibly produce an adverse public reaction. Mr. Coombs res
ponded that he would hope that a gold sale could be avoided, and that
the Swiss would be willing to accept Treasury bonds. The problem had
been produced by the Swiss policies, and it was reasonable to expect
them to cooperate in meeting it. On the other hand, foreign central

5/5/64 -51
banks were willing to hold dollars because of the belief that they
were freely convertible into gold. If this belief was undermined, the
situation would be serious.
Mr. Treiber commented that it was highly desirable for the
System to reduce its Swiss franc debt now, to leave room for meeting
problems in the coming period of uncertainty. Mr. Coombs expressed
agreement, ano added that in the long run the U.S. might save rather
than lose gold by reducing its debtor position now.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the Sys
tem Open Market Account transactions in
foreign currencies during the period
April 14 through May 4, 1964, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Coombs said he wanted to report to the Committee on a matter
involving the way in which the Account reported to foreign central
banks on the swap operations. As authorized by the Committee, he had
been informally reporting the System's current swap position to foreign
central bank officials. On the occasion of a System drawing, he
would advise the other central bank involved orally with respect to
all of the System's drawings, on a country-by-country basis, so that
they would be fully informed on the System's debtor position. The
System's creditor position with respect to individual countries was
reported only with the approval of the country involved; otherwise,
only the System's aggregate creditor position was given. He
presumed that this information usually was passed on in the same in
formal way to Government officials, with appropriate safeguards. The
arrangement was reciprocal.

5/5/64 -52
This informal reporting arrangement, Mr. Coombs said, had
important advantages in terms of security. An example of the risks
involved in more formal interchanges was provided by the experience
of the Gold Pool. For a number of months it had been the practice
to prepare ccnfidential multilithed reports detailing the Pool's
operations. Through one channel or another these reports were
regularly leaked to the press, and this was acutely embarrassing to
all concerned, The basic problem was that a reproduced document could
be handed on with little possibility of detection. Informal oral
transmission of information afforded much better guarantees that
security would be safeguarded, since no recipient of information could
be certain that anyone else had received information in identical
form. There had been no leakage of information to the press since an
oral reporting arrangement was adopted by the Gold Pool.
For a year or so, Mr. Coombs continued, certain countries had
been urging that a more formal reporting system be instituted in
connection with swaps, involving a monhly report on all operations
to the BLS or some other agency for transmission to governments. The
object could hardly be to obtain information, since this already was
being provided under the informal system now in effect. He thought
the real purpose was to provide a basis for group intervention in the
credit operations of individual countries whose positions might be
considered overextented at meetings of Working Party 3 or other groups.

5/5/64 -53
Mr. Coombs said he wanted to alert the Committee to this development.
He noted that the subject of formal reporting on swap operations might
be put on the agenda at a meeting of the Group of Ten.
Mr. Daane added that the question of formal reports, presumably
including information on swaps, to the BIS or some other agency had
been referred to in recent Group cf Ten Deputies meetings, and it was
contemplated that a task force would be aske to consider what data
might be requested, on what time schedule, and with what restriction,.
Of course, there could be no commitments for the System made in Group
of Ten Deputies meetings; the U. S. representatives had stressed that
any reporting arrangements would have to be agreed to by all parties,
and that there would have to be full reciprocity. The question of
what use would be proposed for the data remained open. His own
preference was against going too far on formal reporting. He thought
it was good that Mr. Coombs had alerted the Committee to take a look
at the question, and he noted that it might to necessary for the
Committee to formulate a position on the matter at a later date.
Mr. Coombs said he had one recommendation to make to the
Committee. The standby swap arrangement with the Bank of England in
the amount of $500 million would mature on May29, and he recommended
its renewal for anotner one-year period. He had indications that the
Bank of England would concur in such a renewal,

5/5/64 -54
Thereupon, renewal for a further
period of one year of the $500 million
standby swap arrangement with the Bank
of England, as recommended by Mr. Coombs,
was approved unanimously.
The Committee then turned to the proposal of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York to publish the report of the Account
Manager to the Committee, which had been discussed without final res
olution at the two preceding meetings. Mr. Treiber again reviewed
the advantages that the New York Bank saw in publishing this report
in the Federal Reserve Bulletin and making reprints available to
students and others.
In the discussion, certain problems of publication were noted,
including that of partial duplication of otler material in the Board's
Annual Report and that of differences in tone and emphasis between the
Board's and the Manager's reports. It also was suggested that in view
of the delay in resolving the question it might now be considered
almost moot, particularly since the usual publication delay meant that
the report could appear in the June Bulletin at the earliest.
Mr. Treiber then suggested that the matter be dropped, and no objection
was made.
Mr. Balderston then noted that Mr. Stone had sent a memoran
dum to the Committee under date of April 27, 1964, regarding the request
from the Honorable Wright Patman dated April 6, 1964, for certain
information relating to Federal Reserve open market transactions in

5/5/64 -55
recent years for use in connection with an inquiry by the Domestic
Finance Subcommittee of the House Banking and Currency Committee.
(A copy of this memorandum has been placed in the files of the
Committee.) Mr. Balderston invited Mr. Stone to comment.
Mr. Stone said that the study in question would actually be
made by Mr. George Benston, a staff member of the Subcommittee and
a faculty member at the University of Chicago. His discussions with
Mr. Benston had been most amicable and satisfactory, and he saw no
problems from the viewpoint of the Desk in complying with the request.
References to individual dealers would be deleted from the material
supplied to preserve confidentiality.
Mr. Stone added that he should mention that the summary
tabulations Mr. Benston had requested would be supplied in the form
of appendix pages from the Account Management's weekly report to
the Committee. These pages contained information not only on
transactions in Treasury bills, which was th object of Mr. Benston's
interest, but in some cases also on transactions in coupon issues.
There were virtually no transactions in coupon issues recorded on the
sheets on which bill transactions were recorded during the years for
which the data were requested, except for some in 1951 and 1952,
Mr. Mitchell commented that he thought it desirable to provide
exactly what had been asked for. Mr. Daane concurred in this view,

5/5/64 -56
Mr. Balderston asked whether there was any objection to
authorizing Mr. Stone to provide the information requested by the
Subcommittee on Domestic Finance to Mr. Benston, and no objection
was raised.
Secretary's Note: In accordance with this
decision, the following letter was sent
to Chairman Patman over the signature of
Chairman Martin later in the day:
This is in reply to your letter of April 6, 1964,
requesting certain information relating to Federal Reserve
open market transactions in recent years for use in con
nection with an inquiry by the Domestic Finance Subcommittee
into the operations of the Government securities market.
The Federal Open Market Committee considered your request
at its meeting today, and is glad to cooperate in
providing the information required for this inquiry.
As you may know, Mr. Benston of your staff and Mr.
Stone, Manager of the System Open Market Account, have
engaged in personal discussions and correspondence in order
to arrive at more complete specifications of the materials
required and the manner in which they are to be used.
Mr. Stone will communicate shortly with Mr. Benston con
cerning arrangements for physical transmission of the
materials in question.
Mr. Ba derston noted that a menorandum from Messrs. Sherman
and Young had been distributed under date of May 1, 1964, regarding
the procedure for making historical minute records of Open Market
policy discuss:ons available for scholarly research, and he asked
Mr. Young to comment.
Mr. Young summarized the contents of the memorandum, a copy
of which has been placed in the files of the Committee. He noted that
the National Archives would be prepared to receive the Open Market

5/5/64 -57
Committee minute records for the period prior to 1961 and to make copies
of the material available to scholars and others on a reimbursable
cost basis. The Committee earlier had discussed making its records
available for the period 1950-60, but it seemed logical that the Com
mittee's entire minute record through 1960, and those of predecessor
groups in the System, be made available at the same time, and he and
Mr. Sherman so recommended. No restrictions would be imposed on the
use of these records other than those customary for appropriate
preservation by the National Archives. The main interest probably would
be on the part of scholars, although journal:_sts and others might
also consult the records.
Mr. Young said the Secretariat had been in touch with the
various learned societies, including the American Economic Association,
the Economic History Association, and the American Historical
Association. All had expressed willingness to cooperate in promoting
research based on these records, The Secretariat also had been in
touch wit': the Social Science Research Council. The Council was pre
pared to set up a committee to suggest types of useful reserach and
to elicit interest on the part of younger scholars,
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and by
unanimous vote, the procedures outlined in the
memorandum from Messrs. Sherman and Young were
approved.
Mr. Balderston noted that it had been agreed at the preceding
meeting to hold an afternoon session at this meeting devoted to the

5/5/64 -58
form and content of the Committee's current economic policy directive.
Mr. Ellis observed that he thought such a discussion would be highly
desirable. He noted, however, that the staff memorandum on this
subject, dated April 8, 1964, did not propose a particular framework
for discussior. In his judgment, the discussion would be more
fruitful if the Committee had before it an agenda, with specific pro
posals. He therefore proposed that the discussion be postponed until
a later meeting, by which time such an agenca could be prepared.
It was agreed that Messrs. Mitchell, Ellis, and Swan would
undertake to prepare an outline for a discussion of the Committee's
current economic policy directive at a later meeting. Also, it was
suggested than members and other Reserve Bank Presidents forward
any proposals they would like to advance to one of these individuals.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, May 26, 1964, at 9:30 a.m.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary
U