A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington on Tuesday, July 28, 1964, at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Daane 1/
Mr. Hickman
Mr. Mills
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Shuford
Mr. Swan
Mr. Wayne
Messrs. Ellis, Bryan, and Deming, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bopp and Irons, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Dallas,
respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistart Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Brill, Furth, Garvy, Grove, Holland, Jones,
Koch, and Mann, Associate Economists
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Accourt
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open MareL
Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of Governors
Messrs. Partee and Williams, Advisers, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Axilrod, Chief, Governnent Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the
Secretary
1/ Entered meeting at point indicated in minutes.

7/28/64 -2
Mr. Helmer, First Vice President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago
Messrs. Eastburn, Taylor, Baughman, Parsons,
Tow, and Green, Vice Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Eanks of Philadelphia,
Atlanta, Chicago, Minneapolis, Kansas City,
and Dallas, respectively
Messrs. Sternlight and Parthemos, Assistant Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
New York and Richmond, respectively
Mr. Eisenmenger, Director of Research, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
July 7, 1964, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open Market
Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open Market Account
and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the period July 7
through July 22, 1964, and a supplementary report covering the period
July 23 through July 27, 1964. Copies of these reports have been placed
in the files of the Committee.
Supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs said that the
gold stock would remain unchanged again this week. The French had come
in with their usual monthly gold order for $34 million last Friday, and
$25 million would be sold to Germany on July 29. These sales had been
substantially offset, however, by a purchase of $50 million from the
Bank of England. The Stabilization Fund would wind up the month with
a gold balance of nearly $170 million, which would be further supplemented

7/28/64 -3
early in August by the United States' share, possibly as much as $25
million, of the Gold Pool receipts during July.
While the Stabilization Fund at the moment was in a fairly
comfortable position, Mr. Coombs continued, there were a number of
potentially heavy demands for gold which might materialize over coming
months. The French demand continued to run at a rate of slightly more
than $400 million a year. The Swiss National Bank was now carrying
somewhat more than $200 million in excess of their traditional ceiling.
The potential German demand was, of course, even greater, and Bundesbank
officials had already hinted that they would like to get a substantial
share of any gold which might be sold off by the British or the Dutch.
The Austrians had indicated that they would like to make new arrangements
for a series of monthly purchases in order to keep their gold ratio up
to the 50 per cent level, and the Spaniards, who had been building up
their dollar balances, might also be heard from.
On the exchanges, Mr. Coombs said, there had been some interest
ing developmemts in the guilder, lira, and sterling markets. In the
case of the guilder, the Netherlands Bank had continued to pursue a
tight money policy in an effort to check inflation and correct a serious
balance of payments deficit. During the first five months of this year,
the Netherlands ran a total balance of payments deficit of $250 million,
which was a very substantial amount indeed for a country the size of
the Netherlands. Largely owing to the credit squeeze, however, only

7/28/64 -4
$60 million of this deficit had to be financed by drawing down the
reserves of the Netherlands Bank. The remaining $190 million was
financed by repatriation of short-term dollar investments by the Dutch
commercial banks as their liquidity positions came under pressure. In
recent weeks, repatriation of dollar investments by the Dutch commercial
banks was apparently running well ahead of the balance of payments deficit,
with the result that the dollar reserves of the Netherlands Bank had
risen by more than $50 million and now stood close to the $200 million
ceiling. To guard against still further inflows originating in borrowing
abroad, the Netherlands Bank had recently prohibited the Dutch commercial
banks from ircurring a net debtor position in foreign exchange. If the
Dutch credit squeeze continued, however, loopholes in this regulation
might well appear just as had occurred in the case of France. Meanwhile,
the pulling back of dollar investments by Dutch commercial banks had
probably contributed to the strength of the Euro-dollar rate which
remained more than one-half per cent above the 90-day certificate of
deposit rate in the New York market.
Mr. Coombs reported that there had been a number of encouraging
developments in the case of the lira, both political and economic. The
new government seemed to be much more solidly established. The Italian
credit restraint program, initiated by the Bank of Italy nearly a year
ago, had brought about a decided slackening in the rate of monetary
expansion. Imports were down, while exports had continued to rise.

7/28/64 -5
A lot of money had come in through direct foreign investment in Italian
industry, and the Italian reserves actually increased during the second
quarter despite the fact that the Italian commercial banks continued to
liquidate their foreign indebtedness. The New York Bank's operations in
forward lira as agent of the Bank of Italy might also have contribuced
to an improvement in the market psyc ology. Rumors of a lira devaluation
had subsided and the market rate on tne forward lira had now declined
below the 4 per cent ceiling that had been maintained. Meanwhile Italy's
partners in the Common Market, some of whom had previously taken a
pessimistic view of the Italian government's economic program, now seemed
prepared to provide not only short-term but also medium-term financial
assistance in order to cushion the transition to a solid equilibrium
in the Italiar payments accounts. In retrospect, the $150 million of
short-term credit provided by the Federal Reserve to the Bank of Italy
last winter seemed to have been a useful operation.
In the case of sterling, Mr. Coombs said, the Account Management',
weekly reports to the Committee had outlined the rationale and results
of the recent operations in sterling in order to forestall private
arbitrage outflows to London. In general, the operations achieved their
limited objectives and had provided some useful experience in , new area
of operations. Both the Account and the Bank of England had been concerned
over the possibility of leakages and Mr. Coombs sound it gratifying that
the commercial banks acting as agents succeeded in maintaining secrecy.

7/28/64
Finally, Mr. Coombs said, as had been anticipated the Bank of
Japan had requested a renewal for a further three months of their $50
million swap drawing maturing July 30. Furthermore, the Bank of Japan
expected a reserve decline of roughly $65 million in the course of this
month, partly owing to measures recently taken to restrain borrowing on
the Euro-dollar market, and might wish to make a further drawing in the
amount of $30 million before the month's end.
Mr. Mitchell asked whether the Italian authorities had any
policy with respect to foreign investments in Italian industry, and
whether they felt such investments might serve to thwart their monetary
policy. Mr. Coombs replied that by and large the Italian authorities
had encouraged such investments. Their volume had not been great
enough to thwart Italian credit policy, and some recent investments by
large American corporations had helped strengthen the capital structure
of certain major Italian industries. This probably had reduced the
concern by the Bank of Italy that credit tightening would damage the
capital structure of some Italian firm.
In response to questions by Mr. Ells concerning the possible
further swap drawing of $30 million by the Bank of Japan, Mr. Coombs
said the Japanese felt that a useful purpose would be served by reducing
their reserve loss in July from an expected $65 million to about $35
million. He was hopeful that the reserve loss would be temporary and
soon reversed. The outlook for Japan's balance of payments had improved

7/28/64 -7
since earlier this year, and the Japanese seemed determined to carry
out policies to strengthen their payments situation. There was, of
course, no assurance that these policies would be effective in time
to permit repayment of the drawing. If the Japanese were unable to
liquidate the drawing by use of current receipts, Mr. Coombs thought
they probably would apply to the International Monetary Fund for a
medium-term credit and repay the drawing by that means.
Mr. Mills commented that Mr. Coombs, had touched on several
sensitive points which seemed to him to deserve the scrutiny and
analysis of academicians. The question he had in mind was how far
monetary policy should be pressed to maintain the international reserve
positicn of any individual country at the expense of undermining the
economy of that country. One saw the problem in Japan where there
had been a rash of bankruptcies quite recently; Japanese policy
moved frequently between tightness and ease. One could see a definite
slackening ir the economy of Italy, and in some Latin American countries
such as Argentina. In all of these countries it seemed to be reassuring
that monetary measures had resulted in improving the international ex
change positions. But if this was done at the expense of reducing the
viability of their domestic economies, there was a question of whether
the gain was worth the loss.
Mr. Coombs said he thought that a certain amount of experience
bearing on this question had been built up since the war. European

7/28/64 - 8
countries and Japan had movedfrom a system of direct, selective
controls more or less across the board toward greater reliance on
general monetary and fiscal policies. They had not completely
abandoned direct controls, but were seeking a proper blend of the two.
He thought that the combination of tighter credit, fiscal measures,
and certain direct controls in Europe was halting inflationary trends,
so far without adverse effects on production and employment. In his
judgment, these policies were working.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the System Open Market transactions in
foreign currencies during the period
July 7 through July 27, 1964, were
approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Mr. Coombs recommended that the $250 million standby swap
arrangemet with the German Federal Bank, which would reach the end
of its three-month term on August 6, be renewed for a new and longer
period of six months. He noted that te German Federal Bank would be
agreeable to this arrangement.
Renewal of the swap arrangement with
the German Federal Bank, with extension
of term from three to six months, as
recommended by Mr. Coombs, was approved.
Mr. Coombs then recommended that the $100 million standby swap
arrangement with the Bank of France, which also matured on August 6,
be renewed for another three-month period. It was possible that the
Bank of France itself might suggest an extension of the term to six
months. If so, he assumed this would be acceptable to the Committee.

7/28/64
Renewal of the swap arrangement
with the Bank of France for a further
period of three months, or for six
months if the Bank of France should
so request, was approved.
The possible further drawing of
$30 million by the Bank of Japan on its
swap arrangement with the System was
noted without objection.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report from the Manager cf the System Open Market
Account covering open market operations in U. S. Government securities
and bankers' acceptances for the period July 7 through July 22, 1964,
and a supplemertary report covering the period July 23 through 27, 1964.
Copies of these reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone commented
as follows:
The financial markets have turned in a good performance
during the past three weeks, highlighted by the Treasury's
very successful advance refunding. In that operation, as you
know, some $9-1/4 billion of issues maturing within three
years have been exchanged for issues maturing in five, nine,
and twenty-eight years. Although the turn-in considerably
exceeded market estimates, the atmosphere in the market has
remained quite firm and confident. Even the rumors of a
possible british Bank rate increase shook loose only a few
bond holdings from weaker hands and these have been readily
absorbed. The dealers' stake in the refunding issues remains
rather large, of course, and the market accordingly is
vulnerable to news that would suggest any change in the
outlook--which at present is regarded as pointing to stable
rates.
A counterpart of the heavy response to the Treasury
refunding has been the increased downward pressure on
Treasury bill rates--which the current offering of a $1
billion strip of bills has served to ameliorate, but not

7/28/64 -10-
entirely to offset. Early in the past three-week period
there was a substantial demand for bills on the part of
sellers of eligible rights in the refunding, and by holders
of the $2 billion of maturing July 15 oills. These sources
of demand served to deplete dealer inventories very sub
stantially, and since the middle of the period the more
moderate continuing demand frombanks, corporations, and
public funds has served to maintain downward pressure on
bill rates. At their low point on July 16 and 17, the
3-month bill was bid at 3.42 per cent, compared with 3.50
per cent at the start of the recent period. Rates moved up
only briefly and moderately after the Treasury's bill strip
was announced, and yesterday the 3-month bills were sold at
an average rate of about 3.48 per cent. It may be that payment
for the strip of $1 billion Treasury bills tomorrow, followed
by the sale of $1 billion of 1-year bills on Thursday, and by
the sale of another short-term security to refund the remaining
August 15 maturities, will serve to put some supply back into
the short-term area and tend to bolster short rates, but on
the other side it is to be expected that investor demands will
continue and the System will also have to be a sizable buyer
of short issues in meeting forthcoming reserve needs. Once
the books on the Treasury's August 15 refunding are closed we
may be able to effect some part of that provision of reserves
through purchases of coupon issues, without buying in an area
too close to the Treasury's offering, out in any event the
prospective reserve need seems too large to be met without
further sizable purchases in the short-term area.
System operations were substantial during the past three
weeks, as the Desk sought to preserve a steady market back
ground during the Treasury's refunding operation. Reserves
were injected over the first several days, then withdrawn in
large volume against the background of an easier money market,
and then in the past three days re-injected in antici ation of
reserve drains through the impact of market factors. Federal
funds traded mainly at 3-1/2 per cent, but in larger volume
than had prevailed in recent months, aid there was trading below
3-1/2 per cent on several days, especially toward the end of
the July 22 week.
The Treasury will be announcing tomorrow its plans for
refunding the remaining $4.1 billion of August 15 maturities,
of which some $2.2 billion are held by the public. Given the
modest size of the maturities and the solid condition of the
market, this job should be quite routine. Indeed, the major
question for the Treasury would seem to be how this operation
might be adapted to deal most effectively with the problem of

7/28/64 -11-
the short rate. The current expectation is that the Treasury
will offer a short note, but some further offering of bills
is also a possibility.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the
open market transactions in Government
securities and bankers' acceptances during
the period July 7 through July 27, 1964,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and financial
reports, supplementing the written reports that had been distributed
prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed in the files of
the Committee.
Mr. Koch presented a statement on economic conditions as follows:
Recently released second quarter GNP figures show that
economic expansion thus far in 1964 has been about on target
as projected early in the year by the Council of Economic
Advisers. Moreover, many of the more comprehensive indicators
of economic activity continue to rise and seem gradually to be
reflecting the effects of the tax cut. Industrial production
in June, for example, was one-half per cent above May and 4
per cent above the end-of-1963 level. Retail sales in July
are apparently advancing further from the record May- June
level.
Yet the "too-good-to-be-true" picture of the economy
seems to be losinga bit of its luster. This current impression
may reflect merely the onset of the usual summer doldrums or
even an economist's penchant for feeling better when he can
find something wrong. Nevertheless, some economic indicators
have not done so well recently. The rate of unemployment rose
again in June and no doubt continued high in July, while the
rate of expansion in employment has been tapering off. Although
housing starts were up a little in June, they have been drifting
downward on balance since last fall. New orders received by all
producers of durable goods declined slightly again in June,
although those of machine tool builders rose sharply.
Some uneasiness about the future course of the economy stems
also from the structure of the expansion during the first half
of the year. Early in the year the likelihood of as much

7/28/64 -12-
expansion as projected was questioned if so much of it had
to depend on increased consumer spendirg on nondurable goods
and services. Yet it is just this category of spending that
has increased so sharply over the past six months. The
January projection called for an increase in consumer spending
on nondurable goods and services during the first half of about
$12-1/2 billion, or almost 4 per cent. The estimated actual
increase turned out to be only a little under this projection.
Although we can expect some drop in the personal saving rate
from its current level, temporarily at about 8-1/4 per cent
as a result of the tax cut, one wonders whether consumers can
continue over the next six months and longer to increase their
spending on nondurable goods and services as rapidly as in the
recent past.
Consumer spending on durable good.; has risen much less
sharply this year, particularly recently. Dealer deliveries
of new autos have declined moderately since mid-June, but
shipments from assembly plants in the East were limited by a
trucking .trike that ended last week. I have already noted the
slowing down in housing starts.
In the business sector, the main news is in the inventory
area where stocks continue moderate in view of the further
rise in sales. The rise in inventories in recent months has
been in goods-in-process and finished goods rather than in raw
materials and purchased stocks. In other words, businesses are
expanding their inventories where needed to meet customer demands
for quick deliveries. But with supplies of materials still
generally ample, with delivery times still showing few signs
of lengthening, and with industrial wholesale prices remaining
relatively stable, businesses are not pushing to stock up in
anticipation of future needs.
In the important wage-price-profit area, it is still too
early to predict the likely outcome of the current bargaining
activity in the auto industry. The recent labor-management
agreement's in the rubber and oil industries involved fringe
benefits, whose total costs are very difficult to estimate,
but there were no wage increases. These settlements do not
appear to have been out of line with either cost stabilization
objectives or settlements reached in other major industries
earlier in the year. In manufacturing as a whole, unit labor
costs, including fringe benefits, are down from early in the
year, with the first half rise in money earnings being the
smallest since the recession year 1954.
Recent price changes have been mainly in markets for
foodstuffs, and largely reflect seasonal influences. The
wholesale industrial price index has remained stable. Most

7/28/64 -13-
prices are not changing. The evidence suggests mainly
selective bottleneck-type upward pressures, such as in the
case of some nonferrous metals.
With prices remaining relatively stable and unit labor
costs, at least in manufacturing, down a little, profit
margins are up further. Higher business sales and profits
have led to some upscaling of capital nvestment, but thus
far such investment can hardly be called ebullient. It is clear
that businessmen are reluctant to overbuild capacity.
Difficult as it always is to foresee sources of future
economic strength, it is in the business fixed capital spendirg
area, in State and local government spnding, and in the area
of consumer spending on nondurable goods and services that we
must probably seek the sources of further aggregate expansion.
Since State and local spending and consumer spending on
nondurables normally rise gradually and since the further rise
in business fixed capital spending is now projected by business
men at a rate that is within reasonable bounds, most projections
of over-all economic activity this year call for continued
moderate expansion.
And with the unemployment rate remaining high, this further
moderate expansion in over-all economic activity again raises
doubts as to the likelihood of bringing the rate down signif
icantly in the foreseeable future. Indeed, with the unemployment
rate of nonwhite teenagers over 30 per cent, one basic cause
of our repent race riots becomes painfully clear. As for
capital utilization rates, that for major materials production
has been unchanged since April and that for manufacturing is
up only moderately from a year ago. Current rates are unlikely
soon either to limit the rise in physical production or to
induce widespread price boosts.
Thus, in conclusion, domestic economic developments as a
whole still seem to me to call for expansionary Government
ecoromic measures, including a stimulative monetary policy.
Mr. Brill made the following statement concerning financial
developments:
After several months of rather placid existence, financial
markets were stirred into some turbulence over the past three
weeks, principally by debt management operations and an assist
from rumors of a British Bank rate increase. The turbulence
was mild considering the magnitude of the debt management
operations. The Treasury advance refunding, involving $27

7/28/64 -14-
billion of publicly-held debt, resulted in a removal of
$4-1/2 billion of short-dated instruments from the market
and almost $5 billion of shorter intermediates. To fill
the gap created at the short end, which was causing downward
pressure on short-term rates at a time when rates abroad
were rising, the System and the Treasury sold bills, the
Treasury rushed out a $1 billion bill strip, and it indicated
that forthcoming offerings would also be in the short area.
As the dust settles, we find long- and intermediate-term
rates on Government securities only a shade higher than early
in July and short-term rates a bit lower, a remarkably small
price reaction in light of all the fund flows involved. The
dust hasn't completely settled, for dealers still have sub
stantial positions in the new issues, with more Treasury
financing imminent, but they do not apoear unwilling to carry
substantial inventories of coupon issues in light of current
market attitudes and expectations.
The narket's ability to abscrb such a lengthening in
maturity in the Federal debt with minimal price adjustment
is the latest indication of the tremendous savings volume
the private economy continues to generate. Financial saving
by the private sector has continued high this year, as it has
throughout the recovery and exparsion period, and recently it
has been given an extra boost by the tax cut. What is dif
ferent this year, however, is not so much the volume of saving
as its compositon. Two differences in savings patterns have
emerged in 1964, neither, unfortunately, readily susceptible
to explanation.
First is the shift in composition as between financial
intermediaries and direct market investment. From 1961 to
1963 the bulk of private financial savings flows--well over
four-fifths of the total--went into financial intermediaries.
This contrasts with 1959, the previous high saving year, when
only one-half went to intermediaries and the other half,
responding to rising market rates, went into direct purchases
of securities. So far in 1964, savings flows have tended to
revert to the 1959 pattern, with the flow to institutions
lower and the flow into securities increasing sharply.
What is surprising about this shift is that it has taken
place without the usual change in interest rate relationships.
One of the few stable functional relationships we have been
able to discern in financial flows is that when there was a
widening of the spread between market interest rates and the
rates offered by institutions, the share of private savings

7/28/64 -15-
flows directed into market instruments increased, and when
institutional rates began to catch up with the market, a
larger share of the savings flow was diverted through
financial intermediaries. It is comforting to econometricians
to have an economic relationship that makes common sense and
also yields a high "r2," and it is disconcerting when such a
previously firm relationship fails to work. It isn't working
now. The pattern of flows so far this year would be more
consistent with a substantially higher level of market rates
than has actually prevailed, given the level of rates offered
by banks and savings associations.
There doesn't seem to be any easy explanation of this
deviatior. Perhaps savers have reached some saturation point
in their ownership of savings accounts and want to diversify
their po.tfolios regardless of current rate relationships.
Perhaps confidence in the future stability of prices is
permittirg savers to waive any inflation risk premium when
acquiring long-term debt instruments. There are many possible
explanations, but none that can now be supported empirically.
Another puzzling development in savings flows is the
recent rise in the public's demand for cash balances. The
money supply rose substantially in June, even while Government
balances were increasing, and has continued to increase thus
far in July when Government deposits are being drawn down.
Based on required reserve figures through July 22, it seems
likely that the money supply will show an annual rate of
expansion of over 8 per cent in both June and July, after
rising at only a 2 per cent rate over the first five months
of the year. It is hard to find in the available evidence
any explanation of this sudden surge in cash balances,
particularly since in the current state of financial statistics
we don't even know who is holding the larger balances, let alone
for what purposes. There is nothing in surveys of consumer or
business spending intentions to suggest: that the private sectors
are girding themselves for a spending spree. One hypothesis is
that the rise reflects a sort of inadvertent accumulation of
tax saving, being held idle until consumers and businesses decide
how to commit the funds. This has some elements of plausibility,
but again is unverifiable.
Before attempting to read too much significance into a
two-month development, however, it should be recalled that
growth in the money supply is not always smooth. For example,
there was a spurt in the money supply last November of about
the same order of magnitude as that which occurred this June,
but it didn't seem to result in any significant change in the

7/28/64 -16-
course of the economy, financial or otherwise. It may
be that the recent surge will soon spend itself.
This is not to belittle expansion in the money supply
at an 8 per cent annual rate, or to cast doubt on the
validity of the figures. It is just that recent increases
do not seem to have significant corollaries in any other
economic development of which we are aware. In the context
of an economy that shows no signs of overheating, that seems
to have reached a plateau in its use of plant and labor
resources, and that still generates a large volume of long
term saving, a rapid increase in the money supply for brief
periods is cause for inquiry and study, but not necessarily
for alarm.
Mr. Furth presented the following statement on the balance of
payments:
The payments deficit for the second quarter turned out
somewhat smaller than expected three weeks ago but the
tentative figures for the first three weeks of July were
disappointing.
The deficit was $140 millior in June, and $675 million
in the second quarter, after adjustment for seasonal influ
ences and "special" transactions.
For the fiscal year 1964 as a whole, the deficit amounted
to $1.8 billion--still too large a figure but by far the lowest
twelve-month total in seven years. And it is particularly
gratifying that it could be financed in such a way as to keep
the decline in U.S. reserves and the increase in liabilities
to foreign monetary authorities to a minimum. More than two
thirds of the total was covered by "special" receipts and by
the increase in dollar holdings of foreign holders other than
monetary authorities. Nearly all the rest was financed by
medium-term credits, including the issue of Roosa-bonds and
drawings on the International Monetary Fund. U.S. gold
holdings declined by only $200 million, while U.S. holdings
of foreign convertible currencies actually rose and liquid
dollar liabilities to foreign monetary authorities declined.
Moreover, the deficit was nearly equalled by a rise in
U.S. liquid claims on foreigners. Bank-reported short-term
claims alone increased by $1.3 billion, and long-term bank
loans by an additional $0.7 billion.

7/28/64 -17-
Notwithstanding the comfort we may derive from the
results of the past twelve month,, the July figures are
disquiet ng. The tentative data for the first three weeks
of the month indicate a deficit of $560 million. July
always shows a sharp seasonal deterioration in the U.S.
payments balance, but this year's increase in the deficit
over and above June seems to be far larger than seasonal.
Unfortunately, we do not know the causes of that
increase. It is true that sharp increases have been
observed during the first month of every recent quarter:
January 1964 was much worse than December 1963, April
much worse than March; and the second and third months of
each quarter have always shown considerable improvement.
But the trend is disturbing: April was worse than January,
and July seems likely to be worse then April.
The prospects of improving the payments balance in the
short run by monetary policy depend, of course, on the
reasons for the deterioration. Insofar as a decline in
foreign demand for our exports, or an increase in our
Government expenditures abroad, was responsible, monetary
policy could do little about it. Insofar as an increase
in our imports or in our expenditures for foreign travel
was a factor, monetary policy--apart, of course, from its
perennial role as guardian of price stability--could correct
the situation only by action severe erough to temper the rise
in our national income.
On :he other hand, insofar as we were to find a sudden
increase in the outflow of money-market funds into foreign
currency assets, relatively small changes in covered
interest rate differentials might be helpful. But during
the second quarter these flows were, on balance, quite
insignificant, and we have no indications of any substantial
increase in recent weeks. Flows into the Euro-dollar market
were indeed large in recent months and may have risen further.
But the impact of these flows on the U.S. payments balance may
not be easily affected by U.S. monetary policy: any measure
designed to curtail them may, after a brief lag, not only
raise interest rates in the Euro-dollar market but perhaps
also divert borrowers from that market to U.S. banks.
Finally, we might find that there was an unusually rapid
increase in direct investments abroad and in U.S. bank credit
to foreigners. We have no data on direct investments for the
second quarter, and no complete data on bank credit for any
month after May. But we know that all types of bank-reported
claims on foreigners together rose in June by the unusually

7/28/64 -18-
large amount of $340 million; and if I had to make a guess,
I should say that bank credit and direct investments could
well have contributed significantly to the recent deteriora
tion.
If the U.S. payments deficit were to continue at the
level of the past three weeks, and if a rise in U.S. invest
ments and credits were indeed found to be playing a large
role, U.S. monetary policy would be faced with the question
of how best to deal with the problem. At the moment, however,
we lack the information needed for an appropriate answer.
Chairman Martin then called for the usual go-around of comments
and views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with
Mr. Hayes, who presented the following statement:
The most significant aspect of the last three weeks'
developments has been the reappearance of a very serious
balance of payments deficit--at least on the basis of
partial data available so far for July, together with data
indicating that the June deficit was more serious than it
had seemed to be at first glance. At the same time, the
latest domestic statistical data point to a continuing
favorable business situation and a prospect of further
expansion. However, there are presently no signs of any
acceleration, and there were even indications of leveling
off in some sectors in May and June--although these signs
were slighter in June than in the preceding month.
Plant and equipment spendirg seems likely to continue
its upward course; and the absence of inventory build-up in
the first half of 1964 may point to an increase in stimulus
to production from this source in the second half. Consumer
spending is a major element of strength in the economy. The
May rise in retail sales now appears to be stronger than
reported earlier, and the advance report for June indicates
maintenance of the high May level, with further advances in
early July.
Prices continue to exhibit remarkable stability--but the
cost-price outlook is still clouded by the unsettled automobile
pay negotiations.
Recent balance of payments figures give cause for consider
able concern. Preliminary data for the first three weeks of
July show an aggregate over-all deficit of about $550 million.
We have no way of analyzing what lies behind this huge deficit.

7/28/64 -19-
It may reflect errors that will lead to drastic revision--but
it is so large that even after a sizable revision we would
still face a very disturbing problem. Paradoxically enough,
the press has recently been filled with optimistic appraisals
of the ba.ance of payments outlook, based largely on the
relatively low annual rate of deficit of about $1.6 billion
in the first half. This optimistic point of view ignores two
important facts: (1) that even a deficit of this magnitude
presents serious financing problems in this seventh year of
major deficits; and (2) that the trend within the first half
was adverse. The latter point gains greater weight in the
light of what seems to be happening in July.
The modest June deficit should be assessed against the
background of a sizable reflux of corporate time deposits from
Canada during that month, which caused Canadian balances in
this country to fall by $200 million. In the absence of the
sharp decline in our liabilities to Canadian banks, the deficit
would have been in the $300-$400 million range. Another ominous
development is a very substantial upsurge in June in bank
reported claims on foreigners, estimated tentatively at over
$300 million and apparently reflecting very large short-term
bank loans. The fact that the trade surplus seems to be
holding up at a relatively high level, together with the
increasingly tight credit conditions abroad and the evidence
of deterioration in our short-term capital account, suggests
that monetary policy might well be looked to as at least a
partial remedy of our payments problem,.
More complete banking data now available for June confirm
the picture of moderate strength already evident three weeks
ago. Money supply, money supply plus time deposits, and bank
credit rose more rapidly than their average monthly increases
earlier in 1964. If we include preliminary figures for the
first half of July, the money supply has grown at an annual
rate of 4.3 per cent so far this year, exceeding the 3.8 per
cent of a year earlier. For money supply plus time deposits
this year's gain still lags somewhat behind last year. But it
is striking that despite the sizable business expansion and
despite a number of minor policy changes toward less ease on
the part of the Committee, there is no solid evidence of a
slow-down in credit growth, and we have continued to provide
liquidity to the economy on a very generous scale. I am
pointing to this not critically but to emphasize the point that
a switch to a slightly less generous credit policy would
probably involve only minimal risks to domestic business.

'8/64 -20-
We may all find great satisfaction in the debt extension
achieved in the Treasury's highly successful advance refunding
program. The program did, however, put heavy downward pressure
on short-term interest rates--pressure which fortunately has
been partly offset by the Treasury's offering of a strip of
bills and a one-year bill, and the prospect of a short-term
obligation to replace the remaining August 15 maturities.
Nevertheless, demand for short-term securities, including
System purchases to offset seasonal pressures on bank reserves,
will remain heavy for the next couple of weeks.
A change of policy at this time is precluded by the neces
sity of naintaining stable money market conditions to facilitate
the August 15 refunding and to permit the market to digest the
huge advance refunding just conpleted. I would hope, however,
that within the existing polic the Desk would do what it
could to maintain as firm a short-term rate structure as possible,
in view of the pull being exerted on American funds by foreign
rates. The existing directive might well be renewed with only
minnr changes to reflect the altered Treasury financing outlook
and the accelerated deterioration in the balance of payments
in July.
Looking a little further ahead, I am impressed anew by the
lack of progress in coping with our very serious balance of
payments problem and the necessity of giving adequate emphasis
this problem in the formulation of monetary policy. To me
is unthinkable that anyone should contemplate abdicating
responsibilites for maintaining the international strength
of the dollar and relyin: on the vague hope that some other
banch of Government, using more "specific" measures, will take
thisb urden from our shoulders. In other words, I think it
highly probable that within the next month or two, in the
absence of an unexpected improvement in the balance of payments,
we shall have to take some moderate but clear-cut action in the
direction of less credit ease.
Unfortunately, public opinicn is none too well prepared
for such a move, in view of the many optimistic statements on
the dollar's status in recent months. Probably a loss of gold
is the most convincing sign of international financial trouble
to the general public, and of course for a variety of reasons
the loss has been nil for many months. Moreover, it is even
possible that a sterling crisis could bring some temporary
additions to the gold stock and thus render more difficult this
psychological obstacle to acceptance of a m:re restrictive
policy. Under these conditions I feel that it is up to the
System to try to prepare the ground, both within and outside of

7/28/64 -21
the Government, for whatever action seems likely to be
called for fairly soon if the international danger signals
now clearly flying are confirmed by actual payments
developments in the coming weeks.
Mr. Ellis commented that in New England consumer spending seemed
to be strengthening, according to recent data on department store sales
and new car registrations. Business capital spending continued to rise,
and nonresidential building contract awards were running 12 per cent
above a year ago. In a recent survey of the one hundred largest
manufacturing corporations in the District, second-quarter sales were
resorted to have substantially exceeded expectations, and more than
two-thirds of the firms expected third-quarter sales to be at least
near the second-quarter levels.
Insured unemployment Claims in New England were 12 per cent
below last year, and new lows were expected later this year.
Nonagricultural employment was up, although manufacturing employment
had yet to regain its earlier level. Manufacturing output, on the other
hand, continued to rise slowly. Shoe production in May was less than
last year, and for the first five months of 1964 was about 1 per cent
below the level last year.
Financial activity continued to outpace production, Mr. Ellis
remarked. Business loan expansion around the tax date in June was
sharper in the District than in the nation. However, demand deposits
continued to show almost no growth, and today were at about their
1962 level. The scramble for deposits continued to be intense. Since

7/28/64 -22
January the vclume of CDs outstanding in New England had expanded
34 per cent, in comparison with 24 per cent for the United States as
a whole. In New England the loan-deposit ratio had reached a new
peak of 71 per cent, and at Boston banks the ratio was 75 per cent,
compared with 66 per cent for all member banks.
Turning to policy, Mr. Ellis said it seemed to him that there
were three aspects of the current economic situation to be taken into
consideration. First and foremost, there was the continued balanced
expansion of the economy without excesses. The expansion was so nearly
ideal that the burden of proof seemed to rest on anyone who wanted to
alter conditicns. This led to the second major aspect, the pattern of
credit expansion. In June total reserves had risen sharply--at a
seasonally adjusted annual rate of over 16 per cent. As had been
pointed out, the recent record suggested that a one-month bulge in re
serves tended to be followed by slower growth rates in subsequent months.
But it appeared obvious that if such a rate of expansion continued it
would call for attention.
The third element to be taken into consideration, Mr. Ellis said,
was the recent worsening in the U. S. balance of payments position. The
outlook seemed to be for a resumption of outflow of short-term balances,
as a result of widening covered yield spreads.
Given che present situation, Mr. Ellis' choice of policy would
be to seek net free reserves between zero and $100 million, and to

7/28/64 -23
support the Treasury bill rate as necessary, gradually moving it into
the 3.50-3.60 per cent range as a small precaution against the effects
of higher short-term rates abroad. This policy would be in the context
of letting the dust settle after the recent advance refunding. He
would hold a discount rate increase in abeyance. Like Mr. Hayes, he
was concerned that the public be prepared before any significant move
toward less ease was undertaken.
Mr. Irons reported that econonic conditions in the Eleventh
District had changed little during the past few weeks. There had been
a moderate upward movement in June and in the first part of July.
Industrial production was running about 5 per cent above a year ago
aid was inching up. Production had been held down a bit by a decline
in crude oil cutput, and it was likely that crude oil allowables would
be reduced slightly in August. Construction was very strong, and the
outlook, especially for residential construction, was favorable.
Employment had moved about seasonally and the unemployment rate, not
seasonally adjusted, was about 4-1/2 per cent of the labor force. This
was somewhat below the year-ago figure of 5 per cent. Retail trade,
including auto sales, was very strong.
It was too early to say much about agricultural prospects for
this year, Mr. Irons continued, but there had been an increase in
acreage and crops generally were satisfactory. The situation was about
normal for this season. Cash farm receipts for the year to date were
running between 5 and 6 per cent below a year ago.

7/28/64 -24
On the financial side, Mr. Irons said, loans at District banks
had increased, while investments and deposits were down slightly.
There were no large changes one way or the other among loan categories,
but commercial and industrial loans were down and loans in other
categories were up. Demand for Federal funds in the District had been
strong. Borrowings at the Reserve Bank were higher, but the change was
not great; a few more banks, both small and large, were coming in to
the discount window.
In the light of the domestic and international situation, and
of the Treasury financing situation, it seemed to Mr. Irons that there
was no reason at the moment to make any strong policy change. The
domestic economy was undergoing steady expansion with a good degree of
price stability, and there was a lack of evidence of any imbalances.
There had been some deterioration in the ba:ance of payments situation
in recent weeks, but in his judgment an overt policy change was not
called for as yet by either domestic condit:ons or foreign developments.
He would like to see continued moderate expansion in bank credit,
relative stability on average in the money market, and levels of interest
rates and a degree of reserve availability approaching those of the last
three weeks. His guidelines would be free reserve averages of $100
million, plus or minus about $25 million; a Treasury bill rate around
3.50 per cent, plus or minus about 5 basis points; and the Federal
funds rate also at ?.50 per cent. He would not raise the discount

7/28/64 -25
rate at this time. The draft directive with the minor changes proposed
by the staff was acceptable to him. He would prefer that any errors on
the part of the Desk be on the side of a little more firmness rather
than a little more ease.
Mr. Swan reported that, as in the Eleventh District, there had
been no very .;ignificant changes in the immediate situation in the
Twelfth District. The rate of unemployment in the Pacific Coast States
was unchanged in June, which was a little unusual in contrast with the
increase in unemployment in the nation. However, the District unemploy
ment rate still continued well above that of the country as a whole and
in May and June was little changed from June of last year. The failure
of unemployment to worsen was related to the fact that the decline in
employment in defense-related industries in June was the smallest monthly
drop so far in 1964. The rate of these decreases had been lessening,
but some further declines in defense employment were anticipated.
Lumber prices, while still below year-ago levels, were somewhat
firmer in July, Mr. Swan said. The firming occurred against a background
of a steady flow of orders and some vacation shut-downs.
Cash farm receipts for the first five months of the year in the
District were slightly higher than a year ago, but had shown less increase
than in the nation as a whole. Agricultural production prospects seemed
to be better; crop volume in the District was likely to be heavier in
1964 than in 1963. Department store sales in the first part of July

7/28/64 -26
continued at levels well above a year ago. On the whole, the economic
situation in the District appeared quite favorable.
Twelfth District banks reflected some pressure in their reserve
positions, Mr. Swan noted. The larger banks were net buyers of Federal
funds in the week ending July 8. They moved to the selling side in the
next two weeks,, but in relatively small amounts.
Mr. Swan reported that one of the smaller city banks recently
had borrowed f-om the Reserve Bank to tide over until it could sell some
mortgages. It; borrowing need had been occasioned by the fact that a
rather substantial certificate of deposit, held by a savings and loan
association, had not been renewed as expected, and the bank felt its
only recourse was to sell mortgages. Mr. Swan said he did not know
whether or not this would prove to be the first of a number of such
incidents, but he suspected that it might be.
It seemed to Mr. Swan that with an advance refunding just
accomplished, and with additional Treasury financing ahead, the Committee
should maintain an even keel situation in the next three weeks. In his
judgment the domestic situation did not call for a policy change in any
case. Recent developments in the balance of payments certainly were not
encouraging, but given the lack of knowledge thus far as to the cause
for the deterioration, and given the fact that the figures were tentative
and had been subject to substantial revisions in the past, he saw no
basis as yet in the international situation for a change in policy.

7/28/64 -27
Thus, Mr. Swan favored a continuation of the Committee's policy of
the past three weeks, without any attempt to obtain slightly more
firmness within the framework of current policy. He was satisfied
with the draft directive that had been prepared by the staff, and
would not change the discount rate.
Mr. Deming reported that Ninth District economic activity
expanded in June, apparently more than seasonally, and the expansion
seemed to have carried over into July. Total industrial power use in
June was up 12 per cent. While total employment, seasonally adjusted,
had shown little change from January to July, manufacturing employment
in Minnesota moved up in July from June levels. By the close of June,
iron ore shipments from Lake Superior ports were 23 per cent ahead of
the same period last year. Nonresidential construction activity was moving
ahead steadily, although residential building was slowing down.
June bank debits, seasonally adjusted, for the Ninth District
showed the sharpest month-to-month rise this year and were 18 per cent
ahead of last June, Mr. Deming said. June personal income, however.
probably would show some decline from May, in large part due to the new
wheat program which caused cash sales receipts of farmers to drop,
although much of this drop would be made up with certificate payments
later. Agricultural output in the District in 1964 should be favorable,
as growing conditions were good. Total wheat production should exceed
last year's level by 10 per cent due to higher yields. Feed grain

7/28/64 -28
production was estimated on July 1 as slightly smaller than last year.
A strike at the Duluth-Superior docks by grain handlers had embargoed
grain shipments to those ports since July 6 and had caused grain to
back up to local farm storage.
District retail sales in July seemed to have improved over June,
Mr. Deming cortinued. Department store sales were quite strong in the
first half of the month in the city areas and even in the smaller urban
centers where they had been weak so far this year.
The Minneapolis Bank's regular opinion survey on short-term
prospects, taken as of July 22, indicated general optimism. Only
two respondents foresaw some weakness in the next several weeks; about
two-thirds foresaw improvement, and about one-third stability at present
high levels.
Bank credit expansion had moderated somewhat so far in July,
Mr. Deming said, as investments declined slightly more than loans grew.
At city banks, however, loan demand in July was stronger than usual with
the increase in business loans rather marked. So far this year, business
loan demand at city banks had been weak, in large part apparently reflec
ting lessened demand for credit by grain processors who were reducing
inventory as a result of the new wheat program. Some rebuilding of
inventory was now taking place, but the amount of credit required by
the milling trade probably would remain smaller than usual since the
new program resulted in lower cash prices, and certificates did not have

7/28/64 -29
to be purchased until or after actual grain processing. The net
result was that the Government would, in effect, carry about one
third of the inventory cost.
With respect to policy, Mr. Deming said, it seemed to him
that for the next three weeks the Committee had to stay about where it
was at present; the Treasury financing situation was the dominant
consideration. There also was no particular reason to change policy
on grounds of the domestic economic situation. However, he had begun
to share the concern expressed by Mr. Hayes and others about the
deterioration in the balance of paymerts. In his judgment the Committee
would be well advised not only to keep this problem in mind but also
to look toward monetary policy action that hopefully would moderate
such outflows of short-term funds that might be taking place. The
Minneapolis Reserve Bank recently had learned of some cases in the
District in which corporations with very strong cash positions were
moving funds to Canada. Other corporations were inquiring into the
possibilities of doing the same. Mr. Deming commented that it would
be hard to say how much of a change in rate differentials would be
required to stop such flows.
Mr. Deming concluded by saying the staff draft of the directive
was acceptable to him. He would not change the discount rate.
Mr. Helmer reported that business trends in the Seventh District
continued to develop favorably and, allowing for seasonal trends,

7/28/64 -30
employment appeared to be increasing and unemployment to be decreasing
slightly.
A local steel producer reported that auto firms were ordering
steel as though they expected to continue output without a work
stoppage. Current estimates for the Auto industry placed output at
1-1/2 million units in the third quarter--12 per cent above last
year--with about 900,000 of these being 1965 models. Order backlogs
had been rising for some types of steel (mainly plates and structurals)
and for some types of capital equipment (especially machine tools and
heavy presses), but there was little evidence that District business
firms were paying or obtaining higher prices for goods.
Business loans declined at District banks during the past few
weeks, although by an amount less than usual for July, Mr. Helmer noted.
Trade and metals manufacturing firms had reduced borrowings rather
sharply but these reductions had been offset in part by net increases
in most other industry groups, especially public utilities. The
continued rise in "other" loans suggested that consumers might have
stepped up the pace of their borrowing. Although most District banks
had maintained fairly comfortable reserve positions, borrowing at the
discount window rose temporarily in the week of the Treasury's refunding.
Banks in Chicago apparently had no difficulty acquiring desired amounts
of CDs, and the amount outstanding had been restored to the pre-tax
date level.

7/28/64 -31
Mr. Tow said there was little evidence of accelerating economic
activity in the Tenth District.
Nonfarm employment had declined slightly this year. In a
majority of States, employment had been essentially unchanged, but a
decline in three States had produced an over-all District decrease.
Most important had been a halt in Colorado's long postwar expansion,
along with employment declines in Kansas and Oklahoma as contributing
factors.
Farm income prospects in the Tenth District for the last half
of this year were distinctly better than the first half, when cash
receipts from farm marketings decreased 6 per cent. With wheat pro
duction a fifth higher than last year's relatively small crop, cash
receipts from that source should materially improve. While wheat
prices were lower than last year, this effect should be more than
offset by an increased volume of marketings and certificate payments
under the new Federal wheat program. Receipts from cattle sales also
should improve, as a larger volume of marketings should at least offset
the effect of lower cattle prices. Cattle prices strengthened somewhat
in June and since then had remained above their May lows.
Asset growth of Tenth District weekly reporting banks this
year had about paralleled that of a year ago, Mr. Tow noted. A more
rapid rate of loan growth had been accompanied by a marked increase
in liquidation of investments. Business loans, however, had decreased,

7/28/64 -32-
in marked contrast to a large expansion las: year. In fact, loans to
durable goods manufacturers constituted the only broad category of
business loan expansion. The faster growth in total loan volume this
year stemmed largely from expansion in loan,; to nonbank financial
institutions; banks, brokers, and dealers; and real estate loans.
The composition of the more rapid total loan volume expansion in
Tenth District weekly reporting banks over a year ago raised real
doubt as to whether it was related to growth in economic activity
within the District.
Mr. Wayne commented that business activity in the Fifth District
continued to rise at a slow, steady pace, following a trend that had
been in progress for many months. The Bank's latest survey showed
businessmen viewing the near future with about the same degree of
optimism as was indicated three weeks earlier. Manufacturers on
balance again reported small gains in new o-ders and shipments and a
slight upward tendency in employment, wages, and the outlook for profits.
The textile business seemed stronger and more stable than at any time
in the past several years. New orders continued at a good pace, keeping
backlogs large and prices firm, and profits were expected to be the best
in more than a decade. Building activity remained at record levels,
but stability in seasonally adjusted construction employment since early
in the year and spring declines in both contract awards and building
permits might foretell a leveling off sometime in the near future.

7/28/64 -33
Retail sales apparently continued at generally high levels, In
agriculture, July rains had brightened crop prospects quite generally.
The rather fragmentary information that had become available
since the Committee's last meeting suggested that the U. S. economy
was continuing to move ahead at a moderate pace, Mr. Wayne continued.
It was true, as Mr. Hayes had suggested, that there were a number of
question marks; the leading indicators had been showing some weakness
for two months, contract awards and housing starts had been trending
downward, and durable goods sales did not look particularly strong.
But it seemed significant to Mr. Wayne that the advance was proceeding
at a good pace in the face of such factors without any signs of in
ventory excesses.
Mr. Wayne believed that recent rate.; of expansion in reserves
and bank credit had been generally appropriate to domestic business
conditions. Disparities between domestic and foreign money rates
continued to occasion concern and should significant short-term
outflows be stimulated, reconsideration of the posture of policy might
be in order. For the present, however, Mr. Wayne saw no reason either
in the domestic or the international situation for altering the Committee's
position. Accordingly, and also in view of the Treasury financing, he
favored no change in policy and would leave the discount rate at the
present level. Mr. Wayne indicated that he was satisfied with the draft
directive prepared by the staff.

7/28/64 -34
Mr. Mills said that, assuming that .he reported financial
statistics faithfully reflected the performance of the national
economy and international movements of funds, in his judgment no
change in policy was called for at this time. However, he continued
to be disturbed by the Committee's concentration in policy actions on
maintaining a predetermined level of interest rates. In his belief,
the result was to draw a curtain over what otherwise would be a visible
and desirable interplay of financial market factors that would offer
the Committee advance notice of impending developments on which policy
actions could be formulated. The Committee was now precluded from
formulating policy in this way by the lack of availability of signs.
Mr. Robertson said that he shared some of Mr. Mills' concern.
He then made the following statement:
Given the reported steady e.pansion in business activity,
the stability in the price picture, and the persisting high
level of unemployment, it seems to me that a "steady in the
boat" posture for monetary policy continues to be very much
in order.
I am not indifferent to the unfavorable recent balance
of payments developments, but I continue to feel that the
credit flows contributing most to the recent changes are
better dealt with by a selective approach to the few lenders
involved rather than by general monetary measures. On the
domestic side, money supply increases have been substantial
in June and July, but as yet I see no cause for concern in
that development. A significant part of the July increase
reflected transfers of deposits from Government to private
hands, rather than a continuation of the strong net bank
credit and deposit creation recorded in June. Two such
months do not make a trend. Moreover, with n the money
supply total the recent cessation of growth in currency in
circulation should lead us to accommodate a little stronger
rate of growth in the demand deposit component of money.

7/28/64 -35-
Finally, these money supply increases ought to be
viewed against the perspective of the very appreciable
shrinkage in the public's holdings of other liquid assets
that resulted from the Treasury's advance refunding. With
all these counteracting influences operating on over-all
public liquidity, I am glad that monetary policy has been
as expansive as it has.
Even apart from all these other considerations, however,
I think the Committee ought to feel impelled to follow an
"even keel" policy over the next three weeks because of the
status of the past and prospective Treasury financings.
Dealers still hold a very large amount of the longer-term
advance refunding issues, and now the Treasury will be
announcing a separate refunding offering for the August 15
maturities (presumably a reasonably short-term offering for
which the books would be open some time next week). The
latter should be a routine operation, on which the Treasury,
from its point of view, would not need any help. Nonetheless,
we must remember that we have ordinarily maintained an "even
keel" policy during and at least for a few days after the
subscription periods for coupon issue refundings, and that
the market has come to expect this from us as a regular
practice
I favor a clear-cut understanding of the "rules of the
game" between us and the market, and therefore I would not
want to see us break this one by a departure from "even
keel" unless the need therefor is substantial. I see no
substantial need to break this rule, and therefore I advocate
a policy of "no change" between now and the next meeting of
the Committee.
Mr. Robertson added that in his opinion the directive with che
amendments proposed by the staff was clearly appropriate. He would
hope that no attempt would be made to slip sideways into a tighter
position, as some had suggested.
Mr. Shepardson said that while the general outlook was encouraging
it seemed to him that many of the public statements being made about
prospects for the domestic economy were perhaps too optimistic and that
the uncertain foreign situation provided some cause for concern.

7/28/64 -36
However, with the present Treasury financing activities calling for
maintaining a stable situation, it seemed inappropriate to make any
change in policy. Accordingly, he favored a continuation of the
policy of the last three weeks. Unlike Mr. Robertson, Mr. Shepardson
was inclined to feel that within the constraints imposed by the Treasury
financing the Committee should not avoid moves in the direction of a
little lower free reserves, and a little higher levels of short-term
rates, somewhat along the lines Mr. Ellis had suggested. Mr. Shepardson
approved of the directive as drafted by the staff.
Mr. Mitchell commented that he thought monetary policy should
be accommodative of the needs of the economy, which he would define
under present circumstances as continuing that it had been doing. He
was puzzled by the behavior of the money supply during recent weeks,
as was Mr. Brill, and he was uncertain of the significance of recent
balance of payments figures, as was Mr. Furth. But until some further
knowledge was available on the implications of these developments he
would be inclined to continue policy as at present. Treasury financing
also precluded a policy change. The draft directive submitted by the
staff was agreeable to him.
Mr. Mitchell said he would like to comment on Mr. Hayes'
suggestion that the Committee should be preparing the public for
something. lie was not sure what it was the public should be prepared
for, but he had a feeling that it was a recession. His reason for

7/28/64 -37
saying this was that it seemed pretty clear by now that the tax cut
had not had the stimulative effect that had been sought. It was
possible that there would be a delayed reaction, but in his judgment
the goals sought had not been realized. He was not sure of the
reason; perhaps the effects of the tax cut had been counteracted by
the trend of Government expenditures. In any case, Mr. Mitchell
thought that the Committee might well face a situation this fall in
which some expansive contribution would be expected from monetary
policy on domestic economic grounds. He fully shared Mr. Hayes'
concern about the balance of payments, but he did not think that the
sort of remedy Mr. Hayes proposed was one that the Committee was free
to use. Not only was the domestic economy the Committee's greatest
concern, but the strength of the U.S. econony was of the greatest
importance throughout the world.
It seemed to Mr. Mitchell that monetary policy in recent years
had been outstandingly successful in accommodating the economy. He
thought the Committee should be very careful in making any departures
in its policy on the grounds that the balance of payments situation
required them, particularly since it appeared that the end of the
current cycle might well be near. In his judgment it was most important
that the System avoid the collison course on which it would embark if
it raised the discount rate or if the Committee made any deliberate
change in its policy posture without overwhelming evidence of need.

7/28/64 -38
Mr. Hayes said he wanted to make clear that he did not foresee
a recession and was not suggesting that the public be warned about the
prospect of one. In his opinion the domestic economy was doing very
well but there was a lack of progress in the balance of payments
problem. In fact, the situation appeared frightening when one looked
back over the past five or six years. He thought monetary policy did
have a role to play in connection with the payments problem, and that
it was not possible to separate the question of domestic prospects
from that of the international strength of the dollar.
Mr. Hickman said that figures now available for the second
quarter reaffirmed the impression that the economy was growing at a
balanced and sustainable rate. The preliminary figures on GNP showed
gains of 1.6 per cent in both the first and second quarters. Industrial
production, on a revised basis, showed a ga.n in the second quarter of
2.2 per cent, slightly larger than the 1.6 per cent gain in the first
quarter. Retail sales, on the other hand, showed an opposite pattern,
with sales up less in the second quarter than in the first (1.8 per
cent as compared with 2.3 per cent).
The economic analyst could, therefore, take his pick as to
whether the expansion was accelerating, decelerating, or steady.
However, it was important to note that when the above increases for
both quarters were summed and multiplied by two to obtain annual growth
rates, the improvements thus far this year had been substantial:

7/28/64 -39
industrial prcduction was increasing at an annual rate of 7.6 per
cent; retail sales at a rate of 8.2 per cent; and GNP at a rate of
6.4 per cent.
Expectations for continued gains in the economy were
widespread, Mr. Hickman said, judging from views expressed at the
latest meeting of 25 Fourth District business economists held
recently at the Cleveland Bank. These economists felt that business would
continue to expand, although not rapidly, during the next three or
four calerdar quarters. Doubts about the outlook were expressed only
for the second quarter of 1965 and later, but primarily because of
the low visibility of economic forecasts beyond the six-month horizon.
There was widespread concern in the group about labor negotiations in
the auto industry this year and possibly in steel next year. Incidentally,
steel analysts in the Fourth District were now looking for a 1964 ingot
output of 117-119 million tons, and automobile analysts were lookirg
for an 8-million-plus car year. Representatives of both industries
were now inclined to see total output for their respective industries
next year as being below this year's record performance.
Scattered and incomplete reports for the Fourth District in
July showed a rather mixed picture, with some signs of hesitation,
Mr. Hickman continued. Part of the hesitation reflected the usual
summer vacations and shutdowns, and part reflected a leveling that had
occurred in iron and steel and the transportation industries in recent

7/28/64 -40
weeks. The latest employment statistics for major labor market areas
of the Distric, seasonally adjusted, showed three improvements, six
declines, and five with no change. This contrasted to the situation
earlier this year when changes were almost uniformly on the side of
improvement.
With respect to monetary policy, Mr. Hickman thought that
because of the imminent Treasury refunding the Committee was faced
again with the need to maintain an even keel. He hoped personally
that in following this course the Committee would not again experience
the violent expansion in the money supply that had occurred recently.
Between the first half of May and the first half of July, as the staff
report pointed out, the money supply expanded at an annual rate of 9.3
per cent. In his opinion such an expansion hardly seemed consistent
with an even-keel policy.
Mr. Hickman continued to feel that nonetary policy had been
too easy too long and that the Committee was building up serious
problems for itself in the future. History seemed to show that if
rates of monetary expansion similar to those that had prevailed in the
recent past were continued for too long, they were likely to result in
price inflation, boom, and bust. From the balance of payments standpoint
also, excessive credit expansion and credit availability appeared to
have encouraged capital outflows from both the banking and nonbanking
sectors.

7/28/64 -41
Mr. Hickman thought that as soon as the Treasury's calendar
permitted, the Committee should push the bill rate to the general area
of 3.60 per cent; and, in the meantime, it should continue to swap key
foreign currencies, buying British pounds and Canadian dollars spot and
selling them forward, to reduce or eliminate the covered yield dif
ferentials. He would also let the Canadians and the British know
what was being done and why, and solicit their cooperation.
The revised draft directive was satisfactory to Mr. Hickman.
Mr. Bopp said that business continued to be good in the Third
District. Labor force developments since the last meeting had been
mainly favorable. Output, which wavered a bit in May, appeared to
have picked up again in June. Sales at retail had been satisfactory,
although not matching national increases.
Unemployment claims in Pennsylvania and Delaware continued to
be low, compared with the totals of recent years. Help-wanted indexes
increased in June in Philadelphia and the Middle Atlantic States, as
well as in the nation. Unemployment rates typically decreased in June,
although in a few places insured rates went up somewhat. The Third
District now had no labor markets classified "F" and only one-
Scranton-- in the "E" category.
Electric power consumption and employment in the manufacturing
industries of the Third District decreased more than seasonally in May,
but both measures appeared to have recovered in June, Mr. Bopp noted.

7/28/64 -42
This assessment was based on not quite complete data, however.
Construction contract awards in the Third District this year were
holding at last year's levels, as were national construction awards.
Department store sales in the District were up 8 per cent over 1963
for the year to date, 9 per cent in the latest four weeks, and 6
per cent in the latest week.
Since the Committee's last meeting, Mr. Bopp said, reserve
pressures on Third District member banks once more had increased and
loans continued to better the year-ago performance. The basic reserve
position of reserve city banks had shifted to the deficit side again
after having been positive during the last Lwo weeks in June. For
the three weeks ending July 22, the deficit averaged almost $50 million.
Borrowing at the discount window, both by reserve city and country
banks, continued to be quite light.
Net loans adjusted at weekly reporting member banks rose by
$17 million, compared to a year-ago decline of $1 million. Business
loans dropped slightly but by an amount less than last year. Total
deposits adjusted in the first half of July rose by $41.0 million,
compared to a $70.1 million decline last year. The increase was
predominantly in the category "other demand deposits adjusted," with
time and savings deposits and interbank deposits also rising.
Mr. Bopp commented that as the economy passed the mid-year mark,
it continued along a path characterized by steady expansion without

7/28/64 -43
inflationary or specutive excesses. Perhaps most indicative of this
course was the 5 per cent increase in gross national product over the
second quarter of a year ago, coupled with a continued rise in output
per man-hour in manufacturing and steady wholesale and industrial
prices. In short, economic policy in the first half achieved the goal
of steady growth without inflation, although there was still some way
to go in attaining the objective of reasonably full employment of
manpower and other resources.
Because of this general under-utilization of resources,
Mr. Bopp regarded as a favorable development the steady growth in
bank credit, in the money supply, and in other liquid financial assets.
The question remained, however, as to whether this build-up represented
inflaticnary tinder for the second half of the year. In a complex
industrial economy, of course, anything was possible. Yet, in his
judgment, ample unused resources rendered such a development unlikely.
As for the balance of payments, it was heartening to see the
second quarter deficit revised a bit in favor of the U. S. It also
was suitable that short-term rates had risen above their monthly laws.
In short, for domestic reasons, Mr. Bopp felt that the present
posture of ease continued to be appropriate to the near-term future
even in the absence of need for an even-keel policy to facilitate
present Treasury financing. The present posture also was appropriate
to the current balance of payments condition, although that condition

7/28/64 -44
had to be watched closely during the remainder of the year. In his
opinion the draft directive submitted by the staff was appropriate.
Mr. Bcpp said that he might mention that there seemed to be
a significant and rapidly increasing restiveness with respect to
Federal Reserve membership in the Third District, particularly on
the part of small and medium-sized banks. Some were actively
considering withdrawing from the System. To some extent this situation
was peculiar to Pennsylvania, where State banking laws gave significant
competitive advantages to nonmember banks.
Mr. Daane entered the meeting at this point.
Mr. Bryan commented that he had no new and immediately current
Sixth District figures that had not heretcfore been presented. The
economy of the District appeared to be robust as judged by directors'
reports, and if judged by new plant and expansion announcements, would
continue in good health for some time.
Borrowings from the discount window for some weeks had been
generally heavier than seemed appropriate :n view of the District's
total banking resources as a proportion of national banking resources.
But charts on member bank borrowings, over a longer term, exhibited an
alternating pattern, first going above the 6 per cent line representing
the District's relation to the national total of reserves, and then
going below. He was thus unable to attach any particular significance
to the present situation.

7/28/64 -45
The national economy, speaking wholly to the domestic side,
seemed to be going ahead nicely, Mr. Bryan said. The development did
not at the moment appear to give clear indications of inflation; on
the contrary. The development also seemed to be sufficiently balanced
and symmetrical so that he did not see any present and compelling
reason for believing that the national economy would shortly change
its direction.
The money supply and reserve supplies seemed to Mr. Bryan to be
in order. Accordingly, speaking to the longer run of three or four
months, he believed that the Account Manager should aim for approximately
a 3 per cent growth in total reserves after allowing for seasonals.
In the shorter run, taking account of the fact that the Treasury
operations would largely inhibit any change in policy, which in any
event did not seem to be indicated, Mr. Bryan believed that the
Account Manager should aim on a daily average basis for $100 million
free reserves, plus or minus $50 million or so.
Mr. Bryan noted that he had not spoken of the balance of payments
situation, but in his recommendation for short-run policy and longer
run policy had abstracted from the balance of payments for reasons that
he had mentioned at other meetings. He would say, however, that in his
judgment the balance of payments problem was extraordinarily serious,
to the point that it might eventually force national policies resulting
in a shock to the domestic economy. Without in eny degree making a

7/28/64 -46
forecast, Mr. Bryan said he could imagine a hypothetical, but quite
possible, chain of events that might at some point lead to devaluation
of the dollar. The problem here, Mr. Bryan said, was one of remedies.
If it could be shown that monetary expansion in this country was
primarily responsible for the balance of payments difficulties he
would, of course, agree that the Comittee must take primary responsi
bility in effecting a remedy. But he did not believe that this could
be demonstrated.
Mr. Bryan said that he would not change the discount rate at
this time. He was agreeable to the directive proposed by the staff.
Mr. Bryan then said that he would like to make a comment with
regard to the staff's regular report to the Committee, "Current Economic
and Financial Conditions," which was familiarly referred to at his Bank
as the "green book." He thought the staff should be complimented for
this book; its format and content were excellent, and he found it most
useful. He wanted to raise a question concerning this report without
having any firm convictions about the answer. On three or four occasions
the Committee had discussed the possibility of publishing from time to
time, in the Federal Reserve Bulletin or elsewhere, a review of economic
developments and a statement about monetary policy. He had not reviewed
the green book to determine whether there would be a problem in connec
tion with confidential information, but the question that occurred to
him was whether this book could be publicly released after each meeting.

7/28/64 -47
At a minimum, this would make the most recent figures available
promptly, and it would also indicate the variety of considerations
the Committee had in mind at each meeting. Publication of this material
might serve as a substitute for the types of articles the Committee had
discussed on earlier occasions.
Mr. Shuford commented that economic activity in the Eighth
District had continued on a high plateau since January. Perhaps it
could be said to have inched up slightly, but generally speaking
there had not been much change since the first of the year. Employment,
bank debits, and department store sales renained at about their January
levels. Bank deposits had continued to increase at a rapid pace, however,
and business loans had risen markedly since April.
District construction activity had been at an advanced level in
recent months, with contract awards so far this year 30 per cent above
the same period a year ago. The sharpest increase had been in non
residential construction, but there also had been a substantial rise in
residential building permits.
Farm crop prospects were good, Mr. Shuford said. The acreage
planted to major crops was about the same as last year. Crops generally
were in good condition for this time of the year, but, as had already
been mentioned, it was a little early to be making predictions. Most
of the small grains had been harvested and corn, cotton, soybeans, and
tobacco were progressing satisfactorily. Dry weather in the southern

7/28/64 -48
part of the District had been a problem, but recent rainfall had
improved conditions. Livestock prices were below year-ago levels,
but they had recovered somewhat from the depressed levels of April
and May.
Nationally, Mr. Shuford continued, economic activity had
continued strong in the second quarter. Output, employment, incomes,
and retail sales all had increased significantly from the first quarter
to second. The economy not only appeared to be healthy, but it also
was strong in all major sectors. Inventories were not excessive,
and at this time there appeared to be no major imbalances.
There had been considerable churning in the money and capital
markets during the past two or three weeks, Mr. Shuford noted. As
Mr. Noyes had anticipated at the last meetirg, shifting from "rights"
into Treasury bills in connection with the advance refunding had put
Treasury bill rates under downward pressure, but after the refunding
rates returned to the levels that had prevailed since last November.
Pressure in the money market, as reflected by data on Federal funds
rates, dealer positions, free reserves, and the like, changed little
on balance. The most recent data on bank reserves, bank credit, and
the money supply showed marked expansion. However, since late last
year monetary growth had been in the 3 to 4 per cent range. Mr. Shuford
noted that in the latter part of 1963 the Committee had been concerned
about the high rate of growth in the money supply, and a few meetings

7/28/64 -49
ago it had been bothered by the fact that the growth rate then was
quite low. Now the growth rate was back up again. It behooved the
Committee, Mr. Shuford said, to consider the behavior of the money
supply from a longer run point of view.
Mr. Shuford commented that the balance of payments problem
continued to be troublesome, and increasingly so at present. For the
time being, however, he favored no change in policy for the various
reasons that had been discussed, including Treasury financing activity.
The staff's draft directive appeared satisfactory to him.
Chairman Martin noted that Mr. Daane, returning from a trip
abroad, had joined the meeting a short time earlier, and he asked
whether the latter had any comments.
Mr. Daane said he thought, no change in policy was called for,
particularly in light of the recent surprisingly successful advance
refunding, and of the imminence of further Treasury financing activity.
He had been somewhat confused by the available data on balance of
payments developments, and he felt this was an area that the Committee
should watch carefully. At this juncture, however, he thought no
change in policy was the best course.
Mr. Balderston commented that at the moment the market might
need to be let alone to digest the large volume of Government securities
issued in the recent advance refunding. Since the redistribution of
the dealer and other temporary holdings should not take long, it was

7/28/64 -50
his hope that the Committee would use the interim to take a fresh look
at the current posture of monetary policy with a view to minimizing
the outflow of dollars at present and a possible resumption of gold
outflows in the future.
Fortunately, Mr. Balderston said, the Committee was now
approaching a period in which some adjustment of that posture would
be possible. He therefore would address himself to what might be
called "a stitch in time." In favor of some gradual lessening of the
pace of bank credit expansion were several considerations:
First, the rate incentive for American corporations and banks
to place funds abroad needed to be diminished in view of the balance
of payments outlook. He was impressed with Mr. Deming's comments on
movements of corporate funds to Canada. Actual rate advances in
Europe, coupled with the expectation of others, had induced nervous
ness that could increase. While the long-term claims on foreigners
reported by banks increased in the second quarter by only $70 million,
Mr. Balderstone suspected that this reduced figure was not representative
of the outlook for the year as a whole.
Secondly, Mr. Balderston continued, although traditional
relationships did not indicate a significant increase in corporate
liquidity ratios, it was clear that big corporations had large and
growing quantities of liquid funds. Consequently, they would continue
to cast around for opportunities to employ this liquidity, including
placement of funds overseas.

7/28/64 -51
In most European countries except Germany, both short- and
long-term rates since a year ago had advanced by about enough to
offset the rate increases in the U. S. during the same period.
Currently, the 4-1/2 per cent prime rate in the U. S. was lower than
that in any o.. these countries except Switzerland, and in that country
banks had had to become more selective in lending at that rate.
The final consideration, Mr. Balderston said, had to do with
liquidity of individuals, which continued to mount as a result of the
high rate of saving and the fact that bank Loans and investments had
grown at a fast pace, averaging about 8 per.cent annually since early
1961.
The money supply had increased markedly since mid-May, at an
annual rate of 9 per cent--a rate that should not be sustained. And
so at a time when European countries, excluding Sweden and Britain,
had cut their rates of money supply expansion, the United States had
continued to provide comfortable bank credit availability. The
important factor was that stiff restraint in Europe and no restraint
here would tend, over a period, to bring to a halt the recent improve
ment in the relative competitiveness of U. S. business and in the
payments deficit.
Mr. Balderston commented the U. S. balance of payments problem
could not be solved by any one action, as others had remarked earlier
in the meeting. But since other developed countries were taking steps

7/28/64 -52
to counter present and developing inflationary pressures, and the
business situation here remained steadily strong, he thought it would
be appropriate to consider shifting System policy shortly to induce
more discounting by member banks, especially the large city banks.
The need for some action was reinforced by the growth of nonborrowed
reserves in the first half of this year at an annual rate of 5.9
per cent. If this were done, one could not foretell whether or not
the big banks would give preference to domestic rather than foreign
lending, but it was worth a trial. It was more certain that some
increase in bill rates would reduce the incentive for bankers and
nonbankers to place funds abroad.
To focus this argument upon a concrete proposal, Mr. Balderston
said, he favored rates of upward of 3.60 per cent for the three-month
bill, but not above 3.75 per cent for the six-month bill. Further, he
would probe to discover the effect of forcing a somewhat higher volume
of bank advances at the discount windows. To achieve both of these
ends would require letting free reserves move close to zero, and even
below zero.
Since his concern, Mr. Balderston said, centered upon some
redressing of bill rates without setting off too large a shrinkage of
negotiable CDs, and upon staunching any future gold outflows, he was
inclined to the view that a change in reserve requirements might be
used again this fall, as Mr. Hayes had suggested at a previous meeting.

7/28/64 -53
Used instead of the open market instrument, it would meet seasonal
credit needs without depressing bill rates and, equally important,
it would reduce the gold requirement. It seemed to Mr. Balderston
that unless action was taken early enough, the action that would be
required later might have to be more drastic than he would consider
desirable.
Chairman Martin commented that he thought the consensus was
clear today: an even keel policy should be followed during the next
three weeks. Some members would prefer that any minor deviations be
on the side of firmness; others would evidently prefer that they be on
the side of ease. He added, with a smile, that his own suggestion
would be not to have any errors at all. The Chairman also commented
that the suggestion for consideration of a change in reserve require
ments deserved careful study.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
was authorized and directed, until
otherwise directed by the Committee,
to execute transactions in the System
Account in accordance with the follow
ing current economic policy directive:
It is the Federal Open Market Commmittee's current policy
to accommodate moderate growth in the reserve base, bank
credit, and the money supply for the purpose of facilitating
continued expansion of the economy, while fostering improvement
in the capital account of U. S. international payments, and
seeking to avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures.
This policy takes into account the continued orderly expansion
in economic activity, accompanied recently by a more rapid

7/28/64 -54
expansion in money supply and little over-all change in
interest rates. It also gives consideration to the
relative stability in average commodity prices; the
underutil:zation of manpower and other resources; the
apparent deterioration in the international payments
balance in the first weeks of July; and the interest rate
advances in recent months in important markets abroad.
To implement this policy, and taking into account
Treasury financing activity, System open market operations
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining about the
same conditions in the money market as have prevailed in
recent weeks, while accommodating moderate expansion in
aggregate bank reserves.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be
held on Tuesday, August 18, 1964, at 9:30 a.m.
Chairman Martin then suggested that the Committee give consid
eration to the memorandum dated June 16, 1964, from Messrs. Ellis,
Mitchell, and Swan regarding the Committee's current economic policy
directive. He asked whether the authors of the memorandum would care
to comment.
Mr. Mitchell observed that the memorandum in question had been
in the hands of the Committee for about six weeks, and that it had been
discussed at a staff conference in San Francisco during the preceding
week. He would make only two points. One was a point he had made when
the report was first presented: that while the proposal in the mem
orandum was quite specific, the authors had not intended to be dogmatic.
The proposal reflected the authors' best judgment as to how it might be
most useful to start what could bp termed an experiment. But the

7/28/64 -55
specifics could be modified readily, and it was contemplated that they
would be changed informally and gradually. If the Committee did decide
on changes, they could be accomplished without inconvenience.
For himself, Mr. Mitchell said, he felt a certain sense of
humility in setting this proposal before the Committee, but he was not
diffident about it; he thought it important to try to improve the
techniques used in wording the directive.
Secondly, Mr. Mitchell said, he wanted to comment on one type
of criticism of the proposal that he had heard, namely, that the pro
cedures suggested would increase staff responsibilities considerably.
It shoula be noted, he said, that under the proposal Committee members'
work also would be more difficult. It was the effort to be more
specific that increased the burden. Moreover, Mr. Mitchell said, the
purpose of the elaborate and expensive apparatus for economic reporting
and analysis which the Federal Reserve System maintained was to provide
the basis for a flexible countercyclical monetary policy. Such an
apparatus would not be needed if the System were to follow an automatic
policy such as some recommended, under which reserves would be injected
at a constant rate.
Mr. Mitchell thought the directive should show not only what
actions the Committee was taking but also how it analyzed the economic
situation and what its prognoses were. There were many uncertainties
and gaps in the Committee's knowledge, and because of them the proposals

7/28/64 -56
in the memorandum might seem to be lame and halting, he said, but he
commended them to the Committee as a step in the right direction.
Mr. Swan commented that he had little to add to what Mr. Mitchell
had said, and would simply point out to the Committee what he personally
considered to be the two most important sentences in the report. One,
which occurred near the bottom of page 12, read: "However deficient
the state of the art, the Committee must, and now does, make judgments
of the sort that would be required under the proposal." This thought
was worth bearing in mind. The other was the last sentence of the
text, on page 13: "In the effort to face the issues directly the
Committee and its staff undoubtedly will come to have a sharper uncer
standing of the problems, and this alone would be a long stride toward
solutions." Mr. Swan expressed the hope that if the Committee moved in
the proposed direction it would not only improve its own processes and
directives but in the longer run it would also improve some of its
basic research programs and facilitate improvement of its analysis of
many of the issues involved.
Mr. Ellis said the three authors of the report had found they
had a high degree of uniformity in their approach to the problem of the
directive. They had not had the advantage of Committee discussion of
the Secretariat's memorandum of April 8, 1964, which appraised existing
directive procedures. Their own memorandum, in effect, started with a
judgment of the three authors with respect to the present practice, and

7/28/64 -57
they were not sure how widely that judgment was accepted among the
Committee members. However, the authors made an assumption that the
Committee did share their judgment, and they then attempted to set
out a modest but significant step toward improvement of the directive.
The central point of their report was the suggestion that the Committee
should establish priorities among its objectives in terms of economic
series that were measurable and that could be used to set targets and
goals in numerical form.
The Committee might well disagree with the specific choices
made in the report, Mr. Ellis said, but the overriding questions were
whether the Committee itself should decide on priorities and whether
it should exp:ess them in measurable magnitudes. If the Committee
agreed that it should do both, the question was where to start. The
authors were quite tentative in their suggestions for a starting pcint.
Chairman Martin commented that despite his skepticism, which
had not been completely removed, as to whether too much could be done
in this area, the Committee had an obligation to make its directive as
realistic and intelligent as possible. While the suggested procedure
would make more work for both the Committee and the staff, as Mr. Mitchell
had indicated, this was no reason of itself to shirk the effort.
The Chairman then called for comments around the table, and
Mr. Hayes made the following statement:

7/28/64 -58-
The memorandum before us, as well as the earlier
memorandum prepared by the Secretariat, has made a
signal cotribution to the discussion of the Committee's
economic policy directive as a means for instructing
the Manager and communicating with the public. I think
all of us have felt that our responsibilities for the
conduct of monetary policy demand nothing less than our
utmost efforts to instruct the Manager as clearly as
possible in achieving the Committee's objectives, and in
informing the public as clearly as we can as to those
objectives and instructions.
At the same time, I do not believe it would be wise
for the Committee to adopt the present proposal for
quantitative monetary objectives and detailed quantitative
instructions. Given the current inadequate state of our
knowledge about financial processes, and their linkages
with real economic activity, I am especially dubious about
the suggestion to single out a particular monetary variable
and specify a particular growth rate for that variable as
the System's primary policy objective. It would be
presumptuous to expect that our directives could resolve
the issues that have confronted monetary theoreticians
and policy makers for so many years, and I do not believe
that a good directive need attempt this. An effort to
impose this task on the directive will neither contribute
to public understanding nor to the quality of policy
formulation. I would be the last to say that our
directives are incapable of improvement, and I would like
to make a few comments on this later. However, I do not
share the feeling of serious dissatisfaction with the
existing directives that underlies these new proposals.
It seems to me that for the most part the existing procedure
works well, and I see no merit in substantial change unless
the change brings very real advantages. It is also my
impression that most members of the Committee have been
generally satisfied with our existing procedure.
Turning to the specific proposals, it seems to me that
there are real dangers to the quality of the Committee's
decisions if it tries to reach agreement every three weeks
on so comprehensive and complex a document as the proposed
directive. Given the difficulty we frequently have in
agreeing on wording in the present much simpler directive,
I do not see how the proposed procedures for developing the
new directive would prove workable unless we limited our
selves merely to choosing among alternative drafts prepared
by the staff. Inevitably, this would mean delegating

7/28/64 -59-
important judgments which are the appropriate province
of the Committee itself.
I have some difficulty on this score even with
regard to the least controversial of the proposed
directive's components--the analysis of recent business
and financial developments in Elements 1 and 2. At
present, the "policy record" has the benefit of being
drafted after an interchange of views among Committee
members at our regular meetings. Moreover, members have
an opportunity to suggest changes before the record is
put in final form, and I believe that useful improvements
often emerge from this process. In contrast, the new
proposal would in all practicality require that a distilled
analysis of recent developments be prepared in advance of
each meeting and before each member's views and the Committee
staff's comments had been heard and weighed. Since this
analysis would provide the foundation for the statement of
the Committee's policy intent and specific operating
instructions, Committee members could hardly pass over
lightly the selection of data made by the staff or the
interpretations placed upon the data. Yet I doubt whether
we are often in such close accord on the factors to be
emphasized that we could agree quickly on an official
analysis rationalizing the group's policy prescription.
Too many substantive issues are involved.
Moving on to Element 3 in the proposed directive, the
statement of the Committee's policy intent, I am extremely
dubious of the proposal to make a specific percentage rate
of growth in reserves behind private demand deposits the
Committee's primary policy objective. I do not believe that
our knowledge of the dynamics of the interaction between
reserve expansion and economic growth is so well developed
that we can fix on a single measure as the target for
monetary policy--whether it is private demand deposits,
money supply, bank credit, or one of the aggregate reserve
measures. And to select not only a particular measure but
also a specific desired growth rate seems daring indeed.
All of us sitting around this table are well aware that the
linkages among monetary variables may change as our economy
develops. To endorse a single policy variable may satisfy
an urge for theoretical neatness, but it represents in my
view a potentially dangerous retreat from the real world.
Pursuit of the particular measure mentioned in the present
proposal--private demand deposits--would seem to slide over
all the questions we have had about how to interpret the

7/28/64 -60-
very rapid growth of time deposits and all the uncertainties
associated with sharp changes in the level of Treasury deposits.
It would also gloss over the very substantial month-to-month
variability in these measures--variability in which a month
or two of substantial gains might be followed by sharp swings
to contraction or vice versa.
I am concerned also with the attempt under Element 3 to
specify particular expectations about interest rates or credit
conditions that we would associate with the reserve growth
goals. This would seem quite premature, given the current
state of knowledge. Certainly before we can contemplate an
approach of the kind proposed in the memorandum, there must
be a great deal more study of our financial processes, and
the linkages between those processes and the performance of
our economy, domestically and internationally. And even then,
without venturing to prejudge the results of this needed
research, I wonder if we could hope to rely on simple fixed
targets of the kind mentioned in the memorandum before us.
One obvious qualification that comes to mind is that if, at
times, the Committee should address its policy particularly
to our international position, this may not lend itself at
all to expression in terms of a desired growth rate in one
of our reserve measures. Rather, the principal emphasis then
might appropriately be placed on general market conditions.
As for Element 4, I believe that the Committee should
continue to instruct the Manager in qualitative rather than
quantitative terms. I am not only dubious of the Manager's
ability consistently to hit quantitative targets such as a
range of $50 million to $150 million average free reserves,
but. I am also concerned lest an effort to hew more closely
to such targets lead to considerably wider fluctuations in
money market conditions. In particular, the choice of a
free reserve target would strongly reinforce the position
of those observers who grossly oversimplify and regard free
reserves as the be-all and end-all of monetary policy. We
have made considerable progress in recent years in breaking
down the market's preoccupation with free reserves. It would
be unfortunate to retrogress by specifying a range or a central
value for free reserves as our target.
If the specified ranges are narrow enough to indicate a
measure of precise control by the Committee, the variables are
likely to fall outside the prescribed ranges quite often. An
occasional failure to hit the Committee's targets would be
understandable and readily explained, but I wonder if frequent
departures from the targets would not be taken as prima facie
evidence that the Committee does not effectively control the

7/28/64 -61-
execution of its policy. Of course, the target ranges
specified in the directive could be widened to the point
where there were few misses, but in th:s case I wonder
how meaningful the quantitative instructions would be.
From the standpoint of public consumption, a wide range
would only point up an apparent lack of precision in the
Committee's instructions to the Manager, leaving an
implication that the Manager must have some other guides
by which to operate.
On the other hand, I would see no objection at all to
individual Committee members mentioning quantitative
objectives as they make their comments and recommendations
on policy at each meeting. As a Committee member I find
such references useful in organizing my thoughts, and I
believe the Manager finds them useful in applying the
Committee's decisions at the Desk. It would also be useful
for the public to know that the member.; of the Committee at
times use quantitative terms in expressing their views. But
rather than have this embodied in the directive, with all
the rigidities that this would tend to impose, it would be
much preferable for the interested pub ic to become aware of
this practice through the minutes for 1936-1960 that are now
being opened to public perusal.
To consider more specifically how the formal detailing
of targets or target ranges would impair the functioning of
monetary policy, one might envisage a ,;ituation late in a
statement week when the market tone seems about right but the
projected reserve average is higher than the Committee has
called for. Close pursuit of the target would require
substantial sales of securities, perhaps to be followed
shortly by substantial purchases if the sales were depleting
reserves too sharply for the following period. The result
might well be more frequent and larger System operations,
with no apparent relation to the money market atmosphere.
Inevitably, System actions would appear arbitrary and capricious
to the market, tending to undermine the continuity of money
market atnosphere that is an important ingredient in the smooth
functioning of the financial mechanism.
The disadvantages of spelling out in the directive the
Manager's required response to changing circumstances are also
evident in the subsidiary instructions relating to the Treasury
bill rate. If a 3.40 to 3.55 per cent range is specified for
the 3-month bill rate, does this mean the Manager is to take
no action until the rate reaches 3.40 per cent? And is his
only response to be to curtail free reserves? I wonder if

7/28/64 -62-
better results are not likely to follow from having the Manager
not merely respond in Pavlovian fashion to a particular rate
level, but weigh the momentum of a trend in rates, and perhaps
set in train a series of responses as rates move downward-
or at other times, when the rate decline seemed clearly
temporary, having the Manager refrain from special action
addressed to the bill rate and permit natural market forces
to bring about a reversal. This would seem to be more in
line with the Committee's desire to have rates as free to
move as possible rather than boxed in by rigid limits. Indeed,
the insertion into the directive of specific rate targets, and
the market's eventual knowledge of that fact, would have a
highly rigidifying effect on rates.
In summary, while I feel a good deal of sympathy with the
objectives; of these proposals--that is, the presentation of an
integrated rationale of the System's policy intent and of
operating instructions that would be more meaningful to the
public--I feel that the proposals before us are just a starting
point toward these ends. As such, they have performed a very
useful furction in stimulating thinking on possible improvements
in our di--ectives. My own thoughts in this area are still quite
tentative but I might just mention a few of the areas that my
colleagues and I have been considering. First, it might be
desirable to make greater use of judgmental-type statements in
those parts of the directive relating to recent economic and
financial developments. The directive might, for example,
give a clearer indication than at present whether there has
been an improvement or deterioration in the situation, whether
recent developments have borne our prior expectations, and to
what extert money market conditions have developed along lines
sought by the Committee.
Second, a clearer distinction might be made between the
Committee s assessment of the economic situation and outlook
on the one hand, and its general policy posture on the other.
Thus at times, the Committee might note that while business had
strengthened and the outlook had improved, a change in policy
was not desirable because of continued unemployment.
Third, we might be more explicit about expected and desired
behavior of credit markets and key financial indicators for
several months ahead, making it clear that our time horizon
extends over that intermediate range and is not confined to
three-week intervals. I should add, however, that even rough
attempts to set down our expectations are subject to some
dangers, and certainly will remain so until we know much more
about the underlying linkages. All these lines of thought

7/28/64 -63
deserve and require further study, but in the meantime let
us not abandon a procedure that has proved workable and has
yielded what seem to me quite satisfactory economic results.
Mr. Irons said that he had found the memorandum interesting and
stimulative, and that he intended to study it further. The more he had
considered it, the less strong were his reactions, but he did have
qualms about certain aspects of the proposal. His thinking started
with the assumption that what the Committee needed was a directive to
the Account Manager that would be understandable, capable of being
carried out, and accurate in reflecting the policy posture of the
Committee. He placed less emphasis than some others on the role of the
directive in informing the public, which seemed to him to be one of
the considerations underlying the proposal that the Committee had before
it.
Mr. Irons thought that the Committee had a fairly satisfactory
way of informing the Account Manager of the Committee's policy positure
in its present directive. The Account Manager was continually responsive
to the Committee. If, during the three-week period, he did not perform
as Committee members thought he should have, they had an opportunity
to criticize his operations at the next meeting.
Mr. Irons noted that element 4 of the illustrative directive
attached to the report began: "To implement this policy, System open
market operations over the next three weeks shall be conducted with a
view to maintaining weekly average free reserves in the $50-$150 million

7/28/64 -64
range." This instruction specified positive numbers, which would be
published later, and the Manager would have to try to hit the target
given. There was no provision in this instruction for the tone and feel of
the market. However, the next sentence of element 4 seemed to undo what
was done in the first sentence. It read: 'Provided, however, that free
reserves should be permitted to move above or below this range in order
to moderate any movement in the Treasury bill rate outside the range of
3.40-3.55 per cent or any serious constriction or excess in the avail
ability of Federal funds or dealer financing." Thus, although an
initial priority was set up, it was a weak priority.
Mr. Irons said that he was fearful of using in the directive
quantitative measures of which the Committee was not sure. There was
a difference, in his judgment, between specifying a range of figures
intended to apply if other things were equal and naming a range of
figures that nust be met regardless of other circumstances. He was not
concerned about references to quantitative targets in the Committee's
deliberations, but he would be concerned if such targets were to be
spelled out in a directive that would be published later. While some
might have only a hazy impression of what was meant by the words "tone
and feel," he thought these words had real .eaning to the Manager, who
was in the midst of market operations and who had a sense of the
developments occurring in the market at any given time. Mr. Irons
thought it would be a mistake to divorce the Manager from considerations

7/28/64 -65
of tone and feel, and to hold him to quantitative targets. Moreover,
if the Commit:ee issued quantitative instructions, it probably would
find that more frequent operations in the market were required, as
Mr. Hayes had suggested.
With respect to elements 1 and 2 of the proposed directive,
Mr. Irons said, the Committee now was providing, in the policy reccrd,
much of what the report recommended. The content of these elements
seemed to be simply a revised version of the forepart of the policy
record entry, where recent developments were reviewed. Mr. Irons
questioned the desirability of expanding the directive to include
what basically was background information at the time of it: adoption.
The Committe was given such information prior to each meeting in
the "green book" and in other memoranda. This kind of information
underlay the Committee's thinking and analysis, its policy conclusions,
and its instructions to the Manager, but he did not believe it would
be desirable to make it a part of the directive. He would be interested
in giving more background material to whoever wanted to read it, and in
this connection he would be quite favorable to considering the possibili.y
of making the green book available, as Mr. Bryan had suggested. If the
Committee moved in the direction proposed in the report, however, it
might get into the same kind of difficulty that had arisen in connection
with the preparation of detailed minutes. He thought, also, that the
Committee would be making trouble for itself if it attempted to include

7/28/64 -66
in the directive an extensive statement of the facts it had considered.
The directive almost had to be written in relatively general terms if
the Committee was to get its job done effectively. Avoiding highly
specific instructions did not mean that the Committee could not hold
the Manager accountable for his operations.
Summing up, Mr. Irons said, he strongly questioned the
desirability of introducing quantitative targets into the directive,
and he questioned whether the Committee would achieve much from the
first two elements of the proposal that was not already accomplished
through the policy record entry and in other ways. He had one other
point, in connection with which he was somewhat disturbed by present
practices. That was the question of delegation of responsibility by
the Committee to its staff, particularly in connection with the
preparation of draft directives for Committee consideration. The
proposal would magnify this problem considerably, he thought. The
report recommended that the staff distribute, before each meeting,
drafts of the first two elements for Committee review, and background
material to facilitate preparation of the next two elements by the
Committee. But drafting of elements 3 and 4 around the table might
well be found to be quite a chore; and it was likely that the next
step would be for the Committee to have the staff draft these elements
also.

7/28/64 -67
Mr. Irons thought the Committee should give serious consideration
to better methods of informing the public; he was sure all of the members
would favor that. Publishing the green book was one possible approach.
Another that had been suggested on several cccasions was to publish a
quarterly review in the Federal Reserve Bulletin which would spell out
the nature of developments and of the Committee's actions in the
preceding quarter. Such a procedure was followed in a number of other
countries. It would accomplish the objective of informing the public
better without disturbing the Committee's basic working instrument--its
directive to the Manager of the Account.
Mr. Dening commented that his views were similar to those of
Mr. Iron.;, except that he did not share the latter's concern about the
staff's role in drafting directive material. He thought the Ellis
Mitchell-Swan memorandum had made a notable contribution to the
continuing discussion about Committee procecure and the nature of the
directive to the Desk. However, he took fairly sharp issue with two
of the basic conclusions of the study.
In his view, Mr. Deming said, the positive contribution came
from the sharp focus on certain points that needed thorough considera
tion, from suggested procedures which should aid Committee discussion
and minimize inconsistencies in instructions, and from the almost
explicit recommendation for extensive research on linkages between
proximate, intermediate, and ultimate objectives of policy. His

7/28/64 -68
disagreement, like that of Messrs. Hayes and Irons, was, first, with
the length and complexity of the suggested form of directive and,
second, with the recommendation to quantify, too precisely in his
view, certain of the long-range objectives of policy and, more partic
ularly, certain of the short-term guides.
The suggestion for staff provision of background material for
all four elements of the group's suggested form of directive was
excellent, Mr. Deming thought. This should help a great deal in
minimizing inconsistencies in instructions. He would suggest one
additional step in this procedure, which perhaps was implicit in the
proposal. This would be a quarterly review and "look-ahead." The
review would compare actual performance of the intermediate and ultimate
variables with what seemed to be desirable or with what the Committee
had hoped to attain. The look-ahead obviously would involve some
forecasting, or at least the statement of certain objectives, but
Mr. Deming thought it would be of benefit to the Committee. In a sense
the Committee already did some of this; the suggestion really came down
to a more formal approach.
Mr. Deming thought the memorandum's reference to the urgent
need for research was something the Committee should clearly keep in
mind. While he was not particularly sanguine about the probability of
establishing very precise linkages among proximate, intermediate, and
ultimate objectives, the Committee should explore this field far more
thoroughly than it had.

7/28/64 -69
Finally, Mr. Deming said, the report should be commended for
its sharp focus on certain issues involved in procedure and directives.
The authors had performed a signal service in getting their points
down on paper, whether or not the Committee agreed with them.
Turning to his areas of disagreement, Mr. Deming said he
thought the proposed directive was far too long and too complex.
He doubted that the directive could be made a public relations document;
arother vehicle was needed for that purpose. Extended discussions at
meetings probably would be necessary to reach agreement on a directive
of the lergth proposed. This would be particularly true if the drafts
included as many polar words as did the illustrative directive for May 5,
In the past he had been on both sides of the question of the desirable
degree of complexity in the directive. At present he leaned toward
simplicity, and toward the preference that Mr. Mills had expressed on
several occasions for something along the lines of "clause b" of the
type of directive the Committee had issued before December 1961.
Mr. Deming agreed with Mr. Irons that the proposed content of
the first two elements was more properly a part of the policy record
than of the directive. At the most he would include a simplified
version of this material in the directive, somewhat along the lines
of the present directives.
On the matter of quantifying instructions, Mr. Deming thought
the points made by Mr. Irons were valid; any member was free to mention

7/28/64 -70
quantitative goals in the course of discuss on at present, and the
Manager could be held accountable for conformance with the instruc
tions given him. To include numerical instructions in the published
record, Mr. Deming believed, would lead to a great deal of capricious
and uninformed criticism of the Committee, particularly in view of
the magnitudes of the revisions in the figures. Moreover, as the
memorandum pointed out, the Committee might not always want to use
free reserves for specifying its targets.
In sum, Mr. Deming said, he thought the procedural suggestions
in the memorandum were well worth consideration; they would sharpen
the Committee's focus on policy questions. But he would favor keeping
the directive simple, and avoiding quantification both in instructions
to the Manager and in statements of longer run policy intent.
Mr. Helmer said he had no comments on the memorandum.
Mr. Tow said that in his judgment the idea of moving toward a
more comprehensive and more explicit directive was a very good one.
Implementation of the recommendations in the memorandum under discussion
would bring a number of improvements, but it also would create problems
that would need to be worked out over time.
Mr. Tow thought the inclusion of element 1 on economic devel
opments and element 2 on credit developments would be important additions
to the directive. This would result from both the more comprehensive
description and the added analytical emphasis. Inclusion of these

7/28/64 -71
sections, as possibly amended by the Committee in any given meeting,
would provide a logical groundwork for the policy statements in
elements 3 and 4. The principal question about including longer
elements 1 and 2 in the official directive was the ability of a
Committee of 12 people to agree on the wording without becoming bogged
down in too much discussion of detailed phraseology.
The biggest change from the present directive, Mr. Tow noted,
was the inclusion of element 3 as a statement of the Committee's longer
run policy intent. A more specific statement of longer run policy
intent would be a constructive step, in his view, although the inclu
sion of this section also would create some problems to resolve. One
problem would be that of internal consistency, arising from the different
approaches to monetary policy taken by Committee members. Some preferred
what might be called a credit and interest rate approach, while others
preferred some variant of a money supply approach. Accordingly, it
would be necessary to write element 3 in such a way that both approaches
would be incorporated. To some degree, that had been done in the
illustrative directive attached to the memorandum. This problem could
not be avoided--if its avoidance required agreement on any one approach
to monetary policy--but over time the problem should be lessened through
increased knowledge concerning the relationships between these variables.
Another problem, Mr. Tow said, arose from the effort to quantify
the targets adopted. No matter what measure was used, whether aggregate

7/28/64 -72
reserves, money supply, credit, interest rates, or some other, there
was no way of knowing what the correct quantification should be.
Whether figures were used or not, however, the Committee had to
observe what was happening to its ultimate economic objectives, and
change these intermediate goals if and when necessary. Added research
should enable the Committee to make better approximations in the future,
but there could never be exact projections.
Whether quantification was used or not, Mr. Tow thought the
inclusion of element 3 would be an important improvement in the
Committee's directive. For the time being, it might be better to
experiment with a verbal approach with a view to quantification later.
In the interim, research, including work on quantitative models, could
be carried on.
In his judgment, Mr. Tow said, quantification was the main
issue in element 4, as the general framework proposed was essentially
that used by the Committee at present. The question of what figures
to use again was an issue, but in a somewhat different way, as changes
could be made from time to time relative to the achievement of the
goals set forth in element 3. There also was a problem of consistency
among the short-run targets, but the draft provided escape provisions
for various contingencies over the short interval between Committee
meetings that should go far toward alleviating this problem. He did
not think this element could be written with two or more variables

7/28/64 -73
without escape clauses, since it was not possible to predict how the
relationships among the variables would work out.
A leading issue, Mr. Tow said, appeared to be the impact on
the market when the Committee and its Manager were committed to
explicit quantitative guides. This was a difficult issue on which
to pass judgment. Much might depend on how the matter was handled.
The proposal did not call for any particular guides to be used
indefinitely, but provided that different guides should be used,
depending on what was most appropriate at any given time. Presumably
the market would come to understand that it could not assume that any
particular guide would be used indefinitely, let alone any particular
guide values. There was reason to wonder whether the problems of the
Committee and the Manager in connection with this matter would be any
greater than they were now.
It seemed to Mr. Tow, however, that the most important issue
before the Committee at this time was the adoption of the general
framework for the directive that was proposed in the memorandum. He
personally thought that adopting this franework, even though
quantification was not accepted, would be a highly constructive step,
and one worthy of consideration by the Committee. Quantification,
whether or not adopted to some degree at this time, should be a
continuing goal.

7/28/64 -74
Mr. Wayne said that he agreed with most of the views that had
been expressed by Messrs. Hayes, Irons, and Deming. He believed that
the Committee's present directive was a distinct improvement over that
used previously. He could understand the desire to arrive at some
neat, clear model that would look well, but he was persuaded that a
move at this time in the direction proposed would prove treacherous.
His concern was focused by the thought that the Committee would have
to experiment in quantifying targets and then verify in retrospect
whether or not the quantity it had named was correct. To experiment
within the official directive of the Committee to the Desk would invite
criticism.
Mr. Wayne thought the report had served a useful purpose in
focusing on the question of linkages in the economy, and he would
consider it highly desirable for the System to do more research in
this area. But to attempt to draft directives of the type proposed in
advance of such research would, in his judgment, be dangerous. Instead,
work des gned to increase knowledge of linkages should be pressed first.
He also shared the other concerns that had been expressed about quantify
ing instructions to the Manager.
Mr. Mills said he concurred in the views that had been expressed
by Messrs. Hayes and Irons, and in some of the variations on these views
expressed by other members of the Committee. He was suspicious of the
target approach, feeling that the inevitable result would be to repeat

7/28/64 -75
the history of religion, where simple faith over the years had been
sacrificed to symbolized ritual without inspiring people in general.
He thought that would inevitably be the path followed if the Committee
adopted the proposals made. Their adoption would amount to a surrender
to statistics in place of instinctive adaptation to circumstances as
they developed.
Mr. Mills said he would much prefer the present directive to
the kind proposed and, as the Committee knew, he was not happy with
the present directive. He thought the first and second paragraphs were
contradictory; the emphasis in the first negated what was called for
under the second. As Mr. Deming had noted, his own preference would be
to return to the old clause (b), a subsection of the type of directive
the Committee formerly had used.
Mr. Robertson commented that he was grateful for the memorandum,
because he would like to see a better job done with the directive, and
he assumed the other members would also. However, he, too, quarreled
with the particular proposals. It seemed to him that the first two
elements were not properly sections of a directive at all; they covered
ground that now was covered in the policy record, except that it was
proposed to draft them in advance of the meeting rather than afterward.
In his judgment the illustrative drafts of these elements did a better
job than did the corresponding part of the present policy record entries,
and he thought their format could be used to advantage in the record.

7/28/64 -76
Moreover, while he did not think elements 1 and 2 should be
made a part of the directive, he was not opposed to their preparation
in advance of the meeting. In fact, he thought it would be desirable
to have such information brought to the attention of the Committee
before each meeting, so that there would be a clear understanding of
the situation that had to be dealt with at :hat meeting.
Mr. Robertson also had no fault to find with the desire to set
forth the policy intent of the Committee for a longer period than 3
weeks. But he was concerned about the risk of being too specific in
a directive that would be published. He doubted the advisability of
using precise numbers in either element 3 or element 4. In his judgment
the directive should indicate the general kind of monetary climate the
Committee was seeking. With respect to the use of a free reserve range
in element 4, he doubted the wisdom of always using a free reserve range
for instructing the Manager, although he knew of no better way of in
dicating what operations the Committee thought were necessary to achieve
the results it desired. Moreover, he would strike the last sentence of
element 3 releting to credit conditions. And in place of the subsidiary
instructions of the type proposed for element 4, setting specific limits
for the bill rate and describing money market conditions under which the
Manager was authorized to deviate from his first instruction, he would
substitute some such language as "in order to moderate substantial swings
in money market conditions, and to partly offset any tendency of the

7/28/64 -77
growth rate for required reserves behind private deposits (for example)
to deviate substantially from the average rate of the past year." Such
language would give the Manager authority to deviate from any specified
free reserve cange without requiring him to maintain the bill rate or
other rate within any precise limits. The Manager would have to use
judgment, but that was a part of his job.
Mr. Robertson expressed the hope that the Committee would agree
on some line, along which it thought progress might be possible, and
undertake to experiment with a directive on these lines for three or
four meetings on a side basis. The experimental directives would not
be officially adopted; the Committee would continue to issue directives
of the presert type. But by experimenting informally, the Committee
would have an opportunity to check back after the fact, and determine
whether it seemed feasible to develop more precise directives.
Mr. Shepardson said that elements 1 and 2 seemed to him to be
more appropriately a part of the policy record entry than of the
directive. On the matter of providing this type of material to the
Committee before each meeting, he felt that such information was
largely contained in the green book, which was available to the Committee
prior to the meeting. In his judgment, the present type of policy record
statement, which was developed on the basis of both information from
the green book and the discussions at the meeting, was superior to the
type of predeveloped statement proposed for elements I and 2. He thought

7/28/64 -78
also that the:e elements would add unduly to the length of the directive,
and he would prefer a more concise statement, such as was contained in
the first paragraph of the present directive.
With respect to the details of the proposal, Mr. Shepardson
felt that the fluctuations observed over time in the various quantitative
series raised considerable hazards in trying to set forth numerical
targets in the directive; they could be pointed to as targets that were
more often missed than hit. In his judgment there were too many factors
involved to permit the selection of two or three and the omission of
others from the directive. Such a procedure, he believed, would open
the gate unnecessarily to charges of "misses" that would not necessarily
have been significant.
Mr. Shepardson said he, like others who had commented, was hopeful
that through research a better understanding of the underlying relation
ships could be developed. At the moment, however, it was clear that the
Committee did not have a full understanding of them. As he had mentionec
at the preceding meeting, without any change in the objectives of the
Committee or in the operations of the Desk, there recently had been
marked fluctuations in the rate of growth of the money supply. The
Committee had yet to develop a full understanding of the causes of such
fluctuations, and until it did it was unnecessarily hazardous, in his view,
to attempt quantification in the directive.

7/28/64 -79-
Mr. Shepardson said he favored making the type of material
included in the green book publicly available. He noted that the
Committee had made progress in getting its policy record entries
prepared on a more current basis. This was an important improvement
because it avoided the possibility of any suggestion that the entries
were written with the aid of hindsight. The Committee still had not
taken a further step, involving a more current release of the policy
record entries--perhaps a quarterly release. He thought it would be
desirable to accelerate the release of these entries. But he was
skeptical about the extensive type of directive suggested in the
memorandum.
Mr. Daane said he considered the proposed directive unnecessarily
complicated. This was particularly true of elements 1 and 2, which, he
thought, did little more than add window dressing to what was now in
cluded ir the policy record. Moreover, staff resources were likely to
be strained in the attempt to draft these elements in advance of each
meeting, and the staff could spend an undesirable amount of time in
worrying about specific language. In his judgment elements 1 and 2
should not be made part of the directive. Perhaps more thought should
be given to improving the corresponding part of the policy record entries.
With respect to the proposal to release the green book or some version
of it, his initial reaction was favorable.

7/28/64 -80
On element 3, Mr. Daane said he shared Mr. Hayes' question
about the desirability of specifying the Committee's longer run
policy intent in terms of the seasonally adjusted annual rate of
increase in required reserves. He recalled a discussion by Mr. Koch
at a recent Board meeting of the operations the Committee would have
called for thus far in 1964 if it had employed such a target. Perhaps
there were answers to the questions raised by Mr. Koch's discussion,
but he bad not seen them. He was opposed to selecting a new target
of this sort without a demonstration that it would involve a net gain
for monetary policy.
The proposed element 4, Mr. Daane continued, would elevate
free reserves to a status as an operating target even higher than that
which the market believed, and some academicians had charged, that the
Committee gave to it. He did not think the Committee should quantify
its instructions and require the Desk to meet numerical targets, even
if the instructions were tempered with qualifications. Moreover, he
questioned the statement on page 7 of the memorandum that a change in
the free reserve target would have"quick and significant" consequences
for other policy variables. Mr. Daane doubted that the relations were
such that quick and significant consequences would necessarily follow,
or that the Committee knew precisely what the relations were at any
time, even as between free reserves and bill rats. Thus, he would
not subscribe to the use of free reserves it, this manner, with the full
weight of the Committee behind them.

7/28/64 -81-
Mr. Daane concluded by saying that he approached the proposal
with two questions in mind: Would its adoption basically improve the
Committee's performance, and would it improve the Committee's pre
sentations to the public? Of the two questions, the former was by
far the more important, and he did not see anything in the proposal
that would improve the Committee's performance in the ultimate sense.
Perhaps further analysis along the lines of elements 1 and 2 was
desirable, but there was no need to incorporate it in the directive.
He was puzzled by the implication on page 3 of the memorandum that
variations in the rate of growth of bank reserves over a period when
the Committee was voting for "no change in policy" were in themselves
bad. "No change in policy" seemed to him to be a meaningful and
significant conclusion that the Desk could and did interpret and
implement.
Chairman Martin, noting the lateness of the hour, suggested
that the meeting be adjourned at this point with the understanding
that the discussion would be pursued at a later meeting of the Committee.
Since there would be some absences at each of the next two meetings, he
suggested that this subject be put down for further discussion at the
meeting tentatively scheduled for September 29, 1964.
Chairman Martin said he knew that all of the Committee members
appreciated the work Messrs. Ellis, Mitchell, and Swan had done in
preparing their memorandum. He believed that it was important for the

7/28/64 -82
Committee to continue to work on the problen of the directive. In
this connection, the Chairman thought it would be useful if Mr. Hayes
had copies of his comments today distributed to the Committee. He
also thcught the Committee might adopt Governor Robertson's suggestion
that it make unofficial "trial runs" of a new type of directive, while
continuing to employ its present type of directive officially. Accord
ingly, he suggested that for the next several meetings the staff prepare,
on the side, the kinds of materials called for in the memorandum.
No objections were made to the Chairman's suggestions.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
ecretary
Secretary