A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington on Tuesday, July 7, 1964, at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Hayes, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Daane
Mr. Hickman
Mr. Mills
Mr. Robertson
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Shuford
Mr. Swan
Mr. Wayne
Messrs. Bryan and Deming, Alternate Members of the
Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bopp, Clay, and Irons, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Kansas
City, and Dallas, respectively
Mr. Young, Secretary
Mr. Sherman, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Broida, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Brill, Furth, Grove, Jones, Koch, and
Mann, Associate Economists
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Messrs. Partee and Williams, Advisers, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Axilrod, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Miss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
Messrs. Latham and Helmer, First Vice Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Chicago,
respectively
Messrs. Holmes, Sanford, Baughman, Parsons, Tow, and
Green, Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of New York, New York, Chicago, Minneapolis,
Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively

7/7/64
Messrs. Parthemos and Brandt, Assistant Vice
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Richmond and Atlanta, respectively
Mr. Meek, Manager, Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston
Mr. Rothwell, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia
Upon motion duly made and seconded, and
by unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee held on
June 17, 1964, were approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System Open Market
Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open Market Account
and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the period June 17
through July 1, 1964, and a supplementary report covering the period July 2
through July 6, 1964. Copies of these reports have been placed in the
files of the Committee.
Supplementing the written reports, Mr. Sanford said that no change
was expected in the gold stock again this week for the twenty-first con
secutive week. The Stabilization Fund now held about $176 million of gold
and there were no orders currently in hand, although, of course, it was
anticipated that the usual French order for $34 million would be received
near the end of the month. In the London gold market, activity picked up
a bit as a result of demand from Italy and of events in Cyprus and the Far
East, and the fixing price was permitted to ride up slightly. In the past
week, however, demand had tapered off again, and the London price had

7/7/64 -3
receded to $35.0711. The United States' share of the pool's acquisition
in June was nearly $16 million. So far in July, the pool had picked
up a further small amount.
The exchange markets continued to be dominated by short-term
capital flows, Mr. Sanford reported. It was possible, to a limited extent,
to see a reversal of the midyear window-dressing on the Continent, with
some outflows from Germany and Switzerland and inflow to the United
Kingdom. This normal seasonal pattern had been dampened, however, by the
revival of speculation against the Italian lira and by continuing doubts
about the futu.:e of sterling. Thus, although Swiss banks had begun putting
surplus funds abroad, and in the past week the Swiss franc had come off
its ceiling, the heavy inflow of capital from Italy had raised the Swiss
National Bank's excess dollar holdings still further and had prevented a
pronounced decline in the Swiss franc rate. At the same time, although
the German mark had eased slightly since midyear, there had not been the
normal heavy flow of funds back into sterling, and spot sterling had
continued to be quite soft at about $2.7914. These developments, taken
together with the weakening in the U. S. balance of payments position
during the second quarter, indicated that the summer was beginning with a
rather precarious exchange market outlook.
Sterling fell rather sharply during June because of shifts of funds
to the Continent and into the Euro-dollar market, but the British let the
rate decline without intervening on a very substantial scale because there

7/7/64 -4
was little evidence of speculation and, in any event, they expected
sterling to rebound sharply after the end of June. The close of the
period for midyear positioning did see an immediate small jump in sterling,
but there was no sustained advance. Although they were prepared to show
the $56 million exchange market loss incurred during June, the British
did not want to show the full decline in reserves of some $71 million
which would have resulted from last minute unexpected payments, and con
sequently they drew $15 million on the swap with the System Account. Even
the announcement of the smaller reserve loss, however, was followed by a
slight weakening in sterling.
Mr. Sanford commented that it would not be unexpected if pressures
on sterling continued and it was quite possible that the Bank of England
would make additional use of the Federal Reserve swap arrangement in
coming months. In their efforts to bolster sterling, the British certainly
would keep interest rates firm--as they had in recent weeks. Meanwhile,
the net narrowing of forward sterling discounts in the past month had
already made U. K. money market instruments more attractive than they had
been in some time, and in the past week there had been reports of U. S.
funds being invested in British hire-purchase deposits. Similarly in the
case of Canada, with the forward Canadian dollar premium holding at about
1/3 per cent, there had been a sizable increase in United States investments
in Canadian finance paper.
As Mr. Coombs indicated at the last meeting, Mr. Sanford said,
the Swiss situation continued to be troublesome. The flow of Italian

7/7/64 -5
funds into Switzerland, as speculation against the lira revived during
June, pushed the Swiss National Bank's dollar holdings up even further,
to $385 million, some $210 million over their usual limit. Consequently,
despite the successful completion of the arrangements to liquidate the
System's Swiss franc obligations, it had not yet proved possible to effect
further reductions in Treasury forward market Swiss franc contracts, and
arrangements along the lines mentioned at the last meeting to take care
of some of the Swiss National Bank's excess dollars were still under discus
sion. Mr. Sanford noted that the recent rise in the Swiss discount rate-
like that in the Belgian rate--was not anticipated to have any effect on
capital flows and had had very little impact on the exchanges.
In Germany, developments had been somewhat more satisfactory.
After the very large reserve gains of early June, the Bundesbank had taken
in net only a few dollars in market operations since mid-June, although
of course the mark remained quite strong. The planned issue of U. S.
Treasury bonds denominated in DM went through on July 1 to the extent of
$150 million, S50 million having been held back by the Treasury for
possible markec intervention during the summer. After this issue the
Germans held only about $90 million more than at the beginning of June.
Thus, at the moment the upward pressures on the German reserve position
were not too great, as German banks were continuing to put some short-term
funds abroad. These outflows had driven the forward mark premium close
to one per cent and the Account had resumed offering forward marks

7/7/64 -6
at that level for Treasury account under the parallel arrangement with
the Bundesbank. To date, however, the market had held just below the one
per cent: level and no sales had proved necessary.
Mr. Sanford commented that he had already noted the revival of
speculation against the Italian lira during this period. There was a
heavy outflow of funds through the spot market, particularly following
the announcement of the resignation of the Italian Government, but since
then the pressures had been concentrated in the forward market. The Bank
of Italy had now taken a strong stand in the forward market and was giving
the New York Bank, as their agent, unlimited orders to support the three
month rate (at 4 per cent discount). The Bank of Italy had also decided
to use the Bank of England for the bulk of the support operations in
Europe before :he opening of the New York market. The practice of placing
sizable bids in the market had proved helpful in stabilizing the market
for the lira. Mr. Coombs had reported that at the week-end Bank for
International Settlements meeting the Italians had given a fairly
optimistic account, including a betterent of the trade balance.
Mr. Sanford concluded by noting that, with the completion of the
repayment of System swap drawings in Swiss francs, the System Account
now had outstanding no drawings initiated by it under any of the swap
arrangements. As to drawings by the other party, there was outstanding
a $50 million drawing by the Bank of Japan, in addition to the $15 million
Bank of England drawing he had mentioned earlier.

7/7/64
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the System
Open Market Account transactions in foreign
currencies during the period June 17 through
July 6, 1964, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Mr. Sanford said he had several recommendations, all relating to
swap arrangements which would mature in the near future.
First, with respect to the renewal of the $50 million swap arrange
ment with the Bank of Sweden which matured July 17, that Bank had given
further thought to the period of renewal and had now indicated that it was
prepared to renew for twelve months, instead of the six-month period
approved at the last meeting of the Committee. This would be in line with
the general authorization of the Committee for negotiation of extensions
for periods not exceeding twelve months.
Renewal of the swap arrangement with the
Bank of Sweden, with extension of term for a
period up to twelve months, was approved.
On July 20, Mr. Sanford said, the swap arrangements with the Swiss
National Bank and the Bank for International Settlements, each in the amount
of $150 million, would mature. Mr. Coombs had discussed these arrangements
with the respective representatives in Basle and at present they were
favorably inclined to renewals for twelve months, although they desired to
give further thought to the subject.
Renewals of the swap arrangements with
the Swiss National Bank and the Bank for
International Settlements, with extension of
term for a period up to twelve months, were
approved.

7/7/64 -8
In the case of the Austrian National Bank swap arrangement for
$50 million, maturing July 24, a renewal for twelve months would be
welcomed by that Bank, Mr. Sanford reported.
Renewal of the swap arrangement with the
Austrian National Bank, with extension of term
for a period up to twelve months, was approved.
Mr. Sanford also noted that the swap arrangement with the Bank of
Japan for $150 million would mature July 30 and their representative had
indicated that they would like to renew for twelve months. The $50 million
outstanding swap drawing also would mature on July 30 and it was proposed
to renew it fcr three months, at the end of which period the Bank of
Japan would hope to pay it off.
Renewal of the swap arrangement with the
Bank of Japan, with extension of term for a
period up to twelve months, was approved.
Renewal of the drawing on the swap with
the Bank of Japan was noted without objection.
Concerning the $250 million swap arrangement with the Bundesbank
maturing August 6, Mr. Sanford observed that the subject of renewal for as
long as twelve months had been raised with their representative and the
Account was to hear in due course. One other swap arrangement matured
August 6, Mr. Sanford noted; namely, the $100 million facility with the
Bank of France. Renewal of this arrangement had not yet been discussed
with that Bank, but this would be done by telephone before the next meeting
of the Committee.

7/7/64 -9
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members of
the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market Account
covering open market operations in U. S. Government securities and
bankers' acceptances for the period June 17 through July 1, 1964, and a
supplementary report covering the period July 2 through July 6, 1964.
Copies of these reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone commented
as follows:
The money market has been generally firm since the last
meeting of the Committee. The special pressures associated
with the June 15 corporate tax date were unwound without
difficulty and the reserve drains associated with the July 4
holiday produced no undue stress. Banks in the major money
centers experienced a few pressures around June 15 and the
July 4 holiday, but a good flow of Federal funds enabled
them to balance their positions with a relatively low level
of borrowing from the Reserve Banks.
Rates on short-term Treasury bills have edged somewhat
lower since the mid-June tax date, while rates on longer
bills have fallen by as much as 10 basis points. The spread
between the 3- and 6-month bills narrowed sharply to a re
cord low of 2 basis points at last night's close. The
downward movement in rates, which occurred despite the rise
in the Belgian and Swiss bank rates, reflects heavy demand
for Treasury bills by public bodies, foreign central banks,
and other investors as well as by the System over the period
since the last meeting, while the decline in the spread be
tween short and long bills reflects the particular popularity
of the December bill maturities. The question of the size of
the spread between the 3- and 6-month bills has come under
considerable discussion in recent days, since the new 6-month
bill auctioned yesterday matures in 1965, when the corporate
income tax rate declines from 50 to 48 per cent. This means,
of course, that the excess of the after-tax yield on 6-month
bills over 3-month bills has now increased. This in turn is
expected to attract buyers to the 6-month area, perhaps
putting enough downward pressure on that rate to keep it quite

7/7/64 -10-
close to the 3-month rate. There was not much evidence of
this tendency at work in the auction yesterday, however,
for the new 3- and 6-month bills were auctioned at average
rates of 3.49 and 3.54 per cent, respectively--the same
spread as occurred the week before.
The market for Treasury notes and bonds is marking time
this week, expecting the Treasury to announce at any moment
a financing operation designed to achieve some debt extension.
According to present plans, the Treasury will announce a
major advance refunding operation after the close of the mar
ket tomorrow.
As you know, most participants in the Government
securities market tended to expect, at the beginning of
the year, that yields would work higher as the year unfolded.
The rise in the British Bank rate in late February and the
passage of the tax cut at about the same time sparked a
conviction among nearly all participants that yields were
going to move higher immediately. The resultant bandwagon
psychology led to considerable selling of coupon securities
and put yields on 3- to 5-year issues in the neighborhood of
4-1/4 per cent by late March. Subsequently, however, as no
indications of a surge in consumer spending or credit demands
appeared and evidence accumulated that monetary policy was
not changing, the expectation of higher rates began to relax
its hold. Indeed, since early April, the prices of Treasury
notes and bonds have moved irregularly upward until most issues
are now at or near the highest levels of the year. In its
early stages, this rise in prices was taken as a technical
reaction to the overselling of late February and March. As
prices continued to improve through much of May and early
June, many market professionals were concerned as to whether
the market was really as good or as solid as it appeared. In
the past two or three weeks, however, a further rise in prices
in the face of a general expectation that the Treasury would
soon add to the supply of intermediate- and long-term issues
has generated a new conviction that current interest rate levels
accurately reflect supply and demand forces operating in the
credit markets and can be sustained for perhaps a considerable
period. In these circumstances, the Treasury might well be
able to achieve a worthwhile measure of debt extension in its
forthcoming operation.
It now appears that the Treasury ended the fiscal year
with a cash balance of $10.2 billion, considerably above
earlier expectations. While there remain some uncertainties
with regard to the rate at which these balances will be drawn

7/7/64 -11-
down, particularly in early July, it now appears that the
Treasury should be able to get by at least until August 15
without any new cash financing, except for the sale of a
one-year bill at the end of this month and the increase of
three weekly bill offerings to the $2.1 billion level of sur
rounding issues. Should the bill rate come under what the
Treasury regards as undesirable downward pressure, however,
it would be prepared to sell additional Treasury bills at any
time to deal with the situation. By the time the Committee
again meets, the outlook for Treasury financing over the bal
ance of the summer should be a good deal clearer than it is
now.
Thereupon, upon notion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote, the
open market transactions in Government
securities and bankers' acceptances during
the period June 17 through July 6, 1964,
were approved, ratified, and confirmed.
Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and financial
reports: supplementing the written reports that had been distributed prior
to the meeting, copies of which have been placed in the files of the
Committee.
Mr. Brill presented a statement on economic conditions as follows:
The state of the domestic economy continues to be good,
with activity maintained at a high level, prices remaining
stable, and both business and corsumer behavior characterized
by cautious optimism. True, the most recent statistics sug
gest some hesitation in the expansion, but hopefully nothing
more than "a pause that refreshes," a temporary leveling off
of the sort we have experienced from time to time in this
upswing. To cite just a few developments: retail sales in
June appear to have slipped a bit from May's record volume;
the unemployment rate moved back up again, as was widely ex
pected; and employment declined substantially, which is more
puzzling. There is not enough information available yet to
provide a clue to the June production index, but it is un
likely to show more than a minor advance from the May level.

7/7/64 -12
Newly available data for May suggest that a slowdown
in some economic areas may have begun two months ago. Thus,
the May rise in personal income was much less than in preceding
months; manufacturers' inventories declined in May, after a
larger than average increase in April; manufacturers' new
orders also edged off after their large April spurt; and
housing starts fell again.
It is certainly premature to voice any alarm about such
a one- or even two-month letup in the pace of expansion,
particularly when recent surveys of spending plans portend
further gains ahead. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that
a number of demand sectors which played an important role in
earlier phases of the cyclical upswing appear to have lost
some of their vigor over the past 6 to 12 months. Federal
Government expenditures for goods and services, for example,
reached a peak in the summer of 1963, after a very sharp
run-up in 1961 and a more moderate but persistent increase
over the next year and a half. Since thle third quarter of
1963, Federal spending has risen very little. Also,
residential construction has shown little further gain
since last fall, after a rapid advance earlier last year.
Housing starts have remained in the 1.5 to 1.6 million range,
high but about one-tenth below the fall peak, and dollar
outlays on residential construction have hardly budged from
the fourth-quarter rate.
More recently, business spending for inventories has
slowed. Additions to inventories seemed to be picking up
some steam toward the end of 1963, but the rate of accumulation
has dropped sharply this year. A flurry in April was reversed
in May; in fact, manufacturers' inventories declined in that
month. Unless the statistics for June change the picture
markedly, total inventory accumulation in the first two
quarters of this year might not be much more than half the
rate of the last two quarters of 1963.
There is a hint, too, that consumer spending for durable
goods may be losing rather than gaining momentum. Such
spending rose at a $3 billion rate in late 1963, a $2 billion
rate in the first quarter of this year, and is estimated to
have increased by only $1 billion in the spring quarter.
Sales of domestic autos appear to have reached either a demand
peak or a supply limit at about 7-3/4 million units, and a
slowdown also is apparent in the furniture and appliance
areas, which had risen spectacularly earlier.
There have been offsets, of course, which have kept
aggregate activity on an upward path. While consumers may
have reached a temporary saturation point at advanced levels

7/7/64 -13-
of spending for housing and durable goods, there has been
no lack of vigor in their spending for nondurables,
particularly apparel, general merchand:.se, and food. After
a somewhat sluggish performance in the latter half of
1963, expenditures for nondurables have risen at a phenomenal
$4 billion, or 9 per cent, annual rate in each quarter of
this year. In the business area, spending for plant and
equipment is picking up part of the slack resulting from
cautious inventory buying. Fixed capital outlays have been
rising fairly steadily since early 1963, and the latest
surveys indicate a continuation of the advance at a steady
pace over the balance of this year. In the governmental
area, State and local spending continues to mount rapidly.
While Federal purchases of goods and services have increased
by $1-1/2 billion over the past four quarters, State and
local purchases have increased $5-1/2 billion.
Thus, in the context of over-all expansion, we have been
experiencing a sort of rolling readjustment over the past
12 months, with increased private and local government
spending compensating for the leveling off in Federal spending,
and within the private total, consumption outlays--initially
for durables and more recently for nondurable goods--filling
the gap left by the decline in housing activity. Throughout
the period, business capital outlays have proceeded on a
steady and substantial upward course.
Such readjustments have much to commend them in permitting
orderly expansion. First, resources have been freed to meet
shifts in public preferences, in contrast to the 1955 situation
of rising demands. Second, the economy has been able to absorb
the consequences of excesses in some areas--multi-family
construction, for example--in an atmosphere of sustained
employment and incomes. Third, by avoiding a concentration
of expenditures, it has minimized bottleneck effects which
in the past have been the origin of more general upward price
pressures.
On the other hand, it also has resulted in a more leisurely
pace in making inroads into unutilized resources than some
would desire. The unemployment rate in June was, after all,
still above 5 per cent, only moderately below that a year earlier,
and marked by continued heavy long-term unemployment. Capacity
use among producers of major materials is still well below
the 90 per cent mark--86 is the best current guess--and capacity
is growing.

7/7/64 -14-
Obviously, we can do better. Nevertheless, it is hard
to fault a record that includes continued cost and price
stability, soaring profits, and a five per cent rate of
growth in real GNP. The wisest Governmental policy would
seem to Le to let well enough alone, at least until im
balances on one side or another give signs of developing.
Mr. Noyes made the following statement concerning financial
developments:
One of the things that we have noted frequently throughout
the course of this recovery and expansion has been the phenomenal
capacity of the economy for self-adjustment. As one or another
of the many financial or physical components of total economic
activity has moved out of line with the generally steady ex
pansion that has characterized the 40 months of upward thrust,
we have noted these aberrations with concern. But so far, at
least, our concern has been short-lived--we have had only to
wait for another month of data and it has been allayed.
Recently there have been misgivings about the behavior
of some key financial variables, especially the money supply
and other measures closely related to it. For the first five
months of 1964, the money supply increased at an annual rate
of only 2 per cent, total reserves at a rate of only 1.3 per
cent, and reserves required for private demand deposits showed
a small decline.
When we add our preliminary estimates for June, however,
there is quite a change, which brings the rate of monetary ex
pansion more nearly into line with the recent behavior of other
financial and nonfinancial variables. For the first half, we
are now estimating the money supply up at an annual rate of
3.1 per cent, and total reserves up 3.9 per cent; and reserves
required for private demand deposits shift from a decline to a
gain of about 1/2 of 1 per cent.
The gain in the money supply in June is all the more notable
because it occurred in the face of a further substantial increase
in U. S. Government deposits. In fact, the large run-up in the
Government's balance during the whole first half has unques
tionably tended to distort the money supply data, for the period
as a whole, on the low side.
Including estimates for June, time and savings deposits at
commercial banks are up at an annual rate of 11 per cent for the
first half, and total bank credit increased at about a 6-1/2
per cent rate--both lower rates than prevailed in 1963. However,

7/7/64 -15
bank loans were up a little more than in either 1962 or
1963, and the second quarter rate of 12.2 per cent was
slightly above the first quarter rate.
I sould emphasize that these numbers for the first
half are all subject to revision when more complete data
are available, but the bank credit figures are especially
fragile at this early date after the end of the period.
Nothing need be added to the Manager's report on develop
ments in the Government securities market except to say that,
while it was less pronounced, the firming of prices and the
downdrift in yields since the last meeting extended to almost
all segments of the capital market. S:ate and local govern
ment issues were an exception. In this market new issues
were large, and despite investor response to the upward adjust
ment of yields, dealer inventories remained high at the end
of June.
The stock market continued buoyant through yesterday's
close, with market sentiment dominated by favorable earnings
reports and estimates.
Turning to Government finance, we are now estimating the
cash deficit for fiscal 1964 at only $4.5 billion. When one
remembers that we were looking somewhat skeptically at an
estimated cash deficit of over $8 billion in January, when
half the fiscal year was already behind us, the change is
striking. The Treasury's favorable cash position of over
$10 billion, which has resulted from this extraordinary
budget performance, has made it possible for the Treasury
to plan for the major advance refunding operation, mentioned
by Mr. Stone. It has also meant, of course, that the supply
of bills in the market is already somewhat less than might
have been anticipated, and it may be that shifting out of
"rights" into bills in connection with the refunding will put
bill rates under downward pressure. We understand that the
Treasury has this very much in mind and is prepared to sell
bills, despite its high cash balance, if this is necessary
to prevent excessive downward pressure on bill rates.
Since the last meeting, current weekly estimates of free
reserves have been in a very narrow range--126, 126, and 123-
and the figure for the week ending tomorrow also now appears
likely to be in the vicinity of that range. As indicated
earlier, in connection with the discussion of money supply de
velopments, the various measures of aggregate reserves all
moved up in the month of June, but this has tended generally
to put them more nearly in line, rather than to push them out
of line, with the moderate expansion called for in the directive.

7/7/64 -16-
Quite apart from the prospective Treasury financing, a con
tinuation of the present directive would seem to be consistent
with the broad objectives of policy.
Mr. Furth presented the following statement on the balance of
payments:
The U. S. payments deficit for June may be tentatively
estimated at $100 million. This estimate is based on the
preliminary weekly data and the final figures may turn out to
be quite different. But our tentative estimate would mean that,
on a seasonally adjusted basis, the deficit was smaller than in
May and April, although still larger than the average of the
first qua::ter.
Our tentative estimate also would imply a deficit for the
second quarter of $700 million before seasonal adjustment, and
of perhaps $800 million after seasonal adjustment. This would
compare with a seasonally adjusted deficit of less than $200
million for the first quarter.
Nearly half of the deterioration between the first and the
second quarter may be attributed to a decline in the trade
surplus, due to the absence of some temporary factors that
favored exports in the first quarter (Soviet wheat sales) and
to the anticipated rise in imports. The surplus on service
account seems to have declined, too, with investment income
probably receding from its unusually high level of the first
quarter and travel expenditures reaching record peaks, perhaps
accentuated by the reduction in Atlantic air fares.
Government expenditures and direct investments abroad
apparently rose from unusually low first-quarter levels. The
monetary policies of many European countries not only favor
new participations of U. S. firms in European concerns squeezed
by credit restrictions but also force U. S. firms to shift the
financing of their existing European subsidiaries back to the
United States.
The aggregate net outflow of funds on portfolio and short
term account may not have changed much. A rise in foreign bond
placements and probably also in the outflow of money-market
funds was apparently offset by a reduction in long- and short
term bank lending to foreigners, which reached extraordinarily
high levels in the first quarter.
It should be stressed, however, that all these interpretations
are based either on incomplete data or on guesswork.

7/7/64 -17
While the deterioration in our payments balance from
the first to the second quarter was disappointingly large,
it is encouraging that within the second quarter there seems
to have been steady improvement from month to month. Un
fortunately, we have no way of knowing whether this improvement
is going :o continue in the period ahead.
The most ominous factor may well remain the continuing
tendency of European central banks to combat real or imagined
inflationary threats by restrictive monetary policies, which
are bound directly and indirectly to hurt our efforts to
reduce the U. S. payments deficit. Last week, Belgium and
Switzerland increased their discount rates: Belgium for
the third time since last summer, Switzerland for the first
time in seven years.
The Swiss action probably is designed to foster a general
increase in long-term interest-rate levels, which the authorities
believe necessary in order to stem the construction boom. Since
Switzerland prohibits the payment of interest on foreign-owned
short-term assets, the move will not directly attract U. S.
short-term funds. But it will certainly do nothing to slow
the influx of funds, which led in June to a rise in Swiss
reserves of $150 million.
The Belgian step is more difficult to understand. Belgium
has suffered less from price increases than most other European
countries. Government budget and bank credit are well under
control, and there have been no signs of an unsustainable in
dustrial boom. It is true that the basic money-market rate,
the yield on four-month government funds, has for some time
been higher than the discount rate and has recently advanced
from 4.75 to 4.80 per cent. But it seems reasonable to assume
that this change was a result rather than a cause of central
bank policy.
It is perhaps only a coincidence that the Belgian step was
taken at the same time at which the Belgian Executive Director
in the International Monetary Fund led an unprecedented protest
of the directors of the Common-Market members against what he
considered the "soft" position taken by the Fund management in
its Annual Report draft, which took the U. S. side in the
controversy on international liquidity. Or did the Europeans
want to demonstrate by both word and action that they favor
everywhere a tightening rather than an easing of liquidity?
If their aim is merely the restoration of internal and
external financial stability, they seem to have succeeded
pretty well in France and Italy. In fact, France again has
achieved a payments surplus close to an annual rate of

7/7/64
$2 billion. Italy's payments deficit has nearly disappeared,
and its international position has so improved, despite
recurrent rumors of an impending lira devaluation, that the
fall of its government has caused hardly more than a ripple
in excharge markets.
Gerany still has taken no action on the modest government
proposals to stem the inflow of foreign capital; its recent
tariff reductions will benefit its Common-Market partners
rather than the rest of the world, including the United States.
The latest wage agreement, in the all-important metal industry,
was quite moderate, contrary to the perennial fears of wage
push earlier expressed by the German authorities.
How seriously we should take the threat of inflation in
Germany may be illustrated by a few figures, taken from the May
report of the German Federal Bank. Between the first quarters
of 1963 and 1964, industrial wages rose 7 per cent. But
industrial production rose nearly 10 per cent. Wholesale as
well as retail prices rose less than 1 per cent. But German
net reserves rose from March to March by nearly $700 million,
in spite of substantial prepayments on military purchases.
In spite of these accomplishments, the authorities in all
three countries still talk and act as if their only problem was
inflation. In France and Italy, industrial production seems
to have stopped rising, if it has not actually declined. Under
conditions of full employment, such a pause is harmless and
perhaps even welcome. But the question remains whether these
countries will modify their restrictionist attitudes in time to
avoid damaging not only their economies but--more important
from our own point of view--also the U. S. payments balance.
Chairman Martin then called for the usual go-around of comments
and views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with
Mr. Hayes, who presented the following statement:
The business picture has remained essentially unchanged
since our last meeting. Prospects continue excellent for
further upward movements, but there are no signs at this point
of any acceleration in the pace of the advance. Indeed, some
of the statistics suggest just a little less vigor than those
becoming available a few weeks ago. In particular, leading
indicators of construction activity suggest the possibility of
some easing off in this sector of the economy. Continued price
stability is evidenced both by the performance of the major
indices and by the latest purchasing agents' report.

7/7/64 -19-
In ccntrast with this generally satisfactory domestic
situation, the balance of payments again shows signs of
becoming a serious problem. This problem has a number of
rather di.tinct aspects. In the first place, there is the
real possibility of a sharply adverse public and market
reaction, here and abroad, to the eventual publication of
the poor second quarter statistics. Second, there is a
possibility that there will be a further deterioration in
our paymerts position in the months ahead. Third, it is a
sobering thought that we may be nearing the limit of our
capacity to finance our deficits through further accumulation
of official dollar holdings or the extension of longer term
bilateral credit facilities--granted that our swap lines remain
fully available to deal with temporary reversible flows and
that the drawing rights on the Fund remain virtually intact.
And this third factor can, of course, be influenced importantly
by the first two.
While June data are, of course, preliminary, the second
quarter is likely to show an annual rate of deficit in excess
of $3 billion--close to the large average deficit of the past
six years. The public has, of course, been prepared for some
worsening in our payments position, but it is questionable
whether so sharp a deterioration has been discounted in advance.
Some of the deterioration between the first and second quarters
reflect the reflow of funds from Canada in March, and their
return in April; even after a rough adjustment for this factor,
the annual rate of deficit in the second quarter would be well
above $2 billion, which I find disturbing. For the past two
months, however, the deficit has been running at a more moderate
rate, though it is still too high.
In aralyzing our current position we have to remain aware
that while the midyear window dressing period has just come to
a close, we are getting into a period of heavy seasonal pressures,
mainly reflecting tourist spending abroad. There is uncertainty
as to how well our trade surplus will hold up, with the continuing
rise in our GNP--although preliminary data for May are encouraging.
New foreign issues may well grow in the third quarter, and interest
rates are rising in several major foreign countries, with some
acceleration of short-term flows to Canada apparent in recent weeks.
At the same time the Euro-dollar market may feel the impact of some
of the credit tightening moves in Europe and may in turn exert an
attraction for American funds. Moreover, in an election year and
with a variety of political uncertainties abroad, together with
inflationary pressures in much of Europe, there is always a
possibility of market disturbances that could have adverse repercus
sions on the dollar.

7/7/64 -20-
In the credit area, the Wednesday-to-Wednesday figures
available for weekly reporting banks for four weeks through
June 24 do not reveal any unusual strength in bank loan demand-
despite a rather sharp temporary bulge over the tax date.
Apparently corporate liquidity is still high. The new proxy
series for bank credit does, however, point to a good gain in
June on a daily average basis; and if we inspect the rates of
growth in credit and deposits for the past six months we find
less evidence than we did a month or so ago for a substantial
slowing of such growth as compared with last year. The money
supply proper, for example, rose in the first six months at a
3.1 per cent annual rate, not far out of line with the 3.6 per
cent gain in the first half of 1963. For money supply plus
time deposits the comparable figures are 6.5 per cent this year
and 7.6 per cent last year. We can hardly be accused of having
prevented continuing ample growth of credit and liquidity.
With respect to policy for the next three weeks our path
seems clearly marked, in view of the likelihood that the Treasury
will undertake important financing operations in this period.
I would therefore favor no change in policy at this time. The
directive might appropriately be left as it is, except for some
recognition of the further confirmation of a weakened balance of
payments position in the second quarter and recognition of the
sizable increase in bank credit as well as money supply in the
past month.
Whether we will still be inhibited by "even keel" considera
tions by the time of the next meeting is now uncertain but should
be amply clear by that time.
As I pointed out at the last meeting, it is none too soon to
give serious thought to our longer-range policy problems and thus
to be prepared to move promptly toward an appropriate stance when
we are free to implement our judgment, provided, of course, that
conditions then warrant a change of policy. While it is by no
means certain, we may be entering a period when the dollar's
international position may be seriously threatened by disillusion
ment and weakened confidence abroad. In any event, we cannot avoid
giving the balance of payments heavy weight in our policy decisions
from now on. There may be a few members of the Committee who
would like to reserve monetary policy to deal with purely domestic
considerations, and to use so-called "specific measures" (including
capital controls) to deal with the balance of payments. Hopes of
disposing so neatly of our problems are, I believe, built on
illusion. Our domestic and international economic well-being are
inextricably interwoven, and at a time of unprecedented domestic
prosperity we should be especially alert to the obligations of

7/7/64 -21-
monetary policy for the preservation of a strong international
financial system based on the dollar. To put it another way, a
world of convertible currencies and freely-moving trade and
investment is the kind of world we believe in, and it is the
kind of world where each country's monetary policy must take
careful account of what is occurring beyond the national borders.
For many nonths now the trend in Europe has been toward greater
credit restraint, almost exclusively because of domestic irfla
tionary pressures. Most European countries have tried hard and
are still trying to blunt the international effects of their
actions. We can hardly expect to remain immune to all these
developments. It would be one thing if we were faced with
depressed domestic conditions--then the argument for looking
mainly inward would be strong indeed. But instead we are con
fronted with record domestic highs in sector after sector, and
with an economy which shows no sign of being seriously vulnerable
to moderate policy moves in the direction of greater restraint.
Apart from the question of our own deliberations, we face
a real problem in helping the public to see more clearly both the
risks and the necessities of our balance of payments position.
In this process of education the System should be playing a
leading role, matched perhaps only by that of the Treasury.
Now, to touch on a more specific matter, I would hope that
serious consideration would be given to the use of a cut in
reserve requirements to provide some of the reserves needed to
take care of seasonal credit expansion this fall. Just as an
example, a 1 per cent reduction in reserve city bank requirements,
a 1/2 per cent reduction for country banks, and a 1/4 per cent
cut for time deposits might together provide a major part of th
season's needs. In the absence of such a move the gold reserve
ratio problem could become acute around the end of the year; and
the move would obviate substantial bill purchases that could
put undesirable downward pressure on short-term interest rates.
Mr. Shuford said that national economic activity had continued to
rise at a rapid but orderly rate in recent months. Production had shown
substantial gains since March and retail sales remained favorable. Em
ployment increases since March indicated greater use of productive
capacity. While the expansion was rather rapid, it seemed well-balanced
and there was little evidence of price inflation.

7/7/64 -22
Activity in the Eighth District had been on a plateau during
the first four months of the year but might have shown some improvement
since April. Business loans at weekly reporting banks rose markedly
from April to June, after remaining unchanged for about half a year. Bank
deposits had continued to rise at about a 9 per cent annual rate, with
most of the gain in time deposits. Value added in manufacturing also had
continued to rise. On the other hand, total payroll employment in the
major labor markets of the District had shown little change since January
and the volume of debits at District reporting banks had been unchanged
for nine months.
Mr. Shuford reported that the outlook for construction activity
in the St. Lou;s Metropolitan Area was favorable. The projects included
in the Downtown Riverfront Redevelopment Program were beginning to take
shape. Chrysler Corporation recently had announced a major expansion in
its St. Louis assembly plant which was expected to be completed by January.
Turning to policy, Mr. Shuford said he favored maintaining cur
rent market conditions because it was likely that the Treasury would be
conducting a major financing. The economy seemed to be at a high level
and moving forward satisfactorily, with no large imbalances.
Mr. Shuford said he found some of the financial indicators a bit
puzzling in view of the strong economic situation. Market interest rates
had shown some weakness since March; yields on three-month Treasury bills
were lower in June and in early July than in March and rates on Government

7/7/64 -23
securities in the six-month to five-year range had shown a pronounced
decline. In previous business expansions, the demand for funds usually
had outpaced the supply, with upward pressure on interest rates. The
opposite seemed to be occurring this time, and this development deserved
study.
Mr. Shuford noted that from September 1962 to November 1963 the
money supply rose at a relatively rapid 4.5 per cent rate, and this ex
pansion probably had contributed to the current strength of the economy.
From November to May, however, growth was it the much lower rate of 2
per cent. Such a decline in the rate of monetary expansion would appear
to be somewhat restrictive unless there was reason to believe that the
demand for money had declined. He was pleased to see that the preliminary
figure for the money supply in June was up considerably, and, as had been
reported this morning, the growth rate so far this year was a little
above 3 per cent.
In view of the interest rate situation, which might indicate some
weakening of demand for loan funds, and of the moderate rates of increase
in the money supply, bank reserves, and bank credit of recent months,
Mr. Shuford preferred to see no tightening in monetary policy. On the
other hand, in light of the strong rise in business activity and the
weakening of the balance of payments position, he did not advocate easing.
Specifically, Mr. Shuford said, he would prefer to see the three-month
Treasury bill rate remain near the 3.50 per cent discount rate. This

7/7/64 -24
might be consistent with free reserves fluctuating around the $100 million
level. He was inclined to think that these market conditions during July
would lead to moderate rates of expansion in bank reserves, bank credit,
and money.
Mr. Shuford did not favor changing the discount rate. He agreed
with Mr. Hayes' observations concerning the kinds of changes that should
be made in the present directive, and he thought that the draft which the
staff had prepared would accomplish this purpose.
Mr. Bryan reported that a number of new figures for the Sixth
District economy had become available since the last meeting. There had
been sharp increases in nonfarm employment, retail trade, and construction
contract awards. Personal income also had risen and insured unemployment
was at the record low level of 3 per cent. In the financial area the
money supply, however defined, and both loans and investments at banks had
risen sharply.
Nationally, Mr. Bryan said, the economy seemed to be moving along
at a satisfactory pace, and there did not appear at this time to be any
significant elements of inflation or instability. He took note of the
point already made that in June most of the reserve series had moved up
and now showed a more satisfactory rate of growth. Total reserves had
come up sharply, with part of the gain absorbed by an increase in excess
reserves from their previously extraordinarily low level and part offstt
by a reduction in borrowings at the Federal Reserve Banks in recent weeks.

7/7/64 -25
Mr. Bryan believed that no change in policy was called for under
the circumstarces. Specifically, for the longer term he favored a rate
of increase in total reserves of approximately 3 per cent or a little
h.gher. For the shorter term he would set a central target for free
reserves at the $100 million level.
Mr. Bopp said the major indicators of business conditions in the
Third District depicted a rather good year for a region that contained
many areas of labor redundancy. Unemployment claims were low; unemployment
rates were declining; employment was up in the growing regions of the
District and steady in the declining ones. Manufacturing output was moving
ahead and so were construction awards. Electric power consumption in
manufacturing industries and construction contract awards in the Third
District stood at favorable levels, compared with recent years.
Since the last meeting of the Committee, Mr. Bopp observed, re
serve pressures on District member banks had continued to diminish and
loans had continued to better their year-ago performance. In two out of
the last three weeks, reserve city banks experienced a slight basic reserve
surplus, averaging around $9 million. The surplus, however, appeared to
be largely seasonal in nature. The latest statement week (ending July 1)
showed a slight swing back to the deficit side. There was no reserve
city bank borrowing at the discount window in June, and country bank
borrowing continued at a low level. Business loans at weekly reporting
member banks rose $12 million in the three weeks ending July 1, compared
to an $8 million increase last year.

7/7/64 -26
In Mr. Bopp's opinion, business and financial developments, as
well as the probable forthcoming Treasury financing, called for no change
in policy during the next three weeks. Recent data indicated that the
rise in consumer demand, especially for durables, was tapering off rather
than accelerating. Also, the economy was entering the season when there
was usually a lull in demand and business activity. Prices continued
generally stable. The margin of unused resources seemed sufficient to
meet any likely increase in demand in the next few weeks without upward
pressure on prices. In his view, the domestic situation clearly did not
call for any firming or tightening of policy.
The balance of payments deficit, Mr Bopp noted, was larger in
the second than in the first quarter. However, the deterioration was not
in the short-term capital sector which was more sensitive to interest
rate differentials. Moreover, it did not appear likely that the recent
rate increases by the central banks of Switzerland and Belgium would exert
any strong pull on United States funds. Although he would not like to
see short-term rates decline, he did not favor action at this time to
bring abcut an increase.
Mr. Bopp recommended no change in policy. He believed, however,
that the proposed changes in the description of the economic background in
the directive drafted by the staff were appropriate.
Mr. Hickman said that, on the basis of preliminary data, domestic
business activity in June continued along the path of moderate and

7/7/64 -27
apparently sustainable rise. Retail trade leveled, or may have
declined a shade, from the advanced May rate. At this early stage,
it appeared that production advanced fractionally in June, with in
dustrial groups other than autos and steel providing most or all of
the push. The production index in most of the remaining months of
1964 was not expected to receive much help from further advances in
steel and autos.
One element of relative weakness in the economy might be
construction, judging by housing starts and construction contracts.
The recent softness in these figures suggested a possible decline in
future construction put in place. It was arguable, however, that the
recent behavior of the foreshadowing construction series was only a
return to a sustainable position and an indication that construction
activity was leveling off.
Mr. Hickman continued to see evidences of potential "sectoral
inflation" in a number of the specialized capital goods industries in
the Cleveland District. At the last meeting of the Committee, he had
mentioned that one of the Cleveland Bank's directors indicated that he
was having difficulty in obtaining skilled people for work in the machine
tool industry. It now appeared, from a survey of 50 Fourth District
industrialists, that about half were experiencing similar difficulties,
insofar as both skilled labor and professional personnel were concerned.
As he saw it, the problem seemed to be concentrated in the metal-working
industries where new orders had been exceptionally strong.

7/7/64 -28-
Insofar as policy was concerned, Mr Hickman thought that with
a large-scale Treasury financing ahead, an even-keel policy was clearly
irdicated over the next few weeks. This would presumably call for re
solving doubts on the side of ease, which was probably nc more than the
market would expect under the circumstances. In his opinion, the Desk
had followed very closely the intent of the Committee within the last
few weeks, maintaining a generally comfortable tone in the market. The
bill rate had held steady within a narrow range, but yields on interme
diate- and long-term Government securities had continued to edge downward
Mr. Hickman's personal view was tha, the tone of the market was
too easy, and that a continuation of this tone would be undesirable if
it were not for the impending Treasury financing. With spreads widening
between interest rates here and abroad, and with bank credit readily
available, he suspected that the Committee was creating difficulties for
itself later on. Some banks in the Fourth District reported confidentially
that they were studying opportunities to earn higher rates abroad, and
were seriously considering getting their feet wet in this area.
Mr. Hickman observed that the opinion expressed by some members
of the Committee at the last meeting in favor of outright control of
bank lending abroad did not appear to be acceptable to some members of the
academic community and to the U. S. Treasury. Also, foreign rates, as
predicted, continued to inch upward. Thus, it seemed to him that an

7/7/64 -29
environment was gradually developing that would call for a more restrictive
U. S. monetary policy. For the near term, however, Mr. Hickman recom
mended no change in policy and no substantive change in the directive.
He approved of the language revisions in the staff draft.
Mr. Daane said that with the Treasury on the eve of a major
effort to achieve some debt extension--an effort that was as much in
the System's interest as in the Treasury's--the situation clearly called
for no change in policy, either overtly or otherwise. It was his under
standing that the Treasury announcement to be made tomorrow would indicate
that there still was a need to raise some cash, although the amount needed
had lessened, and that the Treasury was poised to borrow in the bill area
whenever it seemed desirable for balarce of payments reasons. If the
Treasury did accomplish a significant amount of debt extension, Mr. Daane
thought their borrowing over the rest of the year would be largely in
the short-term area. In the light of this, he felt Mr. Hayes' suggestion
that some of the seasonal need for reserves be met by reducing requiremen.s
should be examined pretty carefully. He agreed fully with the objective
of avoiding downward pressure on bill rates. It was his impression from
past experience, however, that while the open market instrument was not
perfect, it was more difficult to maintain the same monetary posture with
a change in reserve requirements than through utilizing open market
operations.

7/7/64 -30
Mr. Daane said he approved of the staff draft of the directive
except for the modification that had been made in the description of the
international payments position from "less favorable" to "adverse.'
He did not think that what had been learned since the last meeting clearly
indicated a change in the situation, and he preferred language reading
"the country's less favorable international payments position in the
second quarter."
Mr. Hayes said that he did not fully understand the reason for
Mr. Daane's concern over his suggestion regarding reserve requirements.
By way of clarification, Mr. Daane said that in his opinion the use of
the reserve requirement instrument did not afford the same degree of
control as did the open market instrument. To attempt to meet seasonal
needs by reducing reserve requirements would mean providing reserves in
relatively large blocks, and this might create undesired market conditions,
particularly because of possible uneven distribution of reserves. Thus,
there were greater risks involved than when seasonal needs were met by
open market operations, and it seemed unnecessary to incur them as long
as the Treasury was prepared to combat any downward pressures on bill rates.
Mr. Hayes commented that he did not go along with this reasoning;
he thought the System's experience with reserve requirement changes had
been satisfactory. Mr. Daane agreed that there had not been difficulties
at the time of the most recent reduction in requirements, but problems
had been encountered on earlier occasions. Chairman Martin remarked that
the matter deserved careful study.

7/7/64 -31
Mr. Shepardson commented that as the staff report hac indicated,
the domestic expansion had been moving in a satisfactory fashion, and
hopefully at a sustainable rate in most areas. There had been some fluc
tuations and deviations from this pattern. In that connection, he found
the recent behavior of the money supply to be interesting. There had
not been any s:gnificant change in policy fcr some time; yet for a few
months the money supply had grown less rapidly than in the latter part
of 1963, and in the past month there had been an upturn. This seemed
to indicate to Mr. Shepardson that the Committee could create a climate
favorable to monetary growth but it could not necessarily produce any
given growth rate automatically.
In his judgment, Mr. Shepardson continued, there had been an
adequate expansion of the money supply over the longer run, and the fear
of the last few months that the growth rate was inadequate was without
foundation. The Committee was providing the climate for growth that the
economy needed, and it should not be too concerned about short-run
deviations from the trend lines when it was following a general policy
of expanding reserves.
With reference to the balance of paynents situation, Mr. Shepardson
said, it seemed that there was basis for more concern--not particularly
on account of recent European rate changes, although they perhaps pointed
to a problem at some point--but in what he read concerning international
trade negotiations. Developments in these negotiations were not encourag
ing for the U. S. trade outlook.

7/7/64 -32
Having said that, Mr. Shepardson remarked, he thought the
situation at this time justified continuation of the Committee's present
policy. He approved of the revised directive that had been proposed by
the staff.
Mr. Robertson said that in his judgment there was nothing in the
domestic picture or in the international situation that would justify
a change in policy. The forthcoming Treasury financing also argued for
reaffirming present policy and for maintaining about the same money market
conditions as had prevailed in the past few weeks. He agreed with
Mr. Daane's suggestion as to the directive proposed by the staff; "less
favorable" was preferable to "adverse" in describing the balance of pay
ments situation. Otherwise, he found the draft acceptable.
Mr. Mills made the following statement:
Generally stable and prosperous conditions mark the
midyear of 1964, with the usual simmer business letdown to
be expected. These summer doldrums of.er a breathing space
during which policy preparation can be made to conform with
whatever new turn in direction the economy may take. There
is no reason to use this interval for posting economic guards
against imagined inflationary pressures deemed to call for antic
ipatory restrictive monetary and credit policy actions. A
move at this time toward credit restraint, either by way of
positive actions or the utterance of unofficial warning state
ments, could damage the business community's belief in
unimpeded economic progress at a time when the economy still
requires nurturing by a moderately relaxed Federal Reserve
System monetary and credit policy.
As to the domestic scene, the spreading contraction in
the construction industry must be scrutinized closely as to
its economic ramifications if momentum gathers in reduction
in the construction of multiple housing units and commercial

7/7/64 -33
buildings and in a slowing-down of housing starts, As the
construction industry holds a key position in the national
economy, any slowing-down in the pace of its activity could
produce such far-flung results as a shrinkage of employment
which, by having an unfavorable effect on the sale of new
model 1965 automobiles, could thereby transmit a depressive
influence to that likewise critical industry and in the debt
service of the consumer credit obligations identified with
it. If any serious weakness should develop in the con
struction and automobile manufacturing industries, business
activity could decline if there should not be a new surge of
activity in some other areas of the national economy.
In the light of the above, there are better reasons for
following a Federal Reserve System monetary and credit policy
aimed at encouraging reasonable credit expansion than to adopt
a policy intended to head off anticipated inflationary pressures,
of which there are presently no serious indications. The advent
of the usual summer business letdown is a good time for survey
ing unemotionally the probable trend of future business activity
and for designing a credit policy that will help to maintain
and advance the general prosperity now being enjoyed.
I must reiterate my conviction that domestic considerations
must have a first claim in making cred:t policy decisions,
with balance of payments problems set to one side for treatment,
if needed, by appropriate fiscal measures.
In that connection, Mr. Mills added, he wanted to call attertion
to an editorial in the New York Times for June 25 which repeated its
opinion that cceation of a capital issues committee provided an appro
priate approach to the correction of balance of payments problems. Also,
an editorial in the Washington Post this morning took a similar position.
Mr. Mills said he was satisfied with the administration of the
Account since the last meeting. It had produced a constructive margin of
free reserves, which he thought was appropriate and desirable. However,
he had an unconfirmed feeling that the Account had been handled more in
the light of the Treasury financing than to reflect the attitude of some
Committee members and that conditions otherwise would have been more
restrictive.

7/7/64 -34
Mr. Mills concluded by observing that in light of expectations for
the next three weeks he would not suggest any change in policy and he did
not believe that any change was in the minds of other Committee members.
Mr. Wayne said that Fifth District business continued to advance,
although some uncertainties persisted. Among the broad statistical
indicators, seasonally adjusted nonfarm employment and man-hours rose in
May but failed to regain March levels. Seasonally adjusted department
store sales declined a little in June from a.1-time highs reached in May.
On the other band, insured unemployment dropped sharply from late May
through the middle of June, when Virginia had the lowest rate in the nation.
Construction activity continued at high levels, with building permits
rising sharply in May to a new 1964 high. Respondents in the Richmond
Bank's latest survey generally regarded the business outlook with somewhat
more optimism than they had three weeks earlier. Manufacturers reporting
on their own industries, however, showed a little less optimism than last
time. On balance they reported increases in shipments and employment but
little if any change in weekly hours, prices, or the outlook for profits.
Business, real estate, and consumer loans at District weekly
reporting banks rose considerably more than seasonally during the first
three weeks of June and appeared to be substantially stronger locally than
in the nation as a whole. Nevertheless, the money market banks switched
during the period from heavy net buyers to moderate net sellers of
Federal funds.

7/7/64 -35
At the national level, Mr. Wayne said, the latest information
appeared to support earlier impressions that the current expansion in
activity posed little immediate threat to price stability. The latest
monthly gains in some of the important coincident indicators were more
moderate than earlier in the spring, and the leading indicators were some
what less favorable than they had been for some months. Inventories and
capital outlays were being kept in bounds and recent Department of Commerce
surveys suggested little in the way of excess from either of these quarters.
At the moment, the advance seemed altogether moderate and orderly.
As to policy, Mr. Wayne believed that current rates of expansion
in reserves, bank credit, and the money supply were generally appropriate
to the present domestic environment. While the external situation might
provide some cause for concern, especially in view of recent rate develop
ments abroad, he did not feel that it justified any change at the present
time. For these reasons, plus the probability of significant Treasury
financing operations over the coming period, he favored maintaining the
present policy. Mr. Wayne would keep the discount rate at its present
level. The draft directive appeared appropriate to him, with the change
suggested by Mr. Daane.
Mr. Clay said the domestic situation continued, in his opinion,
to call for the stimulative effect of an expansive monetary policy. In
the aggregate, the economy was moving ahead, but there was no evidence
of over-exuberance. On the contrary, the pace was one of moderation and
orderly development.

7/7/64 -36
The overheating of the economy about which concern often had been
expressed just was not showing up, Mr. Clay commented. With the lessened
impact of Federal Government outlays and residential construction, the
economy was dependent upon consumer and business spending as the principal
sectors of expansion. These sectors were advancing, but within bounds
that did not show pressure on resources and prices. There was a strong
likelihood that expansion of the economy could continue in the months
ahead without a price inflation problem.
The economy continued to have a problem of sticky unemployment of
manpower. At the same time, it had the other necessary productive re
sources for expanding economic activity. While the unemployment problem
was of a fairly concentrated variety that existed side by side with
essentially full employment of many types of workers, the necessary shift
ing and upgrading of employees, as well as the required increase in total
jobs, required an expanding economy for developing and putting that manpower
and other resources to use.
In view of these domestic cond.tions and developments, Mr. Clay
said, monetary policy should remain on the expansive side, in line with
the Committee's recent policy objectives. While the international payments
deficit was larger in the second quarter than in the first quarter of
the year, continuation of the current monetary policy also appeared
appropriate when account was taken of the international payments situation.
In addition, the probability of Treasury financing led to a presumption
of no basic change in monetary policy for the period immediately ahead.

7/7/64 -37
Mr. Clay thought that the staff draft for the economic policy
directive, with the change suggested by Mr. Daane, would be suitable for
the period immediately ahead. In his judgment, no change should be made
in the Reserve Bank discount rate.
Mr. Helmer reported that economic accivity in the Seventh District
in recent weeks was showing greater similarity to that for the nation
than in many months. While there were some indications of slower rise, it
was still widely expected that activity would continue upward and :hat
further progress would be made in utilizing unused resources. Information
recently available on retail sales, debits tc demand deposits, and housing
starts indicated these were all down somewhat in the District, but analysts
associated with the major Midwest industries continued to be optimistic.
The June 30-July 2 period saw the opening of new labor contract
negotiations at the big three auto firms, Mr. Helmer noted. A settlement
was not expected before the August 31 deadline, and, when achieved, seemed
certain to exceed the Council of Economic Advisers' 3.2 per cent guideline.
The recent partial recovery of prices for the top grade of slaughter
cattle had been beneficial to some areas of the District. Crop prospects
were generally good and the current indication was that farmers would
realize favorable prices for hogs this fall. However, farm machinery
manufacturers were now reporting some indications of weakening demand in
livestock areas and distributors of various kinds of farm supplies indicated
that payment terms were being eased further in order to make sales.

7/7/64 -38
The net inflow of personal savings and time deposits at banks in
District urban areas increased sharply in May, largely because of a decline
in the rate of withdrawals. At these banks, excluding Indiana where
interest rates were raised early this year, the net inflow in April and
May had been nearly one-fourth larger than in the same months last year.
At savings and loan associations in the same four States the net inflow
rose well above the year-ago level in May after being below year-ago in
earlier months.
Hr. Helmer noted that loan expansion at District weekly reporting
banks in June was strong but less than the rise in the same month of 1963.
The June banking figures suggested that consumers were increasing their
use of credit somewhat. The quarterly interest rate survey showed that
business loan rates in the District were higher in June than in March and
also higher than in June 1963. Major District banks had liquidated
Governments in the last month but had increased their holdings of other
securities. Chicago banks were covering their reserve needs in the Federal
funds market.
Mr. Deming said that Ninth District personal income in May moved
to a new high in terms of annual rate, completely offsetting the weakness
shown for the previous two or three months and bringing the figure back
on the trend line running since January 1962. The average District income
gain in this period had been slightly higher than that for the nation.

7/7/64 -39
The agricultural picture was quite good for this time of year,
Mr. Deming continued. There had been unusually heavy rains and current
soil moisture and early crop prospects were better than usual. Despite
a 2 per cent acreage cutback, winter wheat output as of June 1 was expected
to be 2 per cent larger than last year.
Mr. Deming observed that two recent opinion surveys taken by the
Minneapolis Reserve Bank showed some interesting results. The regu ar
six-week survey of major industrial concerns showed that activity, as
reflected by orders, production, shipments, employment, and hours worked,
generally expanded or remained about the same in May and June. Such
declines as were noted were mainly seasonal although some reflected phasing
out of Gcvernment orders. Only one company reported a slight increase in
prices of its finished products; all others reported prices generally
unchanged. The concerns were quite optimistic about the third quarter
outlook, with three-fourths expecting output gains and half expecting
higher employment and improved profits. Those companies who foresaw de
clines in the third quarter regarded them as mainly seasonal. Two concerns
expected some price increases in their products, one expected a decline,
and the others expected stable prices.
The second survey was a quarterly survey of agricultural banks,
both member and nonmember. They reported a drift to slightly lower net
farm income; and that farmers currently were spending no more, and perhaps

7/7/64 -40
a bit less, on all items and definitely less on major items such as
machinery. They also noted fairly strong farn loan demand and some firming
in farm loan notes as their loan-deposit ratios grew. Some stated they
were becoming less aggressive in seeking loans and were more selective
in granting them.
Mr. Deming said member bank loans continued to expand rapidly
during June following a strong advance in May, bringing the gain for the
first six months of the year to a point comparable with the pronounced
increases of 1963 and 1962 and well above the average for recent years.
In the last two months, city banks had shown gains comparable to country
banks but the six-month record showed a much stronger expansion at country
banks since loan demand at city banks lagged during early 1964. The in
creases shown by the city banks were concentrated in loans to nonbank
financial institutions and "all other" loans. Business loans at the close
of June actually were lower than six months earlier, a very unusual
development, although there was some pickup in this category in June
Bank investments showed virtually no change in June, following
a slight decline in May, Mr. Deming observed. For the first half as a
whole, however, District member bank investments had shown a smaller
decline than was typical. Thus, total bank credit expansion had been
larger than usual and was exceeded in recent years only in the comparable
period of 1962.

7/7/64 -41
Deposit changes in June were about in line with seasonal expec
tations and for the first six months of 1964 had been stronger than usual.
Time deposit growth in June was weaker than usual, with city banks showing
a rather pronounced drop in negotiable time deposits. In part this might
reflect tax and dividend requirements of corporations, but in part it
seemed to reflect some flows into Canadian time deposits by some big
District corporations.
Banks in the District had been on the buying side of Federal funds
transactions for the past four months. City bank borrowing at the dis
count window remained rare and minimal but country bank borrowing, while
still relatively light, had stepped up in recent weeks.
Mr. Deming said he thought that it was obviously undersirable for
the Committee to change policy in view of the Treasury financing, and
that policy over the next three weeks could stand unchanged even apart
from the financing. He agreed with Mr. Brill's comment that it might be
best to let well enough alone. He was concerned, however, with the second
quarter balance of payments developments, and he thought it was necessary
to keep in mind the points Mr. Hayes had mentioned. As to the directive,
Mr. Deming said he favored the change suggested by Mr. Daane but he
thought the staff draft was fine otherwise.
Mr. Swan said that more complete figures for all States in the
Twelfth District confirmed the increase in unemployment in May that he had
mentioned at the last meeting and reflected declines in both construction

7/7/64 -42
contract awards and housing starts that were substantially greater in the
District than in the country as a whole. On the other hand, employment
had held up quite well considering the continued layoffs in defense- and
space-related industries. Retail sales appeared to have continued favoraole
into June.
The larger banks continued to be net sellers of Federal funds in
June, although the margin was quite small. Borrowings from the Reserve
Bank were much lower in June than in May, but during the week ending
July 1 they rose substantially--both absolutely and in relation to bor
rowings for the country as a whole. In the three weeks ending June 24,
covering the t.x date, total bank credit, total loans, and total commercial
and industrial loans at weekly reporting banks all increased much less
than in the sane period a year ago. For the year to date commercial and
industrial loans increased more this year than in the comparable period
of last year. The increase this year in total loans, however, was somewhat
less than in 1963.
Mr. Swan said the Treasury financing clearly dictated no change in
policy, but, the financing apart, he agreed with those who advocated no
change at this time in light of both the domestic and international
situations. To him "no change" implied continuation of the situation that
had existed in the last three weeks which, he thought, quite accurately
reflected the position desired by the Committee three weeks ago. He would
accept the directive proposed by the staff with the change suggested by
Mr. Daane.

7/7/64 -43
Mr. Irons said there was little new with regard to conditions in
the Eleventh District. He could typify the novements of most major indi
cators over the past three weeks by saying slight or moderate advances were
occurring generally, and the indications were that these advances would
carry into the next month. Production had inched up; construction con
tinued strong; department store sales were good. There was a steady,
slight upward pull on District activity, but nothing sensational or striking.
The economic picture showed no inflationary signs. Unemployment was not
a problem in the District; the unemployment -ate was small relative to
that in the nation as a whole.
Mr. Irons noted that conditions in agriculture were reported to
be generally satisfactory. Some sections of the District needed rain but
that was always true at this time of the year. Prices received by farmers
were up slightly.
On the financial side, Mr. Irons saic, in the past three weeks
loans were up fairly substantially in most categories. Consumer loans
were runn:ng some 22 per cent above a year ago. Demand deposits wer up,
but time and savings deposits were down a bit.
Mr. Irons thought that District banks generally were less liquid
than a year ago. Banks were seeking funds actively, including some of
the small ones. Loan-deposit ratios in the District had increased to about
58 per cent from 52 per cent a year ago. City banks were active buyers of
Federal funds. Member bank borrowings had risen somewhat, and an increasing
number of country banks were coming into the discount window.

7/7/64 -44
One District trend that gave Mr. Irons concern related to the
volume and quality of debt that was being created. Occasional references
were heard at the Reserve Bank to cases in which debtors were not carrying
out the terms of their loan contracts. Some of the new country banks in
the District were taking the view that in order to make money they had to
expand loans, and in some cases their loans were in excess of their
deposits. There might be problems ahead in settling some of the debt that
now was being created.
On the policy side, Mr. Irons said, with the Treasury about to
undertake a financing there was not much the Committee could do at this
time. He would not advocate a policy change even if a financing was not
in prospect. Despite a feeling that the Committee might have been main
taining too much ease for too long a period and might later regret it,
for the present he would follow an even-keel policy, continuing the posture
of the past three weeks, with average free reserves around $100 million,
the bill rate and the Federal funds rate at about 3.50 per cent, and the
discount :ate unchanged. The international situation was a source of
some concern, but in his judgment it did not require action at this ime.
He would accept the directive drafted by the staff with the modification
suggested by Mr. Daane.
Mr. Latham reported that the New England economy continued to
evidence steady but unspectacular growth. Business sentiment was generally
optimistic but conservative, with no apparent evidence of speculation in
inventory or bank credit.

7/7/64 -45
District manufacturing employment rose slightly in May to reach
the best seasonally adjusted total since August 1963. However, with
the trends varying by industry, the twelve-month net change was only
slightly improved. Nonmanufacturing employment also bettered the sea
sonally anticipated rise. The preliminary manufacturing production index
for May showed a slight improvement for the month. Shoe production
continued to reflect a downward trend compared with a year ago.
Mr. Lacham said construction contracts, which had been a strong
factor in the otherwise staid upward trend in New England, slipped below
the 1963 pace with a decrease in nonresidential building. Residential
building contirued to show on the plus side, particularly in the apartment
building category, which apparently reflected a delayed trend compared
with other sections of the country. Department store sales were strong
in May, and during the four weeks ended June 27, they averaged 5 per cent
above a year ago with a cumulative gain of 6 per cent for the year to date.
Deposit balances at mutual savings banks continued to show an
annual growth rate of 8.6 per cent. A strong credit demand had been in
evidence, business loan growth continued at a rapid rate, and loan-deposit
ratios were on a rising trend. Liquidity had been maintained nevertthless
by a reduction in long-term Government holdings.
Mr. Latham commented that competition for deposits was keen.
Special savings deposits seemed to be the order of the day. One large
commercial bank had instituted a special savings account limited to amounts

7/7/64 -46
over $10,000. Interest was paid on a daily basis and was subject to
change upon ten days' notice. Currently, the rate was 3-1/2 per cent or
was tied to the discount rate. Savings banks vying for funds had re
sorted to various types of enticing accounts. For example, a savings
bank in New Hampshire offered regular savings accounts at 4-1/2 per cent,
investment savings accounts at 4-1/2 per cent, and a bonus savings account
at 5 per cent. Mr. Latham noted that mortgage money was in ample supply.
Mr. Balderston observed that he was impressed by two observations
that Mr. Brill had made. First, the construction boom apparently was
flattening out. Second, within the advance occurring in the private sector
of the economy a rolling readjustment seemed to be under way. In
Mr. Balderston's opinion these developments should not occasion alarm;
on the contrary, they increased the assurance that the economy would
continue in a healthy state for a while.
The Treasury financing clearly indicated no change in policy today,
Mr. Balderston said. He would accept the draft directive submitted by
the staff.
Chairman Martin commented that everyone seemed to agree that the
Treasury financing was the primary consideraion today, and that no change
should be made in policy. The members also seemed to agree that the
economic policy directive prepared by the staff was acceptable with the
modification suggested by Mr. Daane. The Chairman proposed that a vote
be taken on such a directive.

7/7/64 -47-
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, and by unanimous vote, the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York was authorized and
directed, until otherwise directed by the
Committee, to execute transactions in the
System Account in accordance with the follow
ing current economic policy directive:
It is the Federal Open Market Committee's current policy
to accommodate moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit,
and the money supply for the purpose of facilitating continued
expansion of the economy, while fostering improvement in the
capital account of U. S. international payments, and seeking to
avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures. This policy
takes into account the continued orderly expansion in economic
activity, accompanied recently by a more rapid expansion in
money supply and some decline in interest rates. It also gives
consideration to the relative stability in average commodity
prices; the underutilization of manpower and other resources;
the country's less favorable internatioral payments position
in the second quarter; and the further interest rate advances
in important markets abroad.
To implement this policy, and taking into account probable
Treasury financing activity, System oper market operations shall
be conducted with a view to maintaining about the same condi
tions in the money market as have prevailed in recent weeks,
while accommodating moderate expansion in aggregate bank reserves.
Chairman Martin then noted that Messrs. Daane, Balderston, and
Young recently had returned from Europe. At the Chairman's invitation,
Mr. Daane brought the Committee up to date or procedural and substantive
aspects of the Group of Ten Deputies' discussions concerning arrangements
to meet future international liquidity needs.
Mr. Balderston commented that he had been struck by the construction
boom in many European countries, and the resulting difficulties in
Switzerland and Austria; and by the widespread scarcity of labor. He had

7/7/64 -48
been particularly suprised by the economic progress being made in Finland,
although a considerable degree of inflation had occurred there. Bankers
in Germany and Austria had expressed the hope that the United States would
not let its costs get out of hand. Such a development, they thought,
would lead to difficulties both for the U. S. and for them. In Scandinavia
he had heard a considerable amount of talk about the need to restore the
balance there between equity and debt, and about the possibility of shift
ing to a value-added basis for taxes.
Mr. Young remarked that for part of his trip he had been on
vacation in Portugal and southern Italy, and had been pleased to note the
progress those countries were making. He also reported briefly on meetings
he had attended in Paris of Working Party 3 and of the Economic Policy
Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held
on Tuesday, July 28, 1964, at 9:30 a.m.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Secretary