A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System in Washington on Tuesday. April 14, 1964, at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Martin, Chairman
Mr. Balderston
Mr. Daane
Mr. Hickman
Mr. Mills
Mr. Mitchell
Mr. Shepardson
Mr. Shuford
Mr. Swan
Mr. Wayne
Mr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. Hayes
Messrs. Ellis, Scanlon, ard Deming, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bopp, Clay, and Irons, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Kansas
City, and Dallas, respectively
Mr. Sherman, Assistan, Secretary
Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hackley, General Counsel
Mr. Noyes, Economist
Messrs. Brill, Furth, Garvy, Grove, Holland,
Jones, Koch, and Mann, Associate Economists
Mr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open Market
Account
Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of Governors
Messrs. Partee and Williams, Advisers, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Axilrod, Chief, Government Finance Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Miss Eaton, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,
Board of Governors

4/14/64 -2
Messrs. Eastburn, Black, Baughman, Parsons, Tow,
and Green, Vice Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Richmond,
Chicago, Minneapolis, Kansas City, and Dallas,
respectively
Mr. Eisenmenger, Director of Research, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston
Mr. Meek, Manager, Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Upon motion duly made and seconded,
and by unanimous vote, the minutes of the
meeting of the Federal Open Market Com
mittee held on March 24, 1964, were
approved.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members
of the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System
Open Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on
Open Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies
for the period March 24 through April 8, 1964, and a supplementary
report covering the period April 9 through April 13, 1964. Copies
of these reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.
Supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs said that he
expecte no change in the gold stock this week. Since March 16 the
Russians had been heavy sellers in the London gold market, with
total sales through April 13 amounting to somewhat more than $450
million. Of this total, the Pool had taken in $443 million and had
made not only the regular month-end distribution but also two interim
distributions in which the United States' share was $251 million.
This inflow had increased the gold holdings of the Stabilization

4/14/64 -3
Fund to the abnormally high level of $300 million. The only gold
sales in sight for April were $11 million to the Austrians and
possibly another $34 million to the French.
The exchange markets had been reasonably quiet, Mr. Coombs
continued, and the Account had been able, as a result of the Italian
drawings upon the International Monetary Fund, to pay off completely
the System's swap drawings in German marks and Dutch guilders. The
Swiss franc debt, which amounted to $220 million on March 4, had
subsequently been paid down by $40 million through regular weekly
purchases of Swiss francs from the Swiss National Bank. Liquidation
of the Swiss franc debt continued to be handicapped by unusually
tight money market conditions in Switzerlard. It might, however, be
possible for the Account to clean up the renaining $180 million of
the Swiss franc debt through two operations that were now under
negotiation. The first of these was a possible swap between the
Swiss National Bank and the Bank of Italy in the amount of $100 million
equivalent. If this went through, the Bank of Italy would presumably
sell to the U. S. the Swiss franc proceeds against dollars, and the
francs could then be applied against the swap debts with the Swiss
National Bank and the Bank for International Settlements. Another
by-product of such a swap between the Swiss and the Italians would be
that the Italians would pay off in full their $150 million drawing on
their swap line with the System.

4/14/64
The second operation now being negotiated was a U. S.
Treasury issue of a $75 million bond denominated in Swiss francs
to the Bank for International Settlements, which would in turn
issue short-term money market paper to the Swiss commercial banks.
Here again, the Swiss franc proceeds of the Treasury bond issue
would be sold to the Federal Reserve. If both operations were to go
through, the Account could thus clean up $175 million of the $180
million debt still outstanding. In both cases, there were only a
few technical details still to be overcome, and he was hopeful that
negotiations might be completed within the near future.
At the last Basle meeting, Mr. Coombs said, a representative
of the Bank of Japan indicated to him that the Bank might wish to
draw upon its swap line with the System during the course of April.
The Japanese were fully aware of the necessity of avoiding repeated
renewals of such swap drawings and would expect to draw upon the
International Monetary Fund if they cculd not liquidate the swap
through other means. Also, at the last Basle meeting, the Bank of
England sought and received informal commitments from a number of
the Continental central banks of credit assistance in the event of
speculation against sterling arising out of the forthcoming British
election. Mr. Coombs thought the Committee should welcome this
approach, which would contribute to a reasonably equitable sharing
of the burden of assistance to the United Kingdom in the event of
another sterling crisis.

4/14/64
Mr. Mills inquired whether the Bank of Italy swap with the
Swiss National Bank would be favorably regarded by the European
economic community. He noted that there had been some complaint
about the U. S. dealing directly with the Bank of Italy in working
out the recent package of assistance.
Mr. Coombs said the main concern expressed at the Basle
meeting was that the Italians did not seek assistance from other
European central banks as well as from the U. S. Had they been
approached, he felt that a good deal of money would have been put
up on a standby basis. Against this background, bringing additional
central banks such as the Swiss National Bank, into the picture
would be helpful. The Bank of France also might be prepared to
render assistance if asked. It might be recalled that after the
French opposed the British entry into the Common Market, the Bank
of France extended credit to the British when sterling came under
speculative pressure.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the System Open Market Account trans
actions in foreign currencies during
the period March 24 through April 13,
1964, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Mr. Coombs recommended renewal for another three months
each of the following reciprocal currency arrangements: (a) Bank
of France, $100 million; (b) German Federal Bank, $250 million; and

4/14/64 -6
(c) Bank of Japan, $150 million. There we::e no drawings presently
outstanding under these swap arrangements, which were renewed most
recently on February 6, February 6, and January 29, 1964, respectively.
Thereupon, renewal of the swap
arrangements with the Bank of France,
the German Federal Bank, and the Bank
of Japan, as recommended by Mr. Coombs,
was authorized by unanimous vote.
Mr. Coombs then pointed out that on April 29, 1964, two Bank
of Italy drawings of $50 million each under its swap arrangement
with the Federal Reserve would mature. Unless the Bank of Italy was
able to execute the swap with the Swiss National Bank that he had
mentioned earlier, it might wish to renew such drawings for another
three months. One of the drawings had already been renewed once;
for the other, this would be the first renewal.
After discussion, renewal on a three
month basis of the two Bank of Italy
drawings of $50 million each, if requested,
was noted without objection.
Mr. Coombs also referred to certain System swap drawings that
would mature later this month; namely, a drawing of $20 million under
the swap agreement with the Bank for International Settlements and
two drawings of $25 million and $30 million, respectively, under the
swap agreement with the Swiss National Bank. If renewed, this would
be the second renewal in each of these cases. As he had mentioned
earlier, however, it might be possible to liquidate these drawings
in the near future.

4/14/64
Renewal of the aforementioned drawings
under the swap arrangements with the Bank
for International Settlements and the Swiss
National Bank, if necessary, was noted
without objection.
This concluded the discussion of System foreign currency
operations.
Before this meeting there had been distributed to the
members of the Committee a report from the Manager of the System
Open Market Account covering open market operations in U. S.
Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period
March 24 through April 8, 1964, and a supplemental report covering
the period April 9 through April 13, 1964. Copies of these reports
have been placed in the files of the Committee.
In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone
commented as follows:
System open market operations supplied reserves on
balance during the past three weeks, cffsetting seasonal
reserve drains and permitting the market to accommodate
smoothly the payments flows associated with the end-of
March bank statement date, the April 1 Cook County tax
date, and other sizable financial flows. Free reserves
were somewhat higher and member bank borrowings
somewhat lower than in the preceding three weeks, but
the averages for both periods fell within the recent
range of variation. The great bulk of Federal funds
trading took place at 3-1/2 per cent although the rate
softened temporarily toward the ends of the two-week
reserve averaging periods encompassed during the recent
interval.
In the securities markets the atmosphere was
noticeably brighter during the past few weeks. Treasury
bills were in good demand from a variety of sources
including corporations, State and local funds, foreign
accounts, and some commercial banks. In particular, the

4/14/64
commitment in the short-term area by AT&T of over $1
billion, raised in its recent stock offering, had a
pervasive impact on short-term rates. At the same time,
supplies of bills fell short of dealers' expectations
as the Treasury did not tap the bill area for its April
cash borrowing. In this setting, bill rates moved lower,
with the quotations for three- and six-month bills
declining by 7 and 5 basis points, respectively, over
the interval. In yesterday's auction the average
issuing rates for three- and six-month bills, at about
3.48 and 3.69 per cent, respectively, compared with rates
of 3.55 and 3.74 per cent three weeks earlier. These
lower levels have started producing a more cautious
atmosphere, for most market participants seem to regard
the current levels as rather temporary and as more likely
to be followed by an increase than by a further decline
in rates. However, given the Treasury's April 15 paydown
of $2.5 oillion maturing bills, it may be that bill rates
will remain for a time around their present levels.
In the Treasury bond market, prices edged irregularly
higher during the past three weeks as market participants
came to feel that the downward price movement of the
preceding several weeks had gone far enough and may have
been overdone for the time being. In this developing
environment, the Treasury's cash offer of $1.0 billion
16-month notes was very well received. Underlying the
change of trend were the favorable reports on the first
quarter balance of payments, together with a feeling that
the tax cut may not produce any early upsurge in business
activity. Commercial bank selling of intermediate
maturities slackened, and this, in combination with
modest investor buying, augmented on two days by System
purchases, tended to move prices higher over the interval.
While underlying market sentiment is less gloomy now than
at the time of the last meeting, it remains quite cautious
and dealers continue to hold a sizable net short position
in the over-5-year area.
The corporate and municipal markets have shared in
the improvement in sentiment that has developed recently.
The relatively light calendar of new corporate bond issues
has contributed to the strength in that market, while the
excellent response accorded two large municipal offerings
has restored an affirmative outlook in that area.
A more cheerful atmosphere also developed in the
bankers' acceptance market during the period. After
experiencing a sharp build-up in inventories during the

4/14/64
first half of the interval, dealers raised their rates
by 1/8 per cent effective April 2. Subsequently, net
investor demand brought these inventories sharply lower
again and effective today the dealers have returned
their rates to the levels prevailing three weeks ago.
The next major item on the Treasury's financing
calendar is the refunding of about $10.6 billion May 15
maturities--of which about $4.2 billion is publicly
held. The Treasury plans to meet with its advisory
groups on April 27 and 28 and will probably announce
the terms of the exchange on April 29 or 30. No other
major financing operation is expected until June, when
the Treasury may choose to get a start on its heavy
cash needs of the second half of the year. I should
note that the Treasury plans to continue to put out a
new issue of one-year bills each month and that it may
choose to raise perhaps $0.5 billion new money in
weekly bill auctions between now and the end of June.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made
and seconded, and by unanimous vote,
the open market transactions in Govern
ment securities and bankers' acceptances
during the period March 24 through April
13, 1964, were approved, ratified, and
confirmed.
Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and
financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had been
distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed
in the files of the Committee.
Mr. Noyes presented a statement on economic conditions as
follows:
We are all weary of the phrase "watchful waiting"
and also of the posture it describes. I shall propose
that we dispense with both despite the fact that we
still find ourselves in the position in which information
that is just beyond our reach seems highly important to
the System's basic policy responsibilities.

4/14/64 -10-
It may be helpful to remind the Committee again
that this situation is not abnormal, but is, in fact,
characteristic of a free enterprise economy operating
in response to market determined prices, which reflect
changes both in current conditions and expectations.
It is a rare thing indeed when we are able to foresee
clearly changes in, say, interest rates or prices of
commodities which have not already been fully reflected
in current market quotations. Uncertainty is a normal
and necessary condition to the effective functioning
of our type of free society. With the passage of time,
specific uncertainties are resolved, but others spring
up immediately to take their place. If this were not
the case, we would always be in the midst of either an
inflationary or deflationary spiral.
So . will not apologize for the fact that neither
the data about what happened in the first quarter of
the year, nor my analysis of it, will resolve your doubts
as to the future course of the economy.
We are now estimating that GNP in the first quarter
will be up about $7 or $8 billion--about a 1-1/4 per
cent increase, or an annual rate of 5 per cent--somewhat
less than in the fourth quarter of 1963. If we abstract
from fluctuations in the rate of inventory accumulation
and look just at final purchases of goods and services,
the rate of expansion is almost incredibly stable--up in
each recent quarter by about $9 or $10 billion, or at an
annual rate of around 7 per cent,
The production index went up another 5/lOths of a
point in March to 128.2. This makes the cumulative gain
for the quarter 1.2 percentage points on the index, or
almost exactly 1 per cent--a moderate figure.
Unemployment in March held at 5.4 per cent of the
total labor force. However, unemployment among adult
males dropped further to 3.9 per cent from 4.1 per cent
last month and 4.6 per cent a year ago.
Price movements continue to be the most difficult
area to report on satisfactorily. Most of the action in
recent weeks has been in nonferrous metals, with copper
in the spotlight. The very recent movements can be
attributed to the unsettled supply situation, but it
must also be borne in mind that the five metals in the
BLS daily industrial commodity index are now up 20 per
cent, and the entire group is up 8 per cent from a year
ago. On the other hand, the over-all wholesale price
index was stable during the first quarter, at a level

4/14/64 -11-
only 1/2 of 1 per cent above a year ago, and consumer
prices have not shown any tendency to depart from the
sluggish upward drift that has characterized the
behavior of this index in recent years.
Analysis of current performance in relation to
capacity is also a frustrating exercise. About all
that can be said with any assurance is that in the
case of almost everything but steel, we seem to be
running closer to capacity than a year ago--and that
in the case of steel we have considerably more slack
than we did when orders and deliveries were being
accelelated by strike expectations a year ago. Taken
altogether, this probably means that the price structure
is more vulnerable to demand pressures than it was
earlier in the expansion, but the fact that there is
less pressure on steel capacity today than a year ago
provides a very useful anchor to the windward.
It is always possible that either an unmistakable
cyclical upsurge or a softening may emerge in the
period ahead, but these now seem by far the least
likely possibilities. The most likely seems to be
that the economy will continue to exhibit, as it has
recently. many of the characteristics associatec in
the past with the expansionary phase of the business
cycle. If one feels these should be dampened by some
measure of monetary restraint, there is very little to
be said for delaying, in the hope of clearer evidence.
Similarly, if one feels that the present expansionary
movement should be encouraged--that it is, in fact,
what governmental policy has been seeking--then present
monetary policy should be positively accepted on its
merits--not simply carried forward by default through
another period of "watchful waiting." As I believe
Governor Mitchell pointed out some time ago, if the
market senses that the System's posture is one of
waiting to pounce, this, in itself, creates a very
nervous and unsettled market condition.
By prearrangement with Mr. Koch, I will conclude
with a word about the Treasury financing calendar. As
it now stands, an even-keel policy would seem to be
called for from late April through most of May. There
is a good chance that the books on the May 15 refunding
will be open at the time of the next FOMC meeting.
Whether further Treasury financing in June would or
should take precedence over a change in System policy

4/14/64 -12-
at that time is a question which can only be settled
in the context of the time. All that can be said now
is that the Treasury would like to finance some of
its second-half cash needs outside the bill area,
and/or extend the maturity of the debt through an
advance refunding in June.
As a practical matter, the options that are open
can be stated fairly simply: Between now and the May
refunding the System can either maintain substantially
the present policy or move to a slightly less easy
policy--say, a somewhat lower free reserve target.
Only most urgent considerations, which do not appear
to exist, would justify a discount rate change between
now and the announcement of the refunding at the end of
the month. In either case, the System could pre-empt
time for a change in policy in late May or June, if
conditions warrant, although a change at that time would
undoubtedly reduce the chances of any Treasury financing
outside the bill area.
Mr. Koch made the following statement concerning financial
developments:
Since it is now possible to make fairly good
estimates of financial developments over the first
quarter of the year, it strikes me as an appropriate
time to step back a pace and see just how a monetary
policy designed to keep moneym arket ccnditions
relatively stable over this period, coupled with the
changing demands for funds, have been reflected in the
course of the basic indicators of policy--namely, bank
reserves, the money supply, bank credit, and interest
rates. For this purpose I have passed out to you this
morning a table we bring up to date periodically here
at the Board which summarizes recent developments in
selected indicators of monetary policy. This table,
as you will note, shows the daily average level of these
indicators in March, as well as their seasonally adjusted
annual rates of change for the following periods: the
first quarter of 1964, the last half of 1963, the year
1963 as a whole, and the first quarter of 1963.
As for the most commonly used measures of aggregate
bank reserves, total reserves and required reserves
behind private deposits have increased at a slower rate
thus far this year than they did in 1963. Nonborrowed
reserves have risen at about the same pace.

4/14/64 -13-
Tapered growth since the turn of the year has also
characterized most measures of the economy's liquidity,
one of the two main channels through which monetary policy
affects real activity. The money supply narrowly defined,
for exanple, grew at a 3.3 per cent rate from December
through March, as compared with a 5.0 per cent rate in the
second half of 1963.
Tine and savings deposit expansion at commercial
banks was at about the same rate in the first quarter as
a whole as in the latter part of last year, but the rate
slackened markedly over the quarter. Saving and loan
association shareholding growth has also been less sharp
recently than earlier. Accumulation of savings at mutual
savings banks was at a substantially more rapid pace in
January, due mainly to higher rates paid by New York
mutuals but the pace dropped off considerably in
February and even more in March. In view of the tax cut
early in March, the reduced rate of growth in liquid
saving, coupled with the decline in retail sales, are
difficult to reconcile. The explanation may lie in
increased consumer purchases of AT&T stock and other
nonliquid investments.
The other main channel through which monetary policy
affects the economy is through the cost and availability
of credit and capital, particularly commercial bank
credit. The rate of increase in total loans and invest
ments of banks was 10.9 per cent in the first quarter of
1964 as compared with 8.0 per cent in the whole of 1963.
The recent percentage rise in this item has been larger
than that in demand and time deposits combined. The
differerce reflects in large part a substantial increase
in Government deposits from December to March. These
deposits are being drawn down abruptly in April, and for
this reason a more rapid rate of increase in private
deposits and the money supply is expected this month
than earlier in the year.
An examination of the character of recent bank
credit growth suggests that it is due more to banker
than to borrower initiative. Thus, business borrowing
from banks, the main demand-oriented category of bank
credit, has shown only a moderate growth recently,
whereas bank acquisitions of financial-type loans and
U. S. Government securities, the rates of growth of
which are more at the initiative of the banks themselves,
have been either stronger or about as strong recently as
in late 1963. Aggregate capital market financing is

4/14/64 -14-
expected to be very large in April, sparked mainly by
the huge AT&T stock issue. For the year to date,
however, the volume of publicly-offered bonds has been
quite moderate. The calendar of future issues scheduled
to date also continues moderate for this time of year,
normally a period of relatively heavy capital market
financing.
Turning to the cost of credit, most categories of
interest rates averaged only a little higher in March
than in December. From mid-February co late March,
however, rates on intermediate- and long-term securities
rose considerably. In the last week or so, rates moved
back down a little, mainly in the case of short- and
intermediate-term issues.
The relatively moderate demands for both bank credit
and bond financing suggest that the recent interest rate
rise was due mainly to expectations lather than to
stepped-up demands for borrowed funds. Two factors seem
to me to have been primarily responsible. First, dealers,
counting on rather immediate upward rate pressures, went
short in their longer term Government security positions.
Secondly, banks and possibly other investors, thinking
that rates would no doubt rise sometime this year even
if not in the immediate future, tended to shorten up
their portfolios. The most recent decrease in rates
suggests that more uncertainty about the course of
interest rates has now developed, at least as to the
near-terr future, but a substantial bond rally is unlikely.
What does all this suggest as to the most appropriate
posture for monetary policy in the immediate weeks ahead?
It is difficult to find in recent domestic financial
developments in and of themselves much cause for a change
in policy. The seasonally adjusted annual rates of
growth of most of the basic indicators of policy have
been moderate and strike me as sustainable and appropriate
in light of current economic developments. The relatively
high recent rate of over-all bank credit expansion, plus
the large volume continuing to flow abroad, might give
one cause to doubt this judgment. But it should be noted
that the sharper over-all rate is likely to prove
temporary, having been pushed up partly by bank acquisi
tions of Treasury securities in recent financings and by
an accompanying short-lived build-up in Government
deposits. Moreover, the flow of bank credit abroad
might more appropriately be curbed by an extension of
the interest equalization tax proposal than by adoption

4/14/64 -15-
of a less stimulative general monetary policy. Also,
one must constantly remind himself that bank credit
expansion over the last couple of years has reflected
a higher proportion of investment of real savings as
compared to demand deposit creation than it did earlier.
Nor should the February and March increase in
intermediate- and long-term interest rates be interpreted
as justifying, much less dictating, either a less easy
open market policy or a higher discount rate. True,
some of the expectations for better business and increased
credit demands that gave rise to the interest rate rise
may come true, but it would seem to be much more
appropriate for monetary policy to wait for market
validation of such expectations than to attempt to
validate them through either open market or discount
rate action. Such a course of policy would not only
seem to make more economic sense, but it could also be
justified more convincingly to our many watchful
observers both inside and outside of Washington.
Mr. Furth presented a statement on the balance of payments
as follows:
The "flash" report for March indicates a payments
surplus for the month of $380 million, after deducting
German and Mexican advance payments estimated at $90
million. The surplus for the first quarter (after
deducting "special" receipts) was about $225 million
before, and perhaps $50 million after, seasonal
adjustment. This would be the first quarterly surplus
since the fall of 1957, and it would make the cumulative
deficits for the past two, three, four, and five quarters
the smallest since 1958. The tentative data for the first
week of April, adjusted for seasonal movements of volatile
funds, suggest maintenance of the first-quarter position.
This favorable result was apparently due to four
factors: a high level of exports, attributed mainly to
continued full employment in most foreign industrial
countries and some improvement in the payments position
of some less developed countries; a moderate level of
imports, attributed largely to the continued sluggish
rise in U. S. industrial production; near-balance in the
flows of portfolio capital, attributed mainly to the
effects of the proposed interest equalization tax, and
probably also in flows of recorded and unrecorded

4/14/64 -16-
short-term funds; and a decline in net Government
expenditures abroad, attributed in part to some
nonrecurrent repayments. The result was achieved in
the face of one unfavorable factor, however: a near
record volume of bank lending to foreigners, which in
January-February reached an annual rate in excess of
$2 billion.
The high level of long-term bank loans to foreigners
may be related in part to the cessation of foreign bond
issues. But contrary to an opinion reportedly
prevalent in the market, the short-term loans are
overwhelmingly being made to the usual customers of U. S.
banks, mainly Japan, and their size seems to be
connected with the large volume of wocld exports.
Most observers believe that the rest of the year
will see a higher deficit rate. In fact, statisticians
of the Commerce Department believe that the second half
of the year will again produce a deficit at an annual
rate of nearly $2-1/2 billion. They assume that exports
will not rise further but that imports will increase by
more than $2 billion annual rate, or about one-eighth,
reflecting both rising demand connected with the
expected domestic expansion following the tax cut and
the recent increase in nonferrous metal and coffee
prices. They also assume that Government expenditures
for economic aid will increase again to last year's
high level; and that both portfolio investment funds
and unrecorded funds will again flow out. But they also
believe that this deterioration on Government, portfolio,
and short-term funds accounts would be approximately
offset by a reduction in the increase in bank lending to
foreigners. On balance, therefore, they foresee an
over-all deterioration in the U. S. payments position
about equal to the rise in U. S. imports.
Some of these assumptions appear doubtful. For
instance, I should believe that the Administration would
be able to keep the net outflow of aid funds from
rising--even if it does not succeed in achieving a
further reduction. And I should also believe that the
expected rise in U. S. economic activity would not only
raise imports but also reduce the net outflow of direct
investments; and that the favorable payments results of
the first quarter would have a significant confidence
effect, leading to a further reflux rather than to a
renewed outflow of unrecorded U. S. funds.

4/14/64 -17-
Under these assumptions, we might expect that the
over-all U. S. payments balance would indeed deteriorate
somewhat, but hardly by more than $1 billion annual
rate; and we might be so bold as to forecast a total
payments deficit for 1964 of less than $1 billion, as
compared with the Commerce figure of more than $2 billion.
If foreign private dollar holdings were to rise in
1964 as much as in 1963, a deficit of not more than $1
billion could be entirely financed by that rise, and
the "official settlements" balance would then be in
equilibrium. While such an expectation would be too
optimistic, it might be reasonable to assume some rise
in official dollar holdings of less developed countries,
which are likely to gain reserves, at least temporarily,
because of the expected improvement in their terms of
trade. If this were to happen, U. S. gold holdings could
remain intact, and industrial countries with a large
dollar component in their reserves would not be forced
to acquire unwanted further official dollar assets. In
other words, even with a conventionally calculated
deficit in the neighborhooc of $1 billion, the inter
national payments mechanism could remain undisturbed,
and confidence in the stability of the system, and in
that of its basic currency, the dollar, could continue
to increase.
This appraisal seems consistent with the recent
behavior of international reserves. U. S. gold reserves
have shown a recovery even more remarkable than the
improvement in the U. S. payments balance, thanks in
part to the large volume of Soviet sales; U. S. gold
holdings are again about as large as they were last
July. And more important from an economic though not
from a psychological point of view, the "chronic"
surplus countries, France, Germany, and Switzerland,
aparently have, at least temporarily, experienced a
significant decline in the rate of their reserve
accumulation since the Italian stabilization in mid
March. In contrast, the countries that had currency
troubles earlier this year, Britain and Italy, seem to
have been adding modest amounts to their reserves.
To sum up: it would be unwarranted to believe
that our payments troubles are over--the situation
still is far too unsettled. But it would be equally
unwarrarted at this time to consider all of the recent
progress as temporary, analogous to the seeming
improvements in early 1961 (when U. S. imports were

4/14/64 -18-
at unsustainably low levels on account of the recession)
or in early 1962 (when the inflow of funds from Canada
disguised a continued large basic deficit). We can't
predict that the rest of the year will remain good, but
neither can we predict that it wll turn bad.
Following discussion based on the staff presentations,
principally for the purpose of obtaining clarification and
amplification of some of the material contained therein, Chairman
Martin called for the usual go-around of comments and views on
economic conditions and monetary policy beginning with Mr. Treiber.
who presented the following statement:
As the reports so far this morning have
indicated, the business situation is essentially the
same as it was at the time of the last meeting of the
Committee. The advance in business activity continues
at a moderate pace. Business sentiment continues
optimistic. Conceivably the present boyancy could
become tempered by the current and prospective cuts in
defense spending after several years of increases; but
the cutbacks in procurement are likely to have more
effect, a: least initially, on specific communities and
regions than on the nation as a whole.
The over-all unemployment rate in March remained
unchanged at 5.4 per cent. The unemployment rate for
married men edged downward for the fourth month in a
row and returned to its recent low of 2.9 per cent. On
the other hand, there was a rise in unemployment among
teen-agers.
Desp.te the flurry of announced price increases
for individual commodities, the broad price indices have
continued to show stability. Purchasing agents apparently
expect that the recent firming of prices will continue
but that the increases will be held within bounds. The
fairly widespread increases in raw industrial commodity
prices can be traced, in part, to strong demand in
foreign industrialized countries; as yet such increases
have not significantly affected our general price
indices. The major tests lie ahead. These include (a)
labor negotiations in key sectors and their effects on

4/14/64 -19-
costs; (b) price policies of business concerns as various
industries approach capacity production; and (c) the
cumulative impact of the tax cut on consumer demand.
Ma:ch witnessed an unusually strong expansion of
bank credit, even if the adjustment for seasonal
influences may be too high. Bank loans rose sharply.
There were large demands for funds by securities brokers
and dealers and by finance companies. The demands of
both were related, in part, to the withdrawal of
corporate funds (associated with the March 15 tax date)
from repurchase agreements, on the one hand, and finance
company paper, on the other. Business loan demand was
on the weak side. The fact that corporations in the
aggregate did not have to turn, to any considerable
extent, to banks to cover their cash needs for the tax
dates is indicative of their large liquidity reserves.
The seasonally adjusted money supply showed only a
modest increase in March. The slow rise, despite the
sharp advances in bank credit, is largely attributable
to the large increase in U. S. Government deposits. Time
deposits also continued their rise, although at a slower
rate than in the preceding 12 months.
The preliminary balance of payments figures for the
first quarter of 1964 are very encouraging. We should
not, however, let this favorable development make us
over-confident, since the improvement may well turn out
to be only temporary. Future quarters might well see a
decline in the trade surplus and prospective new foreign
security issues are already larger than the actual
figure for the first quarter.
Sparked by a heavy but probably temporary demand in
recent weeks, Treasury bill rates have moved somewhat
lower and into a wider range. The market rate on three
month Treasury bills has been below the discount rate
for the first time since early December. The Treasury
has indicated that it will probably add moderately to
the supply of bills by increasing the weekly Treasury
bill offerings during the remainder of the year. As the
current special demand factors recede and the supply of
bills rises, there is reason to believe that Treasury
bill rates will rise again. While it is good to see
greater flexibility in Treasury bill rates, a continu
ation of such rates below the discount rate could lead
to misinterpretation, especially abroad, of monetary
policy. International capital movements are influenced
greatly by the confidence and attitudes of foreigners.

4/14/64 -20-
It would be unfortunate if foreigners were to come to
feel that we are not fully committed to the defense of
the dollar in the light of the continuing balance of
payments problem and the rising trend of interest rates
in leading foreign countries.
Our recent balance of payments experience does not
call for movement at this time toward less ease. Yet
we must bear in mind that restrictive credit action
abroad, including interest rate increases, could make
necessary defensive action here at some future time.
On the domestic front, the business advance is
continuing at a moderate pace, with few concrete signs
of immediate inflationary dangers. The domestic
situation calls for continuing alertness to developments,
but not for immediate action toward less ease. Clearly,
neither the international nor the domestic situation
calls for more ease.
Thus, it seems to me, it is desirable to continue
our current monetary policy and to aim at a firm money
market, with the Federal funds rate fairly consistently
at 3-1/2 per cent, and with free reserves generally in
the $50 million to $150 million (or a slightly wider)
range. While flexibility in Treasury bill rates is
desirable and there should be no harm in having, from
time to time, rates on three-month Treasury bills below
the discount rate, I would trust that the rates would
also be above the discount rate in the 3.50-3.60 range
a good part of the time.
Mr. Treiber felt that the Secretariat's memorandum of April
8, 1964. rega-ding the form and content of the current economic
policy directive had done a good job of setting out the major
issues and difficulties involved in formulating such a directive.
In particular, there was clear recognition of the difficulty of
simultaneously specifying long-term goals and workable short-term
targets in a way that was informative to the public after the event
without being too inflexible for the Accourt Management in its
day-to-day operations. He concurred in the conclusion that, at

4/14/64 -21
least for the time being, the Account Manager should be instructed
in terms of "money market variables" rather than in terms of inter
mediate or longer range objectives relating to bank reserves, bank
credit, and the money supply. Important as these latter quantities
were, they were not really workable as short-term targets. Rather,
they must be observed and studied as guides or reference points for
modification of the objectives set forth in terms of money market
conditions.
In issuing an instruction in terms of money market conditions,
Mr. Treiber said, it would seem to him unwise to use quantitative
targets, whether expressed as levels or ranges. The basic difficulty
was that policy must be executed in a dynamic market environment,
the elements of which were unpredictable and in the short run often
uncontrollable. There was thus no assurance that the Manager could
always hit the targets specified by the Committee. Furthermore,
given the unpredictable combinations in which money market variables
may occur, there was no assurance that it would always be desirable
for the Manager to attempt to hit the targets specified by the
Committee.
It would seem preferable to defer to the unpredictable,
uncontrollable nature of many of the short-term variables with
which the Desk dealt, Mr. Treiber continued, and to cast the
second paragraph of the current policy directive in language

4/14/64 -22
sufficiently broad to give the Manager flexibility to adapt
operations to changing circumstances in accordance with his
judgment of the Committee's intent.
As a practical matter, Mr. Treiber could foresee great
difficulty for the Committee in getting together on a particular
range of free reserves or Treasury bill rates or both. It was
hard enough to agree on such words as "slight" or "moderate".
Mr. Treiber then turned to the alternative drafts of
possible current economic policy directives that had been distri
buted by the Secretary for the Committee's consideration under date
of April 13, 1964.1/
For the first paragraph of the directive, he preferred
alternative A which seemed to him to be a more straightforward
statement of .he Committee's policy position than alternative B,
but he presented certain specific language suggestions. Also, he
questioned the reference to the "slower growth of aggregate bank
reserves and the money supply." As for the second paragraph, Mr.
Treiber preferred alternative B for the reasons he had mentioned
previously. He questioned, however, the inclusion of the second
1/ These alternative drafts of paragraphs cne and two of the
directive had been developed by the Secretariat in the light of the
staff memorandum with regard to the problems presented by the form
of the directive, distributed under date of April 8, 1964. Copies
of the alternative drafts of suggested directives are appended to
these minutes as Attachment A.

4/14/64 -23
sentence. If the first paragraph stated that it was the
Committee's current policy to accommodate moderate growth in the
reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply, the second sentence
of alternative B for the second paragraph would seem redundant; at
the same time it would seem incomplete because of failure to refer
to the other factors mentioned in the first paragraph.
Mr. Shuford said that in recent months economic activity
in the Eighth District had continued to expand. Employment in the
District's major labor markets had risen significantly, with the
largest gains in the construction field. Total bank deposits rose
at about an 8 per cent annual rate from December to March. On the
other hand, industrial use of electric power and business loans of
reporting banks were about unchanged.
As indicated by the reports this morning, Mr. Shuford con
tinued, national economic conditions continued to be quite favorable.
Activity had been at a high level without creating thus far any
obvious imbalances in production, employment, and incomes. The
economy was operating in a framework of relative price stability,
and the U. S. payments balance had continued to improve.
As to policy, Mr. Shuford said his position was quite
similar to that outlined by Mr. Treiber as far as the immediate
posture was concerned. Certainly he would not want to see any more
ease, and he had an underlying inclination toward less ease. At

4/14/64 -24
the same time he would not favor any overt tightening as of today.
The recent decline in interest rates appeared to have resulted from
a temporary falling off in the demand for funds relative to the
supply. Thus, it seemed to him that the rate fluctuation had been
appropriate. However, he would not want to see rates decline
further and, as Mr. Treiber had indicated, it appeared that they
probably would not remain at the lower levels for any appreciable
time. His preference would be for a bill rate between 3.50 and
3.60 per cent. With respect to the money supply, he would favor a
continuation of the rate of increase that had prevailed during the
past quarter, or possibly a little less; he was inclined to believe,
on the basis of the seasonal pattern that had prevailed since 1960,
that the money supply perhaps had increased at somewhat more than
the indicated 2.7 or 3.0 per cent rate, but a continued rate of
increase of about this order would, it seemed to him, be appropriate
for the time being.
With respect to the form of the directive, Mr. Shuford said
he was glad to receive the document sent out by the Secretariat bu:
had not had time to study it adequately. Neither had he had time
to relate fully the points discussed in the document to the
alternative draft directives. The present directive would seem
quite satisfactory for the moment, and he would be willing to renew
it for the time being, eliminating the reference to Treasury

4/14/64 -25
financing. However, he would be willing to accept alternative
draft A for the first paragraph. While he would have selected
alternative A for the second paragraph, he would not object to
the broader alternative B for that paragrap, if the majority
sentiment was in that direction.
Mr. Bopp reported that although the pace of economic
activity in the Third District had not accelerated greatly, there
had been discernible improvement. Nonresidential construction
awards had spurted ahead. Unemployment was declining slowly but
rather steadily; in each recent month a majority of the District's
labor markets had reported decreases. Store sales, however,
showed no exceptional advances. The Reserve Bank's capital spend
ing survey showed substantial upward revisions of the estimates
for 1964 that were reported last fall,
Basic reserve positions of reserve city banks registered a
deficit averaging around $40 million for the three weeks ended
April 1. This represented the tightest three-week period so far
this year. The deficit was financed almost entirely through the
Federal funds market. Borrowing at the discount window by both
reserve city and country banks continued to be relatively light.
As for policy, Mr. Bopp felt that this was a strategic
period in which it would be important not to give misleading
signals. Economic analysts were groping for clues as to the

4/14/64 -26
effects of the tax cut, and they would continue to do so in the
period ahead. Despite some improvement recently, the Government
securities market seemed poised for a general increase in interest
rates.
Perhaps the tax cut would prove to be the very strong
stimulus that many expected, Mr. Bopp said, and perhaps a vigorous
upswing in activity would bring on higher interest rates. It was
by no means certain right now that this would happen, however. In
the present situation, the System should do nothing either to
confirm or deny the validity of current expectations. Until there
was more conclusive evidence of their validity, policy should aim
for about the same conditions of reserve availability and about the
same levels of interest rates as had prevailed recently. He would
make no change in the discount rate.
The directive should be written in terms of money market
conditions, Mr. Bopp believed. Of the draft alternatives that had
been distributed for consideration at this meeting, he would prefer
alternative B for both paragraphs.
Mr. Hickman observed that business continued to move ahead.
The Cleveland Bank's directors and other businessmen with whom he
and his associates were in contact were increasingly optimistic
about the outlook. Further evidence to this effect was provided by
reports from 21 Fourth District business economists who met at the
Reserve Bank early this month. Almost without exception, they

4/14/64 -27
emphasized current high rates of activity, the forward movement of
the individual industries they represented, and the generally
favorable outlook. On the industrial production index, the median
forecast of the group was for a two-point increase for the second
quarter and a one-point increase for each of the third and fourth
quarters. Only two of the entire group predicted any decline this
year.
Representatives of the automobile ..ndustry and its suppliers
expected domestic production and sales of cars in the neighborhood
of 7.6 to 7.8 million in 1964, barring a strike. If a strike should
occur, there would be a serious shortage o. cars, which probably
could not be made up this year. There was general agreement in the
group that labor demands would be heavy and negotiations tough.
Representatives of the steel industry felt that inventories
were in reasonable balance with orders and shipments, and that the
outlook for steel was good. Their forecasts of ingot tons were
similar to the one he had reported at the preceding meeting of this
Committee, namely, 60 million ingot tons fcr the first half and
about 55 million tons for the second half, for a total of 115 million
tons for the year. The decline in steel output during the second
half would probably be seasonal; it was not expected to have any
material effect on the Board's index of industrial production.

4/14/64 -28
Among representatives of the machinery industries, there
was general agreement that the impact of the projected rise in
capital expenditures was already being felt in new orders for
machinery. At the Cleveland Bank's Board meeting on Thursday, one
of the directors, who heads a major machine tool firm, indicated
that new orders were beginning to reflect increased emphasis on
plant expansion. He also pointed out that although shipments had
expanded considerably, the pace of new orders had caused the back
log to build up and delivery dates to be stretched out.
Also present at the economists' meeting were representatives
of the rubber, nonferrous metals, glass, paper, utilities, railroad,
and petroleum industries. Almost without .xception, they expressed
satisfaction with the present state of demand and the business
outlook. While there was evidence of price firming in a number of
lines, particularly in nonferrous metals and chemicals, the group
seemed to feel that most increases represented partial recovery
from previous softness, and were not as yet inflationary.
So far as open market operations were concerned, Mr. Hickman
thought that the tone of the market had been too easy in the past
three weeks, and that the level of free reserves had been consist
ently above what he considered to be the System's objectives.
Although part of this was due to misses in reserve projections, he
could not escape the feeling that errors were permitted to fall

4/14/64 -29
predominantly on the side of ease. Earlier this year the
Committee appeared to be operating with a free reserve target of
$100 million, plus or minus $50 million (or at least the statistics
were consistent with that assumption). Now the Desk appeared to
have shifted into a position where small d:..fferences below $100
million were resisted vigorously, while on the other side free
reserves had been allowed to drift as high as $240 million. This
implied to Mr. Hickman a shift in the target from about $100 million
to somewhere around $150 million. In view of current business
optimism, the burgeoning reserves of the banking system, and the
ever present threat of adverse capital flows to other countries,
he thought that this easing was inconsistent with the best interests
of the U. S. economy.
So far as techniques of open market operations were
concerned, Mr. Hickman continued to feel that the Account should
operate mainly in short-term securities, with occasional ventures
into the long-term area when it could be done without altering the
yield curve or generating suspicions that the System was influencing
the market for the purpose of aiding Treasury financing. The
purchase of coupon issues for System account last week reinforced
an upward drift in bond prices that had begun earlier. This was
done at a time when dealers had a substantial short position in
long bonds. Observers were led to believe that the System was

4/14/64 -30
preparing the market for the next Treasury refunding operation.
Evidence of this, Mr. Hickman said, was provided by the following
comment that appeared in a leading New York newspaper: "Because
the advance was caused primarily by Federal Reserve buying, several
dealers described the Treasury market as 'artificially strong.'
One noted that, if prices remained at improved levels, the Govern
ment would have a more attractive market in which to offer new
securities. . .in two or three weeks."
In summary, Mr. Hickman thought that the Committee should
shoot for a free reserve target of $100 million, with minor, but
equally likely, variations on either side of the target. In
addition, he thought the Desk should restrict its operations to
the short-term end of the market whenever the time was sufficiently
close to a major Treasury financing to raise doubts as to System
intentions. In his opinion, monetary policy in the past three
weeks had accommodated more than a "moderate growth" in the
reserve base and had failed to maintain "conditions in the money
market that would contribute to continued improvement in the
capital account of the U. S. balance of payments." It also, in
his opinion, did not give adequate weight to the possible effects
of the tax cut and to the effects of recent increases in money rates
abroad on international capital flows. In short, he considered
that monetary policy since the last Committee meeting had been

4/14/64 -31
inconsistent with the directive; that either the directive should
be changed or open market operations should be revised to provide
for less ease.
Mr. Hickman said he thought the staff memorandum on the
directive was excellent. He also liked the efforts that had been
made on the drafting of a current economic policy directive for
this meeting. He would choose alternative A for the first paragraph
and B for the second, but with certain revisions. In the first
paragraph, he would delete the word "progressive" before "stimulus,"
since he was not sure that the tax cut would have a progressively
stimulative effect. He also felt that the Committee should look
at more current data than changes over the first quarter of the
year in formulating monetary policy for the next three weeks; in
particular, he was concerned about the gearing of near-term policy
to a slower growth of aggregate bank reserves in the first quarter
when, in fact, bank reserves had increased sharply during the past
few weeks. He also thought the money supply reference should be
deleted. In alternative B for the second paragraph he would delete
the sentence having to do with aggregate measures because he did
not believe they were within the control of the Desk over periods
as short as three weeks. Also, as he had indicated previously, he
felt that conditions in the money market since the last meeting
reflected excessive ease.

4/14/64 -32-
Mr. Daane said he would recommend "no change' in policy
at this time, for the reasons given by Mr. Treiber and others.
With reference to the posture of the System as reflected in the
operations of the Desk, he felt that the Account Management had
succeeded in being helpful in a difficult period, and that the
Desk's operations clearly reflected the consensus of the Committee
at the March 24 meeting. He would hope that this consensus
continued. He shared the opinion that the balance of payments
situation should still be viewed with some degree of caution; the
first-quarter figures seemed almost too gocd to be true. They
gave the Commiittee some opportunity, perhaps, to reassure the
market again that the System was not sitting right on the verge of
a pouncing operation and did not call for any change in policy on
either side of the fence.
As to the directive, Mr. Daane said that he, too, was
impressed with the staff memorandum, but he had not had an
opportunity to study it fully. On the specific directive for this
meeting he doubted, like Mr. Shuford, that a great deal would be
gained by changing the directive. If it were to be changed, he
would go along with alternative A for the first paragraph, with
the changes suggested, and with alternative B for the second
paragraph, subscribing fully to Mr. Treibel's comment that it was
unwise to try to pinpoint targets in view of the difficulties that
enter into the Manager's operations.

4/14/64 -33-
Mr. Mitchell said that he agreed substantially with what
Mr. Bopp had said about appropriate Committee policy. On the
question whether the Desk's operations in the past three weeks had
departed from the Committee's objectives, he thought they had not.
He agreed with Mr. Daane that the developments that had occurred
were needed to correct erroneous impressions that had been growing
earlier. A situation had been achieved that gave the Committee a
much better posture from which to move.
On the directive, Mr. Mitchell liked alternative B for the
first paragraph, except for the sentence having to do with interest
rate advances abroad and their possibly adverse effects on the
capital account of the payments balance. This sentence seemed to
him to be included in the draft directive without sufficient back
ground of fact. Also, he did not think the draft directive reflected
the full extent of the balance of payments improvement that was
taking place. But he would like alternative B with that deletion,
and he liked alternative A for the second paragraph. He thought
the Comnittee must take a more responsible position in the
directions that it gave to the Manager. The Manager did hear the
discussions, and he knew what the Committee was thinking about,
but if the impression should grow, because of the wording of the
directive, that the Manager dictated policy, a real public relations
problem would be irvolved. Actually, in many cases the Manager was,

4/14/64 -34
in effect, told by the Committee to start conditioning the market
for a policy change, but this did not show in the directive. He
did not believe it was the best course for the Committee to seem
to be giving the Manager too much leeway. Moreover, it was the
Committee's responsibility to give the Manager an unequivocal
directive that was internally consistent. This particular draft
at least recognized the possibility of giving the Manager definite,
consistent instructions.
Mr. Shepardson commented that. the apparent improvement in
the balance of payments naturally was encouraging. Of course, as
others had indicated, the improvement might not be too solid. He
felt quite sure that the recent gain in exports of agricultural
commodities would not be repeated continually. Further, there was
quite an outflow of funds through bank loans, which was indicative
of excessive funds seeking a profitable outlet. In short, he was
not quite as optimistic about the balance of payments as some others
appeared to be.
Domestically, Mr. Shepardson said, everyone recognized that
there had not been much indication thus far as to the effects of
the tax cut. On the other hand, there were indications of some
price movements in commodities. As far as consumer prices were
concerned, there had been a continuing upward crawl. Some segments
of production were approaching capacity; generally speaking, the

4/14/64 -35
margin of excess capacity had been reduced significantly. Thus,
it seemed to him the economy was close to a point where there could
be significant price pressures. The difficulty the Committee faced
was the timing and the extent of price movements. There had been
admonitions on the side of waiting until everything was on the board
for one to see. In his opinion, however, that would be too late;
the damage would have been done. Drastic efforts would then have
to be made to curb the excesses or they would get out of hand. He
knew there was Governmental talk of keeping wage and price advances
within bounds, but he questioned just howm uch pressure actually
would be exerted if increases began to manifest themselves.
It seemed to Mr. Shepardson there already were enough
upward pressures on prices or threat of such pressures that it
would be appropriate for the Committee to make some move toward
less ease at this time; certainly not a drastic move, but one that
would put it in a better position--a more flexible position--to
meet such developments as might occur in the next few months and
to control the situation that he felt lay ahead. If such develop
ments did not occur, the Committee would not be in a position from
which it could not back off. In summary, he would favor moving
toward somewhat less ease than had prevailed with a view to
restraining some of the excesses that he thought were developing
already.

4/14/64 -36
As to the directive alternatives, Mr. Shepardson said he
had no comment pending further study.
Mr. Mills said that although he was encouraged by the
Committee's efforts to develop an improved form of directive, he
deplored the fact that it engaged so much in a battle of words
about form rather than substance. The difficulty would be sur
mounted, in his opinion, if the Committee would fasten its
directive to the statutory instructions under which open market
operations must be administered. The problems of the directive
were susceptible of solution through adherence to such instructions,
by virtue of which appropriate monetary and credit policies would
be adopted. In amplification of this view, Mr. Mills presented
the following statement:
Subsection 3 of section 12(a) of the Federal Reserve
Act prescribes that the time, character, and volume of
all purchases and sales of U. S. Government and other
securities eligible for engagement by the Federal Open
Market Committee shall be governed with a view to
accommodating commerce and business and with regard to
their bearing upon the general credit situation of the
country. Although some latitude in interpreting the
statute is permissible, the conduct of open market
operations for many months past has tended to overstep
the statutory directive under which it functions. That
fact is revealed in the second paragraph of the current
economic policy directive issued to the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York in which it is set out that,
". . .System open market operations shall be
conducted with a view to maintaining about
the same conditions in the money market as
have prevailed in recent weeks, while
accommodating moderate expansion in aggregate
bank reserves."

4/14/64 -37-
In effect, the directive is primarily an in:erest
rate directive, with the accommodation of commerce and
business relegated to a secondary position. That is
clearly so inasmuch as the maintenance of about the
same conditions in the money market implies that
policy actions should be designed to preserve the
existing interest rate structure, with the accommoda
tion of expansion in aggregate bank reserves to be
permitted only if accomplished without: unsettling the
level of interest rates. In effect, a literal
interpretation of the present directive sacrifices the
propriety of fostering a reasonable expansion in bank
credit to an interest rate objective. But conceding
that the level of interest rates has a bearing upon
the general credit situation of the country, open
market policies directed at encouraging or discouraging
the expansion of commercial bank credit can naturally
produce an interest rate structure capable of
influencing national credit conditions in the
constructive direction intended by open market policy
actions without having given precedence to a strictly
interest rate policy objective. Viewed in this way,
the Committee should revamp its reasoning and henceforth
give first place to credit rather than interest rate
considerations when issuing instructions to the Manager
of the System Open Market Account. A change such as
this in the Committee's policy instructions would comply
with the statutory directive governing its activities
and would also have the ultimately beneficial result of
freeing the U. S. Government securities market from
artificial manipulations and the domination of official
control, all to the end that the financial markets
world again respond freely to natural factors.
The tangible difficulty of attempting to artificially
control the U. S. Government securities market clearly is
revealed in the Tax and Loan Account privileges accorded
by the Treasury in its recent offerings of 3-7/8 per cent
notes and one-year Treasury bills, and which involved the
necessity of supplying additional reserves in support of
commercial bank acquisitions of these securities. This
provision of reserves is somewhat in contradiction to the
theory of maintaining existing conditions in the money
market, at least if the reserves so injected are permitted
to remain at the disposal of the commercial banks follow
ing securities divestments subsequent to their original
underwriting transactions. The reserves supplied to assist

4/14/64 -38
the Treasury's financing operation can, of course, be
withdrawn at a later date in order to maintain condi
tions in the money market in their original posture.
However, the over-all effect of first supplying and
then withdrawing reserves for purposes unrelated to
general credit conditions in the economy would further
confirm the investor community in its belief that the
Federal authorities were unalterably won over to a
policy of artificially controlling the U. S. Government
securities market through an interest rate pegging
program.
As to the Committee's current position, Mr. Mills said the
statistical record of the past three weeks on the supply of reserves
and interest rate movements, and the market reactions thereto,
reflected what he regarded as evidence of a monetary and credit
policy consistent with current economic conditions. He would hope
for a relative continuance of similar financial factors during the
time until the next meeting of the Committee. He had no comment
on the draft directives; as he had indicated, he thought they were
off on the wrong foot.
Mr. Wayne reported that further gains continued to
characterize Fifth District business activity. The broad statistical
indicators were all at or near record levels. Bank debits for March
showed quite a sharp rise. Insured unemployment had continued to
decline more than seasonally, optimism remained high among the
Reserve Bank's business contacts, and durable goods manufacturers
responding to the Bank's recent survey reported increases in new
orders, shipments, employment, and average weekly hours.

4/14/64 -39
Uncertainties, however, continued to mark some sectors of
nondurables that were especially important to the Fifth District.
Federal cigarette tax collections in March were 9 per cent lower
than a year ago despite a 10 per cent rise from February, but
most cigarette plants were again operating full time, with a few
on overtime.
The one-price cotton bill, now enacted into law, came up
for discussion at the joint directors' meeting held last week at
the Charlotte Branch. Several directors speaking from first-hand
knowledge said that the uncertainties of recent weeks had com
pletely disrupted some sectors of the market for cotton goods,
even to the point of causing temporary shutdowns of finishing
operations, and that these uncertainties, now stemming from the
discretionary powers of the Department of Agriculture as well as
from the unpredictable behavior of buyers and sellers, were still
a long way from being resolved.
The District's already disappointirg agricultural prospects
suffered another blow when freezing weather extensively damaged
fruit and vegetable crops, particularly in the Carolinas.
As Mr. Wayne interpreted the national situation, it was
fully as good and perhaps even stronger than the Fifth District
picture. Evidence of increasing strength in capital outlays
continued to mount. The profit picture remained good, cash flow

4/14/64 -40
was running at record levels, the various capital spending surveys
were quite encouraging, machine tool orders were setting a furious
pace, and manufacturers' inventories remained at a low level in
relation to sales. Construction activity was at a record level,
with a large backlog of contract awards. Both the level of con
struction activity and the big upsurge in capital outlays were
almost, if net entirely, unprecedented at this stage of the cycle.
Employment continued to rise, and the country might now be making
some dent in the ranks of the unemployed. Most other indicators
were also on the plus side. The disappointing pace of retail sales
following the tax cut did pose some questions, but even that might
be a statist:cal quirk.
Mr. Wayne concluded that these signs added up simply to
strength and not to inflaticn. Wholesale prices still showed no
upward pressure at all. There had been scattered price rises but
also some reductions, as in the case of au:omobile tires and
stainless steel. Even the prices of sensitive industrial material,
frequently a good leading indicator, had shown a scant 0.5 per cent
rise since December--quite a small movement for this index.
Further evidence of a stable price situation was provided by the
recent conclusion of the National Association of Purchasing Agents
that "Business is good and volume is high, but capacity is ample
and a buyers' market prevails." Upward price pressures might

4/14/64 -41
develop at any time, especially if there were significant wage
increases following the bargaining rounds this summer, but this
possibility should not be a factor in Committee policy at the mo
ment. In view of the present price situation and the improving
balance of payments situation, he saw no reason for changing the
posture of Committee policy from what had prevailed for the past
several weeks.
With regard to the directive, Mr. Wayne concurred with the
views of Mr. Treiber as to the measures it would be appropriate to
employ in giving instructions to the Account Manager. He considered
the memorandum prepared by the staff timely and well done. As to
the draft directives suggested for consideration at this meeting,
he would prefer alternative A for the first paragraph and alternative
B for the second paragraph. He would not change the discount rate
at this time.
Mr. Clay observed that economic activity appeared to
continue in the same general pattern that had prevailed throughout
much of this business upswing. The trend was moderately upward,
most resources, were in ample supply, and the over-all price
situation was essentially stable.
The appropriate monetary policy, Mr. Clay suggested, had to
be found in the record of economic developments and not in the
knowledge that income taxes had been cut. Considering what was

4/14/64 -42-
known about the economy, monetary policy should continue in a
manner that ccnformed to the Committee's objectives in recent
months. This was basically a policy of credit expansion with a
view to facilitating employment and economic growth. More
specifically, it should be the Committee's aim to provide reserve
availability so that commercial bank credit could show a moderate
rate of growth on a seasonally adjusted basis. Money market
conditions of recent weeks presumably would be consistent with
such a goal, and the international payments situation should
permit a continuation of the greater degree of flexibility in
short-term interest rates that had prevailed recently.
Some change would need to be made in the first paragraph
of the current economic policy directive, Mr. Clay said, at least
to delete the reference to Treasury financing. If a new wording
was adopted, alternative B of the staff drafts for both the first
and second paragraphs appeared satisfactory. There was some
attraction to the idea of more definite guidelines, as provided in
alternative A of the second paragraph, and it was probable that
this alternative would be usable for the three-week period ahead.
However, when he considered the concern in past years over the
market's strong reliance on free reserve figures as an indicator
of the Committee's monetary policy, he would be reluctant to see
any steps taken to establish a public record of a free reserve

4/14/64 -43
guideline for instructions to the Manager, quite apart from the
more basic question of the use of free reserves as a yardstick.
The discount rate should remain unchanged.
Mr. Scanlon reported that economic prospects in the Seventh
District continued to be favorable except for the possibility of
a serious disruption if the railroad negotiations should not be
successful. Representatives of large business enterprises in the
Midwest continued to report that current crders and shipments were
exceeding earlier projections that had been considered optimistic
at the time they were made. There had beer, some further tendency
for order backlogs for manufactured goods to rise and for delivery
lead-times to lengthen. But these developments had not been
accompanied by any substantial increase in upward price pressures.
At the beginning of April inventories of domestically
produced autos were equal to 46 days of sales at the March rate,
compared with a 40-day supply a year earlier. Because of the
possibility of a strike on August 31, production was somewhat
higher than would be the case otherwise. Used car prices remained
steady, and stocks were at a "comfortable" level. Shutdowns for
model changeover would take place in July, a week or so earlier
than last year. Changes in 1965 cars were to be much more extensive
than in the 1964 models.

4/14/64 -44
Higher borrowings by finance companies and recent strength
in "other" loans probably reflected continued expansion of consumer
credit, Mr. Scanlon said. Increases in business and consumer loans
had been accompanied by liquidation of U. S. Government securities
and a slowdown in acquisitions of mortgages and municipals.
Effective rates on new conventional residential mortgages in the
Chicago metropolitan area had continued "soft," averaging 5.76 per
cent in the first quarter compared with 5.82 per cent in the fourth
quarter of 1963. The March interest rate survey of business loans
showed no general change in the average rate charged. In the
smallest loan category, however, there was a sharp increase in the
proportion of loans made at rates over 6 per cent.
The large Chicago banks had reduced their borrowings now that
the pressures connected with the April 1 personal property tax date
had abated. Government securities held by these banks had declined
sharply, mainly because of a $500 million reduction in holdings of
bills. Bill portfolios now totaled only $350 million. Two large
banks reported sales of 6 to 9-month CDs at 4 per cent during the
past three weeks.
Mr. Scanlon said it seemed to him that the current situation
called for no change in monetary policy at this time. On the
directive, he thought the Secretariat was moving in the right
direction in trying to formulate a directive stated in quantitative

4/14/64 -45
terms, if this could be done without endangering the effectiveness
of the Manager's operations. He had been intending to say that
there were good ideas in Mr. Young's April 8 memorandum, but as the
discussion moved around the table he was not sure how a group the
size of the Committee could ever select from the number of alterna
tives included in the memorandum. Whenever the Committee departed
from broad, general instructions, it had to assign priorities to
various considerations, and this was the area where it had been
difficult to come to agreement in the past.
With respect to the alternate drafts suggested for
consideration today, Mr. Scanlon noted that. alternative A for the
second paragraph made it clear that the free reserve figure would
take precedence over short-term interest rates. He did not know
whether the Committee was ready to face up to making this decision.
The Committee seemed to be able to agree only on directives stated
in broad general terms that did not weigh cne objective against the
other and simply indicated that the Committee was taking all factors
into account. While he thought that the Ccmmittee most likely
should continue to work on the form of the directive and try to get
something a little more specific, he would settle today for
alternative B of both paragraphs if he had to choose between the
alternatives, and he would be willing to delete the second sentence
of the second paragraph.

4/14/64 -46
Mr. Deming reported that most indicators of commerce and
production for the Ninth District were up and looked fairly strong.
There was strength in construction activity and prospects. Income
figures for the District were not as favorable relative to a year
ago as for the country as a whole, reflecting essentially the
decline in livestock prices. Otherwise, the farm situation looked
reasonably good. It appeared as though the income from wheat this
year, assuming normal yields, would be abott the same as in 1963
now that the new legislation had passed.
Mr. Deming noted that the Minneapolis Reserve Bank surveyed
from time to time some of the large District manufacturing concerns,
located principally in the Twin Cities, that do a national and
international business, asking them about prospects in the quarters
ahead for prices, employment, etc. The most recent reports
indicated a rather general further increase in activity. Two of the
respondents were thinking of increasing prices modestly. One firm
reported that it had in fact increased prices modestly, but had not
been able to make the higher prices stick.
Loan demand at city banks in the District showed
significantly less strength than last year. Demand seemed to have
picked up somewhat in the past couple of weeks, but not sifnificantly.
Country banks remained about on track with typical behavior, with
loan demand little weaker than last year. Loan-deposit ratios did

4/14/64 -47
not show anything significant; city bank ratios were well below
their peaks, while country bank ratios had crawled up a little.
With respect to policy, Mr. Deming thought the Committee
should stay about where it was for the next three weeks. If he
were not required to choose between directive alternatives A and
B at this time, he would be happy with the present directive,
with deletion of the reference to Treasury financing. If he had
to choose, he would take alternative A for the first paragraph and
alternative B for the second.
Speaking more generally concerning the directive, Mr.
Deming did not feel prepared at this time to go much further than
a selection between alternatives A and B. He would not want to
quantify. Perhaps free reserves and short-term interest rates
might be mentioned from time to time, when the Committee so
desired, as goals of short-run policy. But he doubted the likeli
hood of success in attempting to make the instruction to the
Manager serve at the same time as a public relations document.
He would be inclined to move toward simplifying the directive
rather than toward making it more complex.
Mr. Swan said the general business situation in the Twelfth
District appeared to be about the same as reported three weeks ago.
Some caution in connection with defense contracts, which were
concentrated in the Northwest and in California, tempered the

4/14/64 -48
prevailing optimism a little. There had been, of course, the
infortunate earthquake disaster in Alaska, and the full extent
of the damage could not yet be assessed. While this posed serious
problems for the area concerned, he doubted, however, that there
would be major indirect effects on other areas and other parts of
the economy.
The March figures for employment and unemployment in the
Twelfth District were available only for California; they showed
a slight increase in total nonfarm employment, with the rate of
unemployment holding at the February level of 5.7 per cent. Retail
sales continued satisfactory in one sense, but they were somewhat
disappointing in another sense because there did not seem to be
any particular reflection as yet of a substantial increase in
consumer spending.
In the three weeks ended April 1, Loans at District weekly
reporting banks increased somewhat more than last year but at less
than the national rate of increase. The reporting banks in the
District were able to increase their security holdings somewhat,
contrary to the decline in securities holdings on a national basis
as well as to increase their loans. There was again some slowing
down in the rate of gain of funds moving into savings and loan
associations since the first of the year. For the second quarter,
a few of the smaller associations had announced increases of 5 to
10 basis points in dividend rates, but this was not widespread.

4/14/64 -49
In terms of policy, Mr. Swan agreed with those who saw
no reason for any change at this point. He saw nothing in the
domestic or international picture that would call for any
tightening, and he saw no reason, obviously, for any increase in
the discount rate.
As to the directive, Mr. Swan seconded the favorable
comments about the work done by the Secretariat, even though he
felt sure the Committee was not going to resolve the whole
question immediately. In terms of the first paragraph of the
alternate draft directives, Mr. Swan did not feel strongly one
way or the other. He thought he preferred alternative B in terms
of logic and description of general policy leading into the
second paragraph. He doubted that this was too important one way
or the other, however, or that the draft was too different in
effect from the first paragraph of the existing directive.
The critical question of approach is in the second
paragraph, Mr. Swan continued. He wanted to align himself with
Mr. Mitchell in this regard. With due respect to all of the
questions of unpredictability and flexibility mentioned not only
this morning but many times before, it did seem to him that the
Committee should move in the direction of a more specific directive.
If the Committee had problems of inconsistencies or choices, it
should face up to them and work on them. Choices among objectives

4/14/64 -50
would be necessary, and the Committee probably would have a hard
time reaching agreement, but the Manager had to choose among
objectives in order to operate and it seemed preferable for the
Committee to make that choice. The public relations problem is
of a secondary nature, but he would rather explain why the Desk
had not hit a target (stated in terms of a range) than to continue
to try to explain on a defensive basis, why the Committee's direc
tives remain indefinite. Subject to one minor change, he would
therefore prefer alternative A for the second paragraph.
Mr. Irons reported that Eleventh District conditions
were generally quite favorable, with the economy moving along at
a high level. There continued to be moderate, though not
spectacular, gains. Industrial production was at a record level,
nonagricultural employment was up fractionally, and unemployment
was down just a shade. In the oil industry there had been a
little easing with respect to both crude oil and refining.
Department store sales continued to set new records month by month
and new car registrations were strong. Agricultural activity had
made quite a good record so far this year, although there was
concern about the weakness of cattle prices.
Loans, investments, and deposits were up in the District
during the past three-week period, Mr. Irons said, and loan demand
seemed strong. Some banks regarded it as very strong. A few of

4/14/64 -51
the District's larger banks were using up some of their liquidity,
but they were still seeking loans actively. They were dropping
out of Governments, particularly those with maturities under one
year, and shifting to non-Governments. Federal funds purchases
had been running about $500 million, and sales somewhere around
$300 million to $325 million. Borrowing from the Reserve Bank had
not been very heavy. A few large banks were coming in when Federal
funds were not readily available; they were becoming accustomed to
living on borrowed funds, obtained either through the Federal funds
market or the discount window.
Nationally, Mr. Irons said, the picture seemed to be one
of moderate expansion without excesses or significant imbalances.
In summary, the domestic situation appeared very favorable.
Looking at the domestic situation and balance of payments develop
ments, and considering that the Treasury would soon be in the
market with a refunding, he believed that the present policy with
respect to availability of reserves and money market conditions
should be continued without change. He would not change the dis
count rate, obviously, and he felt the bill rate should be around
3.45 to 3.55 per cent, with Federal Funds most of the time at the
discount rate.
Turning to the directive, Mr. Irons said he was not
disturbed too much about the present directive. He thought it was

4/14/64 -52
reasonably clear and gave the Manager of the Account a reasonable
statement to follow, particularly in view of the fact that the
Manager attended the Committee meetings, heard what went on,
and was in contact with Board and Bank staff people every morning.
He agreed with Mr. Deming that it might be dangerous to try to
quantify the directive. The Committee, he thought, permitted
itself to get lost in semantics, inserting a word here and taking
out a comma there. He also thought the Committee should be
cautious regarding the tendency to place emphasis on the directive
as a public relations document. Personally, he was not sure the
general public could be expected to understand the directive, and
he doubted whether the Committee should put too much emphasis on
pleasing the academic economists. No matter what the directive
said, there would be economists who would be critical and outspoken.
He did not want to leave the impression that this was not something
worth working on, but the Committee tended to go over and over the
same ground. In summary, he came out at about the same place as
Mr. Deming. Ior this meeting, he would be quite satisfied with
the present directive, deleting the last sentence in the first
paragraph. It described current policy, and the Manager should be
able to carry out operations satisfactorily. As between draft
alternatives A and B, he had no particular preference. The
differences appeared to him to involve mainly questions of semantics.

4/14/64 -53-
Mr. Ellis summarized the picture in the First District by
saying that the regional economy was tracking the national pattern
quite closely. There had been some slowness in manufacturing
activity, but recently even manufacturing output seemed to be
following the national pattern fairly well.
The Boston Bank had held two regional meetings since the
last meeting of the Open Market Committee. The central banking
seminar, which brought together a group of 35 economists and
bankers, proved especially interesting to him, Mr. Ellis said,
because it focused attention on a restatement of the longer range
objectives of monetary policy. A meeting yesterday of 20 business
economists focused on the present and prospective strength of the
economy and of credit demands. In particular, he found reassuring
the discussion of retail trade. The economists did not show any
dissatisfaction or unhappiness with one month's figures, in terms
of being disappointed about the results of the tax cut. They
oointed out that the basic pattern of consumer spending changes
slowly.
Mr. Ellis said he emerged from these conferences with the
view that the price structure was vulnerable to demand pressures.
According to his analysis, capital spending, consumer spending, and
Government spending all were likely to expand throughout the year.
All these borrowing groups, plus foreign borrowers, would exert

4/14/64 -54
increasing pressure on the credit market, intensified by
seasonal expansion later in the year. Measuring against those
expectations the 11 per cent annual rate of growth of bank credit
in the first quarter, he could not view the situation with com
placency. Knowing that monetary policy lags in its impact, he
found himself intellectually committed to the view that the
System should be moving to a posture of less ease to reduce the
abruptness and sharpness of delayed action. Like Mr. Shepardson,
he was concerned that the Commit:ee consider now what its posture
should be when and if a price break-out occurred.
Turning to the directive, Mr. Ellis felt that the
Secretariat, in its memorandum, had done a service in calling
again to the Committee's attention the objectives of completeness,
reasonableness, clarity, and informativeness. The Committee went
through a review of the form of the directive every so often, and
he liked to think that the Committee took a step forward in
improvit.g the directive each time this was done. It was his
observation that every time the Committee changed the format of
the directive it made an improvement, but that thereafter the
Committee tended to whittle the directive down by taking out
words, phrases, and adjectives. As the Committee studied the
directive this time, he hoped it could make another step toward
improvement in the direction suggested by Mr. Mitchell. Choices

4/14/64 -55
had to be made; if they were not made by the Committee, then they
had to be made by the Manager. If they were not made by the
Manager, then it was a process of muddling through. The Committee
should continually strive for more accuracy in its directives.
As to the alternative draft directives, Mr. Ellis said he
preferred alternative A for both the first and second paragraphs.
Re would accept Mr. Treiber's amendments to the first paragraph.
The second paragraph suggested that open market operations should
be conducted for the next three weeks as they had on average for
the past three weeks. As he looked at the past three weeks,
though, free reserves had averaged $100 million higher, while
member bank borrowings averaged $100 million lower and the bill
rate dropped 7 basis points. Federal funds traded frequently at
less than the discount rate. He would be unhappy if the Manager
interpreted a continuation of these results as constituting his
objective for the next three weeks. He (Mr. Ellis) would be
willing to accept the averages of the past 6 or 9 weeks, however,
and he wouldm odify the draft directive accordingly.
Mr. Balderston said he shared the concern about policy
expressed by Messrs. Ellis, Shepardson, and Hickman. He had the
feeling that things had gotten a little out of hand during the
past two or three weeks, and he was unhappy that the free reserve
average for the past four weeks was $130 million. The Desk had

4/14/64 -56
missed, on the high side, what he assumed to have been the
Committee's target.
In discussing that situation, Mr. Balderston continued,
he would like to point out what he thought was the key to some
of the departure from the line toward the desired policy goal,
using as his basis comments made recently by Mr. Eckert of the
Board's staff concerning excess reserves and their long-run trend
downward. Despite the oft-repeated admonitions of Committee
members about the tendency for continuing use of a given level
of free reserves to pull policy off the line toward the goal
actually desired, it was his (Mr. Balderstcn's) belief that the
Committee had been deceiving itself recently. His conclusion
stemmed from the steady reduction of excess reserves of member
banks. In 1962 the decline from the previous year was 13.5 per
cent; in 1963 the decline was 14.2 pe:r cent. In the first quarter
of the current year, excess reserves were 14.3 per cent below the
year-age figure. Putting it another way, each recent year's level
of excess reserves had been from 88.7 to 89.9 per cent of the pre
vious year. By the first quarter of this year the figure had
fallen one-third from the 1961 level. With the relatively stable
free reserve objective in recent times, it was no wonder that the
steady decline of excess reserves should be associated with lower
member bank borrowings. During the first quarter of this year

4/14/64 -57
borrowings averaged about $60 million less than the borrowing
level of the five months following the chage in policy last
July. Free reserves averaged $119 million, as compared with
$113 million for the preceding five months. On the one side,
the Committee had been pulled off the line of what Mr. Balderston
thought was the desired policy direction by the technical
deficiency of $60 million in excess reserves. Then in the past
four weeks free reserves had averaged on the high side of $100
million by $30 million. In short, he concluded that monetary
policy had been easier than intended. He would suggest, there
fore, a target for free reserves of around $50 million.
Comi.g to the directive, Mr. Balderston said he had
little choice, for the first paragraph, as between alternatives
A and B, though perhaps a slight preference for B. As to the
second paragraph, he had a distinct preference, for the reasons
set forth by Mr. Mitchell, for alternative A. The proposed
alternative E said little except more of the same. If the
Committee was going to dispense with the thought of any quanti
tative means of communicating with the Desk, then it seemed to
him the Committee was committed, in essence, to the use of three
phrases: more ease, less ease, or about the same degree of ease.
On the other hand, if, as in alternative A, the Committee at
least mentioned some targets in tangible form, he thought it

4/14/64 -58
communicated more effectively. Although there were problems in
using free reserves as a goal of policy for the Committee, for
the reason that the target gets cumulatively more deceptive the
longer it remains unchanged, he nevertheless thought that free
reserves remained one of the best means discovered to date for
communicating with the Desk at three-week intervals. If the
Committee was to get away from the words "more, less, and about
the same" and put down something the Desk could see, it would
have to say something about free reserves from time to time, and
also something about rates.
Chairman Martin commented that he associated himself
intellectually with those who felt that monetary policy had been
slightly too easy and that if the Committee could move slightly
toward less ease it would be in a stronger position. Timing was
the problem, however, and he did not know the best way out of the
dilemma. Everyone outside the System was trying to make System
policy, and the Committee should not take action that would play
into the hands either of those who said it was a foregone con
clusion that there would be higher interest rates or those who
thought that the Committee was pursuing an easier monetary policy.
It was a period of balancing these pressures, and also the problem
of the Treasury, which would have an almost impossible job of
financing within the 4-1/4 per cent limit if the expectations

4/14/64 -59
that he was inclined to share actually developed in the market.
The Committee should not, at this juncture: make the Treasury's
problem any more difficult than it was likely to become through
the natural forces of the market. Therefore, he leaned to the
view that it would be desirable to have slightly less ease, but
only when the Committee could make this move without undue
complications.
The Desk, Chairman Martin continued, may have erred on the
side of over-correcting the imbalance that some people thought
existed when free reserves were averaging around $50 million, but
the Desk had been dealing with a difficult problem, and in his
opinion quite well on the whole. It was almost impossible in
this type of market to keep any sort of balance.
The Chairman thought the Treasury had a clear right to
expect that the System would not make the Treasury's task harder
than it was going to be anyhow until it became clear what the
decision in the market were going to be. Therefore, he came out
with the view, generally speaking, that no change in policy for
the next three weeks would be the best course.
On the form of the directive, Chairman Martin said that
the more he worked on the directives the less confidence he had
that the Committee could find words that would be completely
satisfactory to 12 voting members. Everyone had a word or phrase

4/14/64 -60
that meant something to him different from what it meant to the
next person. The Committee should continue to write sample
directives and to work on them. However, the Committee ought to
make clear that when it made some change in the directive, that
change was made for a good reason. He did not think it made much
sense just to change a little phrase here and there.
Chairman Martin said that he hesitated to put the draft
directives to a vote today. There did not seem to him to be
enough neeting of the minds to make it worth while. He felt that
the Committee perhaps ought to set up a meeting that would be
devoted solely to discussing the formulation of the directive.
Mr. Mitchell commented that there was a real issue
involved: how the Committee could be sure that the directive was
not internally inconsistent. While this was a difficult problem,
the Committee should not shy away from the problem because of its
difficulty. This might all be just a matter of semantics, but he
did not think so.
Chairman Martin replied that he thought the way to handle
the matter was to set up a meeting at which the Committee would
do nothing but debate the form of the directive. It could not do
this when trying to deal with policy, as, for example, this
morning. Instead, the Committee should sit down and try to hammer
out points of view.

4/14/64 -61-
After further discussion along these lines, Mr. Daane
suggested, in view of the indication that the Committee appar
ently intended to make no change in policy today, that it renew
the existing directive, with only minor change, and arrange
another meeting for a full-scale debate concerning the form of
the directives and the possibility of quantifying instructions,
a point on which he had reservations.
Chairman Martin recalled that Mr. Deming's suggestion
was simply to strike the last sentence of the first paragraph
of the existing directive. However, the Commmittee had not come
as yet to the question whether it was in fact going to make no
change in policy. That should be determined first.
The Chairman added that he was sympathetic with the view
of those who would like to see slightly less ease as a prelude to
price changes that might occur, and while he subscribed to Mr.
Ellis's intellectual commitment on the basis of the facts as he
(Mr. Martin) sawt hem, he had not yet reached a point where he
would want to see the System compound the problems of financing
that the Treasury was going to have for the next few weeks by
even a modest adjustment of policy. Again, he thought the Desk
had a difficult problem because free reserves had swung from $20
million to $230 million; but that had been the sort of swing
that was likely to occur when someone said that the free reserve

4/14/64 -62
target should be a little above or a little below $100 million.
To sum up, however sympathetic he would be, were the Tre.sury
not in the market, to the idea of moving slightly in line with
what he conceived to be the over-all trend rather than against
it, in his view the wisest course for the next three weeks for the
Committee would be to have the Desk continue to do what it had
been doing for the past three or six weeks and not make a con
scious change in policy no matter how the free reserve figures
turned out.
Chairman Martin then proposed a vote on no change in
policy to see how that came out. Those opposed could vote
against it and record their reasons.
Mr. Mitchell inquired whether this neant no change from
the past three weeks or the past six weeks, and Chairman Martin
replied that this meant no change from the directive as carried
out by the Desk. He did not think that the Desk had deliberately
tried to change policy in arriving at the recent figures.
Mr. Stone commented that the Desk most assuredly had not
undertaken to make any change in policy in one direction or the
other. He would like to mention a circumstance that gave rise to
the free reserve figure of $230 million for the statement week
ended March 25. When the Committee sat around the table on
March 24, there was some discussion about the free reserve figure

4/14/64 -63
then thought to be developing--about $130 million. As it turned
out, free reserves for the preceding day were about $350 million
above the projections, so that his associates were looking at a
free reserve figure of $220 million for the current week and net
borrowed reserves of about $250 million for the week beginning
that Thursday. The Desk had the choice of selling about $250
$300 million of Treasury bills in the market to bring the figure
down, but this would have meant repurchasing the same quantity
and more two clays thereafter. The alternative was to ride
through for a couple of days. The choice of the latter course
seemed to him to reflect the intent of the Committee in those
circumstances.
Mr. Wayne commented that it seemed to him the daily wire
had said precisely that. If there were objections, he felt that
they should have been made known at the time.
Mr. Hickman, who had been on the morning telephone call,
said he had the same recollection of the incident as Mr. Stone.
There also was the thought that the high free reserve figure
would offset the low figure of the preceding statement week. But
the Manager did ride along week after week with free reserves on
the high side of $100 million and with borrowings quite low. Mr.
Hickman thought the market had been overly easy. He would like
to go back to the figures of the previous three-week period.

4/14/64 -64
In reply to a question, Mr. Stone said there had been no
difference between the past three and the past six weeks so far
as the objectives of Desk operations in implementing the policy
directive were concerned, and Chairman Martin commented that it
seemed clear what the Manager had no misunderstanding as to what
was involved.
The Committee was then polled on the basis of no change,
for the next three weeks, in policy as nov being carried out.
This developed to be the consensus, Messrs. Balderston, Hickman,
and Shepardson dissenting.
Mr. Daane, in voting for no change in policy as reflected
in the current directive, said that he sympathized with the
Chairman's reference to the chore of the Treasury that lay ahead.
He would not, however, subscribe to the idea that the Committee
should at any point in time simply validate market developments
or take them as its cue to action. There was a real opportunity
for the Committee to show continuing leadership rather than pass
ive acquiescence in market developmen:s.
Mr. Hickman stated that he voted against no change in
policy because he thought that the market had been overly easy
in the past three or four weeks and that an excessive expansion
of bank reserves had been accommodated.

4/14/64 -65
Mr. Mills said that he voted for no change in policy on
the basis that the experience of the past three weeks was in
accord with his thinking about appropriate monetary policy.
Chairman Martin then said he understood it was agreeable
to the majority of the Committee to continue the present direc
tive, with the deletion of the last sentence of the first
paragraph, which contained reference to the imminence of new
cash borrowing by the Treasury.
Thereupon, upon motion duly made and
seconded, the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York was authorized and directed, until
otherwise directed by the Committee, to
execute transactions in the System
Account in accordance with the following
current economic directive:
It is the Federal Open Market Committee's current
policy to accommodate moderate growth in bank credit,
money supply, and the reserve base, while maintaining
conditions in the money market that would contribute
to continued improvement in the capital account of the
U. S. balance of payments. This policy takes into
consideration the fact that domestic economic activity
is expanding further, although with a margin of under
utilized resources, and that it is likely to receive
additional stimulus from the recently enacted reduction
in Federal income tax rates. This policy also takes
into account the facts that the balance of payments po
sition, while improved, may still be adverse, and that
the effects of increases in money rates in important
countries abroad are as yet uncertain.
To implement this policy, System Open Market operations
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining about the
same conditions in the money market as have prevailed in
recent weeks, while accommodating moderate expansion in
aggregate bank reserves.

4/14/64 -66
Votes for this action: Messrs.
Martin, Daane, Mills, Mitchell,
Shuford, Wayne, Swan, and Treiber.
Votes against this action: Messrs.
Balderston, Hickman, and Shepardson.
Chairman Martin suggested that the afternoon of May 5
might be set aside for a session at which the Committee would
devote its entire time to the matter of the formulation of the
directive, and there was agreement with this suggestion.
Chairman Martin then referred to a draft of letter to
Chairman Patman with reference to the request of the Subcommittee
on Domestic Finance of the House Banking and Currency Committee
for copies of the minutes of the meetings of the Open Market
Committee held during the years 1960-1963, inclusive. When
Chairman Martin appeared before the Subcommittee on January 22,
1964, he had agreed to transmit the request to the Open Market
Committee, and the request had been discussed by the Committee
at several meetings since that time. The draft of letter to
Chairman Patman had been prepared in the light of those discussions.
Upon question by Chairman Martin, it developed that there
was general agreement on the part of the Committee with the posi
tion taken in the draft letter. Certain changes of an editorial
character were suggested, however.
The following letter to Chairman
Patman, for the signature of Chairman
Martin, was then approved unanimously
and was transmitted later in the day:

4/14/64 -67-
During the hearings on January 22, 1964 of the
Subcommittee on Domestic Finance of the House Banking
and Currency Committee, I agreed to transmit to the
Federal Open Market Committee the Subcommittee's
request for copies of the minutes of its meetings
held during the years 1960-1963, inclusive. The
Federal Open Market Committee has considered this
request at several meetings since that time, and it
has concluded that it would be in the public interest
to make its minutes available only after the lapse of
a considerable period of time. Accordingly, the
Committee has authorized transmittal to the Subcom
mittee of its minutes for the calendar year 1960.
The official records of the Federal Open Market
Committee are maintained in the Board's offices,
where the original signed copy of the minutes for
1960 is available for examination by representatives
of the Subcommittee. If it would be more convenient,
a duplicate original signed copy of these minutes will
be delivered to the custody of the Subcommittee for
its perusal.
As you know, a complete record of all policy
actions .aken by the Federal Open Market Committee
and by the Board of Governors is maintained by the
Board and is set out in full each year in the Board's
Annual Report to the Congress, as required by the
Federal Reserve Act. Included in the report of policy
actions taken by the Federal Open Market Committee
are: (1) a summary of the economic and financial
information which the Committee has taken into
account in arriving at its policy deci:;ions; (2) a
summary of the main lines of the Commitee's
discussions and the differing views expressed in
their course; (3) a statement of the reasons under
lying policy decisions; (4) a record, by name of
Committee member, of all votes cast in connection
with the determination of policy; and (5) statements
of the reasons underlying dissents from particular
actions, when there are such dissents. In the
Board's Annual Report for 1963 the Record of Policy
Actions of the Federal Open Market Committee covers
79 printed pages. In addition, 42 pages of the Report
are devoted to a review of the System's open market
operations in domestic securities and 20 pages to a
review of its operations in foreign exchange.

4/14/64 -68-
The minutes contain more detailed reports on
economic and financial developments ard conditions,
including references to information obtained on a
confidential basis. Apart from these more detailed
reports, the additional material included in the
minutes consists principally of the discussions and
debates prior to final determinations of policy
actions. The Committee believes that premature
disclosure of such discussions would impair the give
and take of candid debate so important to decision
making. In some cases it could lead to market
reactiors that might seriously handicap the
execution of current decisions and that might
redound to the special advantage of individuals or
groups sophisticated in these matter..
In connection with discussions that began in
1961 of foreign currency operations, the minutes for
recent years also contain confidential reports to
the Comiittee concerning the internal affairs, plans,
and attitudes of foreign monetary authorities and
governments. Moreover, they contain frank
expressions of opinion regarding the financial
policies of foreign countries, in support of positions
taken as to the desirability, from the point of view
of the interest of the United States, of entering
into various types of transacticns with them. You
will recall that when Secretary Dillon appeared before
your Subcommittee on March 5, 1964, he expressed the
view that it would be damaging to our international
relations if these materials were given any publicity
at all.
To provide a broad historical perspective, the
Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of
Governors have instructed their staffs to explore
means for making their records relatirg to monetary
policy decisions through the year 1960 available for
the use of scholars and other interested persons. It
is expected that procedures for accomplishing this
end will be decided upon shortly.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Open Market
Committee would be held on Tuesday, May 5, 1964, at 9:30 a.m.,
with an afternoon session contemplated to discuss the form and

4/14/64 -69-
content of the current economic policy directive. It was also
agreed that the meeting tentatively scheduled for Tuesday,
June 16, 196L, would be held instead on Wednesday, June 17.
There would be a meeting of the Presidents' Conference on
June 15 and a meeting of the Board of Trustees of the Retirement
System of the Federal Reserve Banks on June 16.
In a discussion of the proposed publication of the
Manager's report to the Committee on Account operations in 1963,
Mr. Treiber suggested that publication of the report in full
would be advantageous for several reasons, as follows:
It would broaden public understanding of the process
by which the Committee's open market policy decisions are
implemented. Publication of the chronology is useful in
this regard, but it is also highly desirable to publish
the general review in which the Manager presents the
insights into operational techniques, into the changing
money market environment in which policy is carried out,
and into the behavior of the credit market that derive
from his particular point of contact with the financial
markets. Following publication last year of the report
for 1962, the general review was the focal point of con
siderable favorable comment from teachers, bankers, and
participants in the financial markets. Parenthetically,
it should be noted that publication in the Federal
Reserve Bulletin with a reprinting in our Monthly Review
is likely to reach a considerably larger audience than
the Board's Annual Report alone.
Broader understanding of the criteria presently
guiding day-to-day open market operations may enable
outsiders to make useful contributions to a better
understanding of the relationship between short-run
money market variables on the one hand and intermediate
and longer term variables on the other. The academic
community has given little careful attention to the
role of the money market in the financial process. Indeed,
some members of the community have little or no

4/14/64 -70-
understanding of the reasons for the Committee's
day-to-day concern with the market. The Manager's
report, which is focused on the money market, may
stimulate some constructive academic interest in
the field.
During further consideration of the matter, it was noted
that there had been included in the Board's Annual Report for
1963 the section of the Manager's report coastituting a
chronological review of operations. Question was raised whether
publication of the same material in the Federal Reserve Bulletin
would therefore be warranted. As to the remainder of the
Manager's report, some question as to the desirability of
publication, as a supplement to the New York Bank's Monthly
Review or otherwise also was raised.
After further discussion, Chairman Martin suggested that
the matter be held over until the next Committee meeting for
decision.
Thereupon the meeting adjourned.
Assistant Secretary

Attachment A
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) April 13, 1964
Draft current economic policy directives suggested for
consideration by the Federal Open Market Committee
at its meeting on April 14, 1964
Alternatives for First Paragraph
Alternative A:
It is the Federal Open Market Comm..ttee's current policy
to accommodate moderate growth in the reseve base, bank credit
and the money supply in order to facilitate the financing of
further expansion of the economy and to foster further improve
ment for the capital account of U. S. international payments,
while seeking to avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures.
this policy takes into account the expected progressive stimulus
to domestic activity from the recent Federal income tax reduction
and the increases projected for the year in business capital
expenditures. It also gives consideration to the slower growth
of aggregate bank reserves and the money supply in the first
quarter of this year as compared with the fourth quarter of last
year; the continued relative stability in average prices; the
country's improved, though still unsettled, international
payments position; and the advances in interest rates over past
months in important markets abroad.

Alternative B:
The Federal Open Market Committee notes that domestic
economic activity continues to expand at a moderate pace with
relative stability in average prices, and that the existing
margin of unutilized resources will permit further expansion.
It also notes that progressive stimulus to activity will be
exerted over coming months by the recent reduction in Federal
income tax rates and by the increases projected for the year in
business capital expenditures. In addition, the Committee has
taken account of the slower growth in aggregate bank reserves
and the money supply in the first quarter of this year as com
paired with the fourth quarter of last year; the further
improvement in the economy's payments balance internationally;
and the possibly adverse effects on the cap:.tal account of the
payments balance arising from interest rate advances over past
months in important markets abroad. In the light of these
developments, it is the Committee's current policy to accommo
date moderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit and the
money supply in order to facilitate the financing of further
expansion of the economy and to help sustain the improved position
for the capital account of U. S. international payments, while
seeking to avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures.

Alternatives for Second Paragraph
Alternative A:
To implement this policy, System open market operations
for the next three weeks shall be conducted with a view to main
taining about the same conditions in the money market as have
prevailed on average since the Committee's last meeting, with
weekly average free reserves generally in the range of $50 to
$150 million, and Treasury bill rates adjusting daily to shifts in
money market forces. However, money market conditions shall be
permitted to ease or tighten, as necessary, to cushion any
substantial and persistent change in the rate on three-month
Treasury bills. The Committee believes tha. operations so
conducted will be consistent with moderate upward trends in
aggregate bank reserves, total bank credit, and the money supply.
Alternative B:
In the context of this general policy, System open market
operations for the next three weeks shall be conducted with a view
to maintaining about the same conditions in the money market as
have prevailed since the Committee's last meeting. The Committee
expects that the operations so conducted will be consistent with
moderate upward trends in aggregate bank reserves, total bank
credit, and the money supply.